"Yes, yes," said the other impatiently. "I swear it." Tuppence raised a trembling left hand to the glass. "Very well." Her mouth opened meekly. Mrs. Vandemeyer gave a sigh of relief, off her guard for the moment. Then, quick as a flash, Tuppence jerked the glass upward as hard as she
could. The fluid in it splashed into Mrs. Vandemeyer's face, and during
her momentary gasp, Tuppence's right hand shot out and grasped the
revolver where it lay on the edge of the washstand. The next moment
she had sprung back a pace, and the revolver pointed straight at Mrs.
Vandemeyer's heart, with no unsteadiness in the hand that held it. In the moment of victory, Tuppence betrayed a somewhat unsportsmanlike
triumph. "Now who's on top and who's underneath?" she crowed. The other's face was convulsed with rage. For a minute Tuppence thought
she was going to spring upon her, which would have placed the girl in an
unpleasant dilemma, since she meant to draw the line at actually letting
off the revolver. However, with an effort Mrs. Vandemeyer controlled
herself, and at last a slow evil smile crept over her face. "Not a fool, then, after all! You did that well, girl. But you shall pay
for it--oh, yes, you shall pay for it! I have a long memory!" "I'm surprised you should have been gulfed so easily," said Tuppence
scornfully. "Did you really think I was the kind of girl to roll about
on the floor and whine for mercy?" "You may do--some day!" said the other significantly. The cold malignity of her manner sent an unpleasant chill down
Tuppence's spine, but she was not going to give in to it. "Supposing we sit down," she said pleasantly. "Our present attitude is
a little melodramatic. No--not on the bed. Draw a chair up to the table,
that's right. Now I'll sit opposite you with the revolver in front of
me--just in case of accidents. Splendid. Now, let's talk." "What about?" said Mrs. Vandemeyer sullenly. Tuppence eyed her thoughtfully for a minute. She was remembering several
things. Boris's words, "I believe you would sell--us!" and her answer,
"The price would have to be enormous," given lightly, it was true,
yet might not there be a substratum of truth in it? Long ago, had not
Whittington asked: "Who's been blabbing? Rita?" Would Rita Vandemeyer
prove to be the weak spot in the armour of Mr. Brown? Keeping her eyes fixed steadily on the other's face, Tuppence replied
quietly:

"Money----"

Mrs. Vandemeyer started. Clearly, the reply was unexpected. "What do you mean?" "I'll tell you. You said just now that you had a long memory. A long
memory isn't half as useful as a long purse! I dare say it relieves your
feelings a good deal to plan out all sorts of dreadful things to do to
me, but is that PRACTICAL? Revenge is very unsatisfactory. Every one
always says so. But money"--Tuppence warmed to her pet creed--"well,
there's nothing unsatisfactory about money, is there?" "Do you think," said Mrs. Vandemeyer scornfully, "that I am the kind of
woman to sell my friends?" "Yes," said Tuppence promptly. "If the price was big enough." "A paltry hundred pounds or so!" "No," said Tuppence. "I should suggest--a hundred thousand!" Her economical spirit did not permit her to mention the whole million
dollars suggested by Julius. A flush crept over Mrs. Vandemeyer's face. "What did you say?" she asked, her fingers playing nervously with a
brooch on her breast. In that moment Tuppence knew that the fish was
hooked, and for the first time she felt a horror of her own money-loving
spirit. It gave her a dreadful sense of kinship to the woman fronting
her. "A hundred thousand pounds," repeated Tuppence. The light died out of Mrs. Vandemeyer's eyes. She leaned back in her
chair. "Bah!" she said. "You haven't got it." "No," admitted Tuppence, "I haven't--but I know some one who has." "Who?" "A friend of mine." "Must be a millionaire," remarked Mrs. Vandemeyer unbelievingly. "As a matter of fact he is. He's an American. He'll pay you that
without a murmur. You can take it from me that it's a perfectly genuine
proposition." Mrs. Vandemeyer sat up again. "I'm inclined to believe you," she said slowly. There was silence between them for some time, then Mrs. Vandemeyer
looked up. "What does he want to know, this friend of yours?" Tuppence went through a momentary struggle, but it was Julius's money,
and his interests must come first. "He wants to know where Jane Finn is," she said boldly. Mrs. Vandemeyer showed no surprise. "I'm not sure where she is at the present moment," she replied. "But you could find out?" "Oh, yes," returned Mrs. Vandemeyer carelessly. "There would be no
difficulty about that." "Then"--Tuppence's voice shook a little--"there's a boy, a friend of
mine. I'm afraid something's happened to him, through your pal Boris." "What's his name?" "Tommy Beresford." "Never heard of him. But I'll ask Boris. He'll tell me anything he
knows." "Thank you." Tuppence felt a terrific rise in her spirits. It impelled
her to more audacious efforts. "There's one thing more." "Well?" Tuppence leaned forward and lowered her voice. "WHO IS MR. BROWN?" Her quick eyes saw the sudden paling of the beautiful face. With an
effort Mrs. Vandemeyer pulled herself together and tried to resume her
former manner. But the attempt was a mere parody. She shrugged her shoulders. "You can't have learnt much about us if you don't know that NOBODY KNOWS
WHO MR. BROWN IS...."

"You do," said Tuppence quietly. Again the colour deserted the other's face. "What makes you think that?" "I don't know," said the girl truthfully. "But I'm sure." Mrs. Vandemeyer stared in front of her for a long time. "Yes," she said hoarsely, at last, "I know. I was beautiful, you
see--very beautiful--"

"You are still," said Tuppence with admiration. Mrs. Vandemeyer shook her head. There was a strange gleam in her
electric-blue eyes. "Not beautiful enough," she said in a soft dangerous voice. "Not--beautiful--enough! And sometimes, lately, I've been afraid.... It's dangerous to know too much!" She leaned forward across the table. "Swear that my name shan't be brought into it--that no one shall ever
know." "I swear it. And, once's he caught, you'll be out of danger." A terrified look swept across Mrs. Vandemeyer's face. "Shall I? Shall I ever be?" She clutched Tuppence's arm. "You're sure
about the money?" "Quite sure." "When shall I have it? There must be no delay." "This friend of mine will be here presently. He may have to send cables,
or something like that. But there won't be any delay--he's a terrific
hustler." A resolute look settled on Mrs. Vandemeyer's face. "I'll do it. It's a great sum of money, and besides"--she gave a curious
smile--"it is not--wise to throw over a woman like me!" For a moment or two, she remained smiling, and lightly tapping her
fingers on the table. Suddenly she started, and her face blanched. "What was that?" "I heard nothing." Mrs. Vandemeyer gazed round her fearfully. "If there should be some one listening----"

"Nonsense. Who could there be?" "Even the walls might have ears," whispered the other. "I tell you I'm
frightened. You don't know him!" "Think of the hundred thousand pounds," said Tuppence soothingly. Mrs. Vandemeyer passed her tongue over her dried lips. "You don't know him," she reiterated hoarsely. "He's--ah!" With a shriek of terror she sprang to her feet. Her outstretched hand
pointed over Tuppence's head. Then she swayed to the ground in a dead
faint. Tuppence looked round to see what had startled her. In the doorway were Sir James Peel Edgerton and Julius Hersheimmer. CHAPTER XIII. THE VIGIL

SIR James brushed past Julius and hurriedly bent over the fallen woman. "Heart," he said sharply. "Seeing us so suddenly must have given her a
shock. Brandy--and quickly, or she'll slip through our fingers." Julius hurried to the washstand. "Not there," said Tuppence over her shoulder. "In the tantalus in the
dining-room. Second door down the passage." Between them Sir James and Tuppence lifted Mrs. Vandemeyer and carried
her to the bed. There they dashed water on her face, but with no result. The lawyer fingered her pulse. "Touch and go," he muttered. "I wish that young fellow would hurry up
with the brandy." At that moment Julius re-entered the room, carrying a glass half full of
the spirit which he handed to Sir James. While Tuppence lifted her head
the lawyer tried to force a little of the spirit between her closed
lips. Finally the woman opened her eyes feebly. Tuppence held the glass
to her lips. "Drink this." Mrs. Vandemeyer complied. The brandy brought the colour back to her
white cheeks, and revived her in a marvellous fashion. She tried to sit
up--then fell back with a groan, her hand to her side. "It's my heart," she whispered. "I mustn't talk." She lay back with closed eyes. Sir James kept his finger on her wrist a minute longer, then withdrew it
with a nod. "She'll do now." All three moved away, and stood together talking in low voices. One
and all were conscious of a certain feeling of anticlimax. Clearly any
scheme for cross-questioning the lady was out of the question for the
moment. For the time being they were baffled, and could do nothing. Tuppence related how Mrs. Vandemeyer had declared herself willing
to disclose the identity of Mr. Brown, and how she had consented to
discover and reveal to them the whereabouts of Jane Finn. Julius was
congratulatory. "That's all right, Miss Tuppence. Splendid! I guess that hundred
thousand pounds will look just as good in the morning to the lady as it
did over night. There's nothing to worry over. She won't speak without
the cash anyway, you bet!" There was certainly a good deal of common sense in this, and Tuppence
felt a little comforted. "What you say is true," said Sir James meditatively. "I must confess,
however, that I cannot help wishing we had not interrupted at the minute
we did. Still, it cannot be helped, it is only a matter of waiting until
the morning." He looked across at the inert figure on the bed. Mrs. Vandemeyer lay
perfectly passive with closed eyes. He shook his head. "Well," said Tuppence, with an attempt at cheerfulness, "we must wait
until the morning, that's all. But I don't think we ought to leave the
flat." "What about leaving that bright boy of yours on guard?" "Albert? And suppose she came round again and hooked it. Albert couldn't
stop her." "I guess she won't want to make tracks away from the dollars." "She might. She seemed very frightened of 'Mr. Brown.'" "What? Real plumb scared of him?" "Yes. She looked round and said even walls had ears." "Maybe she meant a dictaphone," said Julius with interest. "Miss Tuppence is right," said Sir James quietly. "We must not leave the
flat--if only for Mrs. Vandemeyer's sake." Julius stared at him. "You think he'd get after her? Between now and to-morrow morning. How
could he know, even?" "You forget your own suggestion of a dictaphone," said Sir James dryly. "We have a very formidable adversary. I believe, if we exercise all due
care, that there is a very good chance of his being delivered into our
hands. But we must neglect no precaution. We have an important witness,
but she must be safeguarded. I would suggest that Miss Tuppence should
go to bed, and that you and I, Mr. Hersheimmer, should share the vigil." Tuppence was about to protest, but happening to glance at the bed she
saw Mrs. Vandemeyer, her eyes half-open, with such an expression of
mingled fear and malevolence on her face that it quite froze the words
on her lips. For a moment she wondered whether the faint and the heart attack had
been a gigantic sham, but remembering the deadly pallor she could hardly
credit the supposition. As she looked the expression disappeared as by
magic, and Mrs. Vandemeyer lay inert and motionless as before. For a
moment the girl fancied she must have dreamt it. But she determined
nevertheless to be on the alert. "Well," said Julius, "I guess we'd better make a move out of here any
way." The others fell in with his suggestion. Sir James again felt Mrs.
Vandemeyer's pulse. "Perfectly satisfactory," he said in a low voice to Tuppence. "She'll be
absolutely all right after a night's rest." The girl hesitated a moment by the bed. The intensity of the expression
she had surprised had impressed her powerfully. Mrs. Vandemeyer lifted
her lids. She seemed to be struggling to speak. Tuppence bent over her. "Don't--leave----" she seemed unable to proceed, murmuring something
that sounded like "sleepy." Then she tried again. Tuppence bent lower still. It was only a breath. "Mr.--Brown----" The voice stopped. But the half-closed eyes seemed still to send an agonized message. Moved by a sudden impulse, the girl said quickly:

"I shan't leave the flat. I shall sit up all night." A flash of relief showed before the lids descended once more. Apparently
Mrs. Vandemeyer slept. But her words had awakened a new uneasiness in
Tuppence. What had she meant by that low murmur: "Mr. Brown?" Tuppence
caught herself nervously looking over her shoulder. The big wardrobe
loomed up in a sinister fashion before her eyes. Plenty of room for a
man to hide in that.... Half-ashamed of herself, Tuppence pulled it open
and looked inside. No one--of course! She stooped down and looked under
the bed. There was no other possible hiding-place. Tuppence gave her familiar shake of the shoulders. It was absurd, this
giving way to nerves! Slowly she went out of the room. Julius and Sir
James were talking in a low voice. Sir James turned to her. "Lock the door on the outside, please, Miss Tuppence, and take out the
key. There must be no chance of anyone entering that room." The gravity of his manner impressed them, and Tuppence felt less ashamed
of her attack of "nerves." "Say," remarked Julius suddenly, "there's Tuppence's bright boy. I guess
I'd better go down and ease his young mind. That's some lad, Tuppence." "How did you get in, by the way?" asked Tuppence suddenly. "I forgot to
ask." "Well, Albert got me on the phone all right. I ran round for Sir James
here, and we came right on. The boy was on the look out for us, and was
just a mite worried about what might have happened to you. He'd been
listening outside the door of the flat, but couldn't hear anything. Anyhow he suggested sending us up in the coal lift instead of ringing
the bell. And sure enough we landed in the scullery and came right along
to find you. Albert's still below, and must be just hopping mad by this
time." With which Julius departed abruptly. "Now then, Miss Tuppence," said Sir James, "you know this place better
than I do. Where do you suggest we should take up our quarters?" Tuppence considered for a moment or two. "I think Mrs. Vandemeyer's boudoir would be the most comfortable," she
said at last, and led the way there. Sir James looked round approvingly. "This will do very well, and now, my dear young lady, do go to bed and
get some sleep." Tuppence shook her head resolutely. "I couldn't, thank you, Sir James. I should dream of Mr. Brown all
night!" "But you'll be so tired, child." "No, I shan't. I'd rather stay up--really." The lawyer gave in. Julius reappeared some minutes later, having reassured Albert and
rewarded him lavishly for his services. Having in his turn failed to
persuade Tuppence to go to bed, he said decisively:

"At any rate, you've got to have something to eat right away. Where's
the larder?" Tuppence directed him, and he returned in a few minutes with a cold pie
and three plates. After a hearty meal, the girl felt inclined to pooh-pooh her fancies of
half an hour before. The power of the money bribe could not fail. "And now, Miss Tuppence," said Sir James, "we want to hear your
adventures." "That's so," agreed Julius. Tuppence narrated her adventures with some complacence. Julius
occasionally interjected an admiring "Bully." Sir James said nothing
until she had finished, when his quiet "well done, Miss Tuppence," made
her flush with pleasure. "There's one thing I don't get clearly," said Julius. "What put her up
to clearing out?" "I don't know," confessed Tuppence. Sir James stroked his chin thoughtfully. "The room was in great disorder. That looks as though her flight was
unpremeditated. Almost as though she got a sudden warning to go from
some one." "Mr. Brown, I suppose," said Julius scoffingly. The lawyer looked at him deliberately for a minute or two. "Why not?" he said. "Remember, you yourself have once been worsted by
him." Julius flushed with vexation. "I feel just mad when I think of how I handed out Jane's photograph to
him like a lamb. Gee, if I ever lay hands on it again, I'll freeze on to
it like--like hell!" "That contingency is likely to be a remote one," said the other dryly. "I guess you're right," said Julius frankly. "And, in any case, it's the
original I'm out after. Where do you think she can be, Sir James?" The lawyer shook his head. "Impossible to say. But I've a very good idea where she has been." "You have? Where?" Sir James smiled. "At the scene of your nocturnal adventures, the Bournemouth nursing
home." "There? Impossible. I asked." "No, my dear sir, you asked if anyone of the name of Jane Finn had been
there. Now, if the girl had been placed there it would almost certainly
be under an assumed name." "Bully for you," cried Julius. "I never thought of that!" "It was fairly obvious," said the other. "Perhaps the doctor's in it too," suggested Tuppence. Julius shook his head. "I don't think so. I took to him at once. No, I'm pretty sure Dr. Hall's
all right." "Hall, did you say?" asked Sir James. "That is curious--really very
curious." "Why?" demanded Tuppence. "Because I happened to meet him this morning. I've known him slightly on
and off for some years, and this morning I ran across him in the street. Staying at the Metropole, he told me." He turned to Julius. "Didn't he
tell you he was coming up to town?" Julius shook his head. "Curious," mused Sir James. "You did not mention his name this
afternoon, or I would have suggested your going to him for further
information with my card as introduction." "I guess I'm a mutt," said Julius with unusual humility. "I ought to
have thought of the false name stunt." "How could you think of anything after falling out of that tree?" cried
Tuppence. "I'm sure anyone else would have been killed right off." "Well, I guess it doesn't matter now, anyway," said Julius. "We've got
Mrs. Vandemeyer on a string, and that's all we need." "Yes," said Tuppence, but there was a lack of assurance in her voice. A silence settled down over the party. Little by little the magic of
the night began to gain a hold on them. There were sudden creaks of the
furniture, imperceptible rustlings in the curtains. Suddenly Tuppence
sprang up with a cry. "I can't help it. I know Mr. Brown's somewhere in the flat! I can FEEL
him." "Sure, Tuppence, how could he be? This door's open into the hall. No
one could have come in by the front door without our seeing and hearing
him." "I can't help it. I FEEL he's here!" She looked appealingly at Sir James, who replied gravely:

"With due deference to your feelings, Miss Tuppence (and mine as well
for that matter), I do not see how it is humanly possible for anyone to
be in the flat without our knowledge." The girl was a little comforted by his wards. "Sitting up at night is always rather jumpy," she confessed. "Yes," said Sir James. "We are in the condition of people holding a
seance. Perhaps if a medium were present we might get some marvellous
results." "Do you believe in spiritualism?" asked Tuppence, opening her eyes wide. The lawyer shrugged his shoulders. "There is some truth in it, without a doubt. But most of the testimony
would not pass muster in the witness-box." The hours drew on. With the first faint glimmerings of dawn, Sir James
drew aside the curtains. They beheld, what few Londoners see, the slow
rising of the sun over the sleeping city. Somehow, with the coming
of the light, the dreads and fancies of the past night seemed absurd. Tuppence's spirits revived to the normal. "Hooray!" she said. "It's going to be a gorgeous day. And we shall find
Tommy. And Jane Finn.