The lawyer laid down his knife and fork sharply. "Has anything happened to Miss Tuppence?" His voice was keen-edged. "She's disappeared," said Julius. "When?" "A week ago." "How?" Sir James's questions fairly shot out. Between them Tommy and Julius
gave the history of the last week and their futile search. Sir James went at once to the root of the matter. "A wire signed with your name? They knew enough of you both for that. They weren't sure of how much you had learnt in that house. Their
kidnapping of Miss Tuppence is the counter-move to your escape. If
necessary they could seal your lips with a threat of what might happen
to her." Tommy nodded. "That's just what I thought, sir." Sir James looked at him keenly. "You had worked that out, had you? Not
bad--not at all bad. The curious thing is that they certainly did not
know anything about you when they first held you prisoner. You are sure
that you did not in any way disclose your identity?" Tommy shook his head. "That's so," said Julius with a nod. "Therefore I reckon some one put
them wise--and not earlier than Sunday afternoon." "Yes, but who?" "That almighty omniscient Mr. Brown, of course!" There was a faint note of derision in the American's voice which made
Sir James look up sharply. "You don't believe in Mr. Brown, Mr. Hersheimmer?" "No, sir, I do not," returned the young American with emphasis. "Not
as such, that is to say. I reckon it out that he's a figurehead--just a
bogy name to frighten the children with. The real head of this business
is that Russian chap Kramenin. I guess he's quite capable of running
revolutions in three countries at once if he chose! The man Whittington
is probably the head of the English branch." "I disagree with you," said Sir James shortly. "Mr. Brown exists." He
turned to Tommy. "Did you happen to notice where that wire was handed
in?" "No, sir, I'm afraid I didn't." "H'm. Got it with you?" "It's upstairs, sir, in my kit." "I'd like to have a look at it sometime. No hurry. You've wasted a
week"--Tommy hung his head--"a day or so more is immaterial. We'll deal
with Miss Jane Finn first. Afterwards, we'll set to work to rescue Miss
Tuppence from bondage. I don't think she's in any immediate danger. That
is, so long as they don't know that we've got Jane Finn, and that
her memory has returned. We must keep that dark at all costs. You
understand?" The other two assented, and, after making arrangements for meeting on
the morrow, the great lawyer took his leave. At ten o'clock, the two young men were at the appointed spot. Sir
James had joined them on the doorstep. He alone appeared unexcited. He
introduced them to the doctor. "Mr. Hersheimmer--Mr. Beresford--Dr. Roylance. How's the patient?" "Going on well. Evidently no idea of the flight of time. Asked this
morning how many had been saved from the Lusitania. Was it in the papers
yet? That, of course, was only what was to be expected. She seems to
have something on her mind, though." "I think we can relieve her anxiety. May we go up?" "Certainly." Tommy's heart beat sensibly faster as they followed the doctor upstairs. Jane Finn at last! The long-sought, the mysterious, the elusive Jane
Finn! How wildly improbable success had seemed! And here in this house,
her memory almost miraculously restored, lay the girl who held the
future of England in her hands. A half groan broke from Tommy's lips. If only Tuppence could have been at his side to share in the triumphant
conclusion of their joint venture! Then he put the thought of Tuppence
resolutely aside. His confidence in Sir James was growing. There was
a man who would unerringly ferret out Tuppence's whereabouts. In the
meantime Jane Finn! And suddenly a dread clutched at his heart. It
seemed too easy.... Suppose they should find her dead... stricken down
by the hand of Mr. Brown? In another minute he was laughing at these melodramatic fancies. The
doctor held open the door of a room and they passed in. On the white
bed, bandages round her head, lay the girl. Somehow the whole scene
seemed unreal. It was so exactly what one expected that it gave the
effect of being beautifully staged. The girl looked from one to the other of them with large wondering eyes. Sir James spoke first. "Miss Finn," he said, "this is your cousin, Mr. Julius P. Hersheimmer." A faint flush flitted over the girl's face, as Julius stepped forward
and took her hand. "How do, Cousin Jane?" he said lightly. But Tommy caught the tremor in his voice. "Are you really Uncle Hiram's son?" she asked wonderingly. Her voice, with the slight warmth of the Western accent, had an almost
thrilling quality. It seemed vaguely familiar to Tommy, but he thrust
the impression aside as impossible. "Sure thing." "We used to read about Uncle Hiram in the papers," continued the girl,
in her low soft tones. "But I never thought I'd meet you one day. Mother
figured it out that Uncle Hiram would never get over being mad with
her." "The old man was like that," admitted Julius. "But I guess the new
generation's sort of different. Got no use for the family feud business. First thing I thought about, soon as the war was over, was to come along
and hunt you up." A shadow passed over the girl's face. "They've been telling me things--dreadful things--that my memory went,
and that there are years I shall never know about--years lost out of my
life." "You didn't realize that yourself?" The girl's eyes opened wide. "Why, no. It seems to me as though it were no time since we were being
hustled into those boats. I can see it all now." She closed her eyes
with a shudder. Julius looked across at Sir James, who nodded. "Don't worry any. It isn't worth it. Now, see here, Jane, there's
something we want to know about. There was a man aboard that boat with
some mighty important papers on him, and the big guns in this country
have got a notion that he passed on the goods to you. Is that so?" The girl hesitated, her glance shifting to the other two. Julius
understood. "Mr. Beresford is commissioned by the British Government to get those
papers back. Sir James Peel Edgerton is an English Member of Parliament,
and might be a big gun in the Cabinet if he liked. It's owing to him
that we've ferreted you out at last. So you can go right ahead and tell
us the whole story. Did Danvers give you the papers?" "Yes. He said they'd have a better chance with me, because they would
save the women and children first." "Just as we thought," said Sir James. "He said they were very important--that they might make all the
difference to the Allies. But, if it's all so long ago, and the war's
over, what does it matter now?" "I guess history repeats itself, Jane. First there was a great hue
and cry over those papers, then it all died down, and now the whole
caboodle's started all over again--for rather different reasons. Then
you can hand them over to us right away?" "But I can't." "What?" "I haven't got them." "You--haven't--got them?" Julius punctuated the words with little
pauses. "No--I hid them." "You hid them?" "Yes. I got uneasy. People seemed to be watching me. It scared
me--badly." She put her hand to her head. "It's almost the last thing I
remember before waking up in the hospital...."

"Go on," said Sir James, in his quiet penetrating tones. "What do you
remember?" She turned to him obediently. "It was at Holyhead. I came that way--I don't remember why...."

"That doesn't matter. Go on." "In the confusion on the quay I slipped away. Nobody saw me. I took a
car. Told the man to drive me out of the town. I watched when we got on
the open road. No other car was following us. I saw a path at the side
of the road. I told the man to wait." She paused, then went on. "The path led to the cliff, and down to the
sea between big yellow gorse bushes--they were like golden flames. I
looked round. There wasn't a soul in sight. But just level with my head
there was a hole in the rock. It was quite small--I could only just get
my hand in, but it went a long way back. I took the oilskin packet from
round my neck and shoved it right in as far as I could. Then I tore off
a bit of gorse--My! but it did prick--and plugged the hole with it so
that you'd never guess there was a crevice of any kind there. Then I
marked the place carefully in my own mind, so that I'd find it again. There was a queer boulder in the path just there--for all the world
like a dog sitting up begging. Then I went back to the road. The car was
waiting, and I drove back. I just caught the train. I was a bit ashamed
of myself for fancying things maybe, but, by and by, I saw the man
opposite me wink at a woman who was sitting next to me, and I felt
scared again, and was glad the papers were safe. I went out in the
corridor to get a little air. I thought I'd slip into another carriage. But the woman called me back, said I'd dropped something, and when I
stooped to look, something seemed to hit me--here." She placed her hand
to the back of her head. "I don't remember anything more until I woke up
in the hospital." There was a pause. "Thank you, Miss Finn." It was Sir James who spoke. "I hope we have not
tired you?" "Oh, that's all right. My head aches a little, but otherwise I feel
fine." Julius stepped forward and took her hand again. "So long, Cousin Jane. I'm going to get busy after those papers, but
I'll be back in two shakes of a dog's tail, and I'll tote you up to
London and give you the time of your young life before we go back to the
States! I mean it--so hurry up and get well." CHAPTER XX. TOO LATE

IN the street they held an informal council of war. Sir James had drawn
a watch from his pocket. "The boat train to Holyhead stops at Chester at
12.14. If you start at once I think you can catch the connection." Tommy looked up, puzzled. "Is there any need to hurry, sir? To-day is only the 24th." "I guess it's always well to get up early in the morning," said Julius,
before the lawyer had time to reply. "We'll make tracks for the depot
right away." A little frown had settled on Sir James's brow. "I wish I could come with you. I am due to speak at a meeting at two
o'clock. It is unfortunate." The reluctance in his tone was very evident. It was clear, on the other
hand, that Julius was easily disposed to put up with the loss of the
other's company. "I guess there's nothing complicated about this deal," he remarked. "Just a game of hide-and-seek, that's all." "I hope so," said Sir James. "Sure thing. What else could it be?" "You are still young, Mr. Hersheimmer. At my age you will probably have
learnt one lesson. 'Never underestimate your adversary.'" The gravity of his tone impressed Tommy, but had little effect upon
Julius. "You think Mr. Brown might come along and take a hand? If he does, I'm
ready for him." He slapped his pocket. "I carry a gun. Little Willie
here travels round with me everywhere." He produced a murderous-looking
automatic, and tapped it affectionately before returning it to its
home. "But he won't be needed this trip. There's nobody to put Mr. Brown
wise." The lawyer shrugged his shoulders. "There was nobody to put Mr. Brown wise to the fact that Mrs. Vandemeyer
meant to betray him. Nevertheless, MRS. VANDEMEYER DIED WITHOUT
SPEAKING." Julius was silenced for once, and Sir James added on a lighter note:

"I only want to put you on your guard. Good-bye, and good luck. Take
no unnecessary risks once the papers are in your hands. If there is any
reason to believe that you have been shadowed, destroy them at once. Good luck to you. The game is in your hands now." He shook hands with
them both. Ten minutes later the two young men were seated in a first-class
carriage en route for Chester. For a long time neither of them spoke. When at length Julius broke the
silence, it was with a totally unexpected remark. "Say," he observed thoughtfully, "did you ever make a darned fool of
yourself over a girl's face?" Tommy, after a moment's astonishment, searched his mind. "Can't say I have," he replied at last. "Not that I can recollect,
anyhow. Why?" "Because for the last two months I've been making a sentimental idiot of
myself over Jane! First moment I clapped eyes on her photograph my heart
did all the usual stunts you read about in novels. I guess I'm ashamed
to admit it, but I came over here determined to find her and fix it all
up, and take her back as Mrs. Julius P. Hersheimmer!" "Oh!" said Tommy, amazed. Julius uncrossed his legs brusquely and continued:

"Just shows what an almighty fool a man can make of himself! One look at
the girl in the flesh, and I was cured!" Feeling more tongue-tied than ever, Tommy ejaculated "Oh!" again. "No disparagement to Jane, mind you," continued the other. "She's a real
nice girl, and some fellow will fall in love with her right away." "I thought her a very good-looking girl," said Tommy, finding his
tongue. "Sure she is. But she's not like her photo one bit. At least I suppose
she is in a way--must be--because I recognized her right off. If I'd
seen her in a crowd I'd have said 'There's a girl whose face I know'
right away without any hesitation. But there was something about that
photo"--Julius shook his head, and heaved a sigh--"I guess romance is a
mighty queer thing!" "It must be," said Tommy coldly, "if you can come over here in love with
one girl, and propose to another within a fortnight." Julius had the grace to look discomposed. "Well, you see, I'd got a sort of tired feeling that I'd never find
Jane--and that it was all plumb foolishness anyway. And then--oh, well,
the French, for instance, are much more sensible in the way they look at
things. They keep romance and marriage apart----"

Tommy flushed. "Well, I'm damned! If that's----"

Julius hastened to interrupt. "Say now, don't be hasty. I don't mean what you mean. I take it
Americans have a higher opinion of morality than you have even. What I
meant was that the French set about marriage in a businesslike way--find
two people who are suited to one another, look after the money affairs,
and see the whole thing practically, and in a businesslike spirit." "If you ask me," said Tommy, "we're all too damned businesslike
nowadays. We're always saying, 'Will it pay?' The men are bad enough,
and the girls are worse!" "Cool down, son. Don't get so heated." "I feel heated," said Tommy. Julius looked at him and judged it wise to say no more. However, Tommy had plenty of time to cool down before they reached
Holyhead, and the cheerful grin had returned to his countenance as they
alighted at their destination. After consultation, and with the aid of a road map, they were fairly
well agreed as to direction, so were able to hire a taxi without more
ado and drive out on the road leading to Treaddur Bay. They instructed
the man to go slowly, and watched narrowly so as not to miss the path. They came to it not long after leaving the town, and Tommy stopped the
car promptly, asked in a casual tone whether the path led down to the
sea, and hearing it did paid off the man in handsome style. A moment later the taxi was slowly chugging back to Holyhead. Tommy and
Julius watched it out of sight, and then turned to the narrow path. "It's the right one, I suppose?" asked Tommy doubtfully. "There must be
simply heaps along here." "Sure it is. Look at the gorse. Remember what Jane said?" Tommy looked at the swelling hedges of golden blossom which bordered the
path on either side, and was convinced. They went down in single file, Julius leading. Twice Tommy turned his
head uneasily. Julius looked back. "What is it?" "I don't know. I've got the wind up somehow. Keep fancying there's some
one following us." "Can't be," said Julius positively. "We'd see him." Tommy had to admit that this was true. Nevertheless, his sense of
uneasiness deepened. In spite of himself he believed in the omniscience
of the enemy. "I rather wish that fellow would come along," said Julius. He patted his
pocket. "Little William here is just aching for exercise!" "Do you always carry it--him--with you?" inquired Tommy with burning
curiosity. "Most always. I guess you never know what might turn up." Tommy kept a respectful silence. He was impressed by little William. It
seemed to remove the menace of Mr. Brown farther away. The path was now running along the side of the cliff, parallel to the
sea. Suddenly Julius came to such an abrupt halt that Tommy cannoned
into him. "What's up?" he inquired. "Look there. If that doesn't beat the band!" Tommy looked. Standing out half obstructing the path was a huge boulder
which certainly bore a fanciful resemblance to a "begging" terrier. "Well," said Tommy, refusing to share Julius's emotion, "it's what we
expected to see, isn't it?" Julius looked at him sadly and shook his head. "British phlegm! Sure we expected it--but it kind of rattles me, all the
same, to see it sitting there just where we expected to find it!" Tommy, whose calm was, perhaps, more assumed than natural, moved his
feet impatiently. "Push on. What about the hole?" They scanned the cliff-side narrowly. Tommy heard himself saying
idiotically:

"The gorse won't be there after all these years." And Julius replied solemnly:

"I guess you're right." Tommy suddenly pointed with a shaking hand. "What about that crevice there?" Julius replied in an awestricken voice:

"That's it--for sure." They looked at each other. "When I was in France," said Tommy reminiscently, "whenever my batman
failed to call me, he always said that he had come over queer. I never
believed it. But whether he felt it or not, there IS such a sensation. I've got it now! Badly!" He looked at the rock with a kind of agonized passion. "Damn it!" he cried. "It's impossible! Five years! Think of it! Bird's-nesting boys, picnic parties, thousands of people passing! It
can't be there! It's a hundred to one against its being there! It's
against all reason!" Indeed, he felt it to be impossible--more, perhaps, because he could not
believe in his own success where so many others had failed. The thing
was too easy, therefore it could not be. The hole would be empty. Julius looked at him with a widening smile. "I guess you're rattled now all right," he drawled with some enjoyment. "Well, here goes!" He thrust his hand into the crevice, and made a
slight grimace. "It's a tight fit. Jane's hand must be a few sizes
smaller than mine. I don't feel anything--no--say, what's this? Gee
whiz!" And with a flourish he waved aloft a small discoloured packet. "It's the goods all right. Sewn up in oilskin. Hold it while I get my
penknife." The unbelievable had happened. Tommy held the precious packet tenderly
between his hands. They had succeeded! "It's queer," he murmured idly, "you'd think the stitches would have
rotted. They look just as good as new." They cut them carefully and ripped away the oilskin. Inside was a small
folded sheet of paper. With trembling fingers they unfolded it. The
sheet was blank! They stared at each other, puzzled. "A dummy?" hazarded Julius. "Was Danvers just a decoy?" Tommy shook his head. That solution did not satisfy him. Suddenly his
face cleared. "I've got it! SYMPATHETIC INK!" "You think so?" "Worth trying anyhow. Heat usually does the trick. Get some sticks. We'll make a fire." In a few minutes the little fire of twigs and leaves was blazing
merrily. Tommy held the sheet of paper near the glow. The paper curled a
little with the heat. Nothing more. Suddenly Julius grasped his arm, and pointed to where characters were
appearing in a faint brown colour. "Gee whiz! You've got it! Say, that idea of yours was great. It never
occurred to me." Tommy held the paper in position some minutes longer until he judged the
heat had done its work. Then he withdrew it. A moment later he uttered a
cry.