Annette had disappeared. Tommy stood spell-bound. Had she run upstairs again? What madness
possessed her! He fumed with impatience, but he stood his ground. He
would not go without her. And suddenly there was an outcry overhead, an exclamation from the
German, and then Annette's voice, clear and high:

"Ma foi, he has escaped! And quickly! Who would have thought it?" Tommy still stood rooted to the ground. Was that a command to him to go? He fancied it was. And then, louder still, the words floated down to him:

"This is a terrible house. I want to go back to Marguerite. To
Marguerite. TO MARGUERITE!" Tommy had run back to the stairs. She wanted him to go and leave her. But why? At all costs he must try and get her away with him. Then his
heart sank. Conrad was leaping down the stairs, uttering a savage cry at
the sight of him. After him came the others. Tommy stopped Conrad's rush with a straight blow with his fist. It
caught the other on the point of the jaw and he fell like a log. The
second man tripped over his body and fell. From higher up the staircase
there was a flash, and a bullet grazed Tommy's ear. He realized that
it would be good for his health to get out of this house as soon as
possible. As regards Annette he could do nothing. He had got even with
Conrad, which was one satisfaction. The blow had been a good one. He leapt for the door, slamming it behind him. The square was deserted. In front of the house was a baker's van. Evidently he was to have been
taken out of London in that, and his body found many miles from the
house in Soho. The driver jumped to the pavement and tried to bar
Tommy's way. Again Tommy's fist shot out, and the driver sprawled on the
pavement. Tommy took to his heels and ran--none too soon. The front door opened
and a hail of bullets followed him. Fortunately none of them hit him. He
turned the corner of the square. "There's one thing," he thought to himself, "they can't go on shooting. They'll have the police after them if they do. I wonder they dared to
there." He heard the footsteps of his pursuers behind him, and redoubled his own
pace. Once he got out of these by-ways he would be safe. There would be
a policeman about somewhere--not that he really wanted to invoke the aid
of the police if he could possibly do without it. It meant explanations,
and general awkwardness. In another moment he had reason to bless his
luck. He stumbled over a prostrate figure, which started up with a yell
of alarm and dashed off down the street. Tommy drew back into a doorway. In a minute he had the pleasure of seeing his two pursuers, of whom the
German was one, industriously tracking down the red herring! Tommy sat down quietly on the doorstep and allowed a few moments to
elapse while he recovered his breath. Then he strolled gently in the
opposite direction. He glanced at his watch. It was a little after
half-past five. It was rapidly growing light. At the next corner he
passed a policeman. The policeman cast a suspicious eye on him. Tommy
felt slightly offended. Then, passing his hand over his face, he
laughed. He had not shaved or washed for three days! What a guy he must
look. He betook himself without more ado to a Turkish Bath establishment which
he knew to be open all night. He emerged into the busy daylight feeling
himself once more, and able to make plans. First of all, he must have a square meal. He had eaten nothing since
midday yesterday. He turned into an A.B.C. shop and ordered eggs and
bacon and coffee. Whilst he ate, he read a morning paper propped up
in front of him. Suddenly he stiffened. There was a long article on
Kramenin, who was described as the "man behind Bolshevism" in Russia,
and who had just arrived in London--some thought as an unofficial envoy. His career was sketched lightly, and it was firmly asserted that he,
and not the figurehead leaders, had been the author of the Russian
Revolution. In the centre of the page was his portrait. "So that's who Number 1 is," said Tommy with his mouth full of eggs and
bacon. "Not a doubt about it, I must push on." He paid for his breakfast, and betook himself to Whitehall. There he
sent up his name, and the message that it was urgent. A few minutes
later he was in the presence of the man who did not here go by the name
of "Mr. Carter." There was a frown on his face. "Look here, you've no business to come asking for me in this way. I
thought that was distinctly understood?" "It was, sir. But I judged it important to lose no time." And as briefly and succinctly as possible he detailed the experiences of
the last few days. Half-way through, Mr. Carter interrupted him to give a few cryptic
orders through the telephone. All traces of displeasure had now left his
face. He nodded energetically when Tommy had finished. "Quite right. Every moment's of value. Fear we shall be too late anyway. They wouldn't wait. Would clear out at once. Still, they may have left
something behind them that will be a clue. You say you've recognized
Number 1 to be Kramenin? That's important. We want something against him
badly to prevent the Cabinet falling on his neck too freely. What about
the others? You say two faces were familiar to you? One's a Labour man,
you think? Just look through these photos, and see if you can spot him." A minute later, Tommy held one up. Mr. Carter exhibited some surprise. "Ah, Westway! Shouldn't have thought it. Poses as being moderate. As for
the other fellow, I think I can give a good guess." He handed another
photograph to Tommy, and smiled at the other's exclamation. "I'm right,
then. Who is he? Irishman. Prominent Unionist M.P. All a blind, of
course. We've suspected it--but couldn't get any proof. Yes, you've done
very well, young man. The 29th, you say, is the date. That gives us very
little time--very little time indeed." "But----" Tommy hesitated. Mr. Carter read his thoughts. "We can deal with the General Strike menace, I think. It's a
toss-up--but we've got a sporting chance! But if that draft treaty turns
up--we're done. England will be plunged in anarchy. Ah, what's that? The car? Come on, Beresford, we'll go and have a look at this house of
yours." Two constables were on duty in front of the house in Soho. An inspector
reported to Mr. Carter in a low voice. The latter turned to Tommy. "The birds have flown--as we thought. We might as well go over it." Going over the deserted house seemed to Tommy to partake of the
character of a dream. Everything was just as it had been. The prison
room with the crooked pictures, the broken jug in the attic, the meeting
room with its long table. But nowhere was there a trace of papers. Everything of that kind had either been destroyed or taken away. And
there was no sign of Annette. "What you tell me about the girl puzzled me," said Mr. Carter. "You
believe that she deliberately went back?" "It would seem so, sir. She ran upstairs while I was getting the door
open." "H'm, she must belong to the gang, then; but, being a woman, didn't feel
like standing by to see a personable young man killed. But evidently
she's in with them, or she wouldn't have gone back." "I can't believe she's really one of them, sir. She--seemed so
different----"

"Good-looking, I suppose?" said Mr. Carter with a smile that made Tommy
flush to the roots of his hair. He admitted Annette's beauty rather
shamefacedly. "By the way," observed Mr. Carter, "have you shown yourself to Miss
Tuppence yet? She's been bombarding me with letters about you." "Tuppence? I was afraid she might get a bit rattled. Did she go to the
police?" Mr. Carter shook his head. "Then I wonder how they twigged me." Mr. Carter looked inquiringly at him, and Tommy explained. The other
nodded thoughtfully. "True, that's rather a curious point. Unless the mention of the Ritz was
an accidental remark?" "It might have been, sir. But they must have found out about me suddenly
in some way." "Well," said Mr. Carter, looking round him, "there's nothing more to be
done here. What about some lunch with me?" "Thanks awfully, sir. But I think I'd better get back and rout out
Tuppence." "Of course. Give her my kind regards and tell her not to believe you're
killed too readily next time." Tommy grinned. "I take a lot of killing, sir." "So I perceive," said Mr. Carter dryly. "Well, good-bye. Remember you're
a marked man now, and take reasonable care of yourself." "Thank you, sir." Hailing a taxi briskly Tommy stepped in, and was swiftly borne to the
Ritz' dwelling the while on the pleasurable anticipation of startling
Tuppence. "Wonder what she's been up to. Dogging 'Rita' most likely. By the way,
I suppose that's who Annette meant by Marguerite. I didn't get it at the
time." The thought saddened him a little, for it seemed to prove that
Mrs. Vandemeyer and the girl were on intimate terms. The taxi drew up at the Ritz. Tommy burst into its sacred portals
eagerly, but his enthusiasm received a check. He was informed that Miss
Cowley had gone out a quarter of an hour ago. CHAPTER XVIII. THE TELEGRAM

BAFFLED for the moment, Tommy strolled into the restaurant, and ordered
a meal of surpassing excellence. His four days' imprisonment had taught
him anew to value good food. He was in the middle of conveying a particularly choice morsel of Sole
a la Jeanette to his mouth, when he caught sight of Julius entering the
room. Tommy waved a menu cheerfully, and succeeded in attracting the
other's attention. At the sight of Tommy, Julius's eyes seemed as though
they would pop out of his head. He strode across, and pump-handled
Tommy's hand with what seemed to the latter quite unnecessary vigour. "Holy snakes!" he ejaculated. "Is it really you?" "Of course it is. Why shouldn't it be?" "Why shouldn't it be? Say, man, don't you know you've been given up
for dead? I guess we'd have had a solemn requiem for you in another few
days." "Who thought I was dead?" demanded Tommy. "Tuppence." "She remembered the proverb about the good dying young, I suppose. There
must be a certain amount of original sin in me to have survived. Where
is Tuppence, by the way?" "Isn't she here?" "No, the fellows at the office said she'd just gone out." "Gone shopping, I guess. I dropped her here in the car about an hour
ago. But, say, can't you shed that British calm of yours, and get down
to it? What on God's earth have you been doing all this time?" "If you're feeding here," replied Tommy, "order now. It's going to be a
long story." Julius drew up a chair to the opposite side of the table, summoned a
hovering waiter, and dictated his wishes. Then he turned to Tommy. "Fire ahead. I guess you've had some few adventures." "One or two," replied Tommy modestly, and plunged into his recital. Julius listened spellbound. Half the dishes that were placed before him
he forgot to eat. At the end he heaved a long sigh. "Bully for you. Reads like a dime novel!" "And now for the home front," said Tommy, stretching out his hand for a
peach. "We-el," drawled Julius, "I don't mind admitting we've had some
adventures too." He, in his turn, assumed the role of narrator. Beginning with his
unsuccessful reconnoitring at Bournemouth, he passed on to his return
to London, the buying of the car, the growing anxieties of Tuppence,
the call upon Sir James, and the sensational occurrences of the previous
night. "But who killed her?" asked Tommy. "I don't quite understand." "The doctor kidded himself she took it herself," replied Julius dryly. "And Sir James? What did he think?" "Being a legal luminary, he is likewise a human oyster," replied Julius. "I should say he 'reserved judgment.'" He went on to detail the events
of the morning. "Lost her memory, eh?" said Tommy with interest. "By Jove, that explains
why they looked at me so queerly when I spoke of questioning her. Bit of
a slip on my part, that! But it wasn't the sort of thing a fellow would
be likely to guess." "They didn't give you any sort of hint as to where Jane was?" Tommy shook his head regretfully. "Not a word. I'm a bit of an ass, as you know. I ought to have got more
out of them somehow." "I guess you're lucky to be here at all. That bluff of yours was the
goods all right. How you ever came to think of it all so pat beats me to
a frazzle!" "I was in such a funk I had to think of something," said Tommy simply. There was a moment's pause, and then Tommy reverted to Mrs. Vandemeyer's
death. "There's no doubt it was chloral?" "I believe not. At least they call it heart failure induced by an
overdose, or some such claptrap. It's all right. We don't want to
be worried with an inquest. But I guess Tuppence and I and even the
highbrow Sir James have all got the same idea." "Mr. Brown?" hazarded Tommy. "Sure thing." Tommy nodded. "All the same," he said thoughtfully, "Mr. Brown hasn't got wings. I
don't see how he got in and out." "How about some high-class thought transference stunt? Some magnetic
influence that irresistibly impelled Mrs. Vandemeyer to commit suicide?" Tommy looked at him with respect. "Good, Julius. Distinctly good. Especially the phraseology. But it
leaves me cold. I yearn for a real Mr. Brown of flesh and blood. I think
the gifted young detectives must get to work, study the entrances and
exits, and tap the bumps on their foreheads until the solution of the
mystery dawns on them. Let's go round to the scene of the crime. I wish
we could get hold of Tuppence. The Ritz would enjoy the spectacle of the
glad reunion." Inquiry at the office revealed the fact that Tuppence had not yet
returned. "All the same, I guess I'll have a look round upstairs," said Julius. "She might be in my sitting-room." He disappeared. Suddenly a diminutive boy spoke at Tommy's elbow:

"The young lady--she's gone away by train, I think, sir," he murmured
shyly. "What?" Tommy wheeled round upon him. The small boy became pinker than before. "The taxi, sir. I heard her tell the driver Charing Cross and to look
sharp." Tommy stared at him, his eyes opening wide in surprise. Emboldened, the
small boy proceeded. "So I thought, having asked for an A.B.C. and a
Bradshaw." Tommy interrupted him:

"When did she ask for an A.B.C. and a Bradshaw?" "When I took her the telegram, sir." "A telegram?" "Yes, sir." "When was that?" "About half-past twelve, sir." "Tell me exactly what happened." The small boy drew a long breath. "I took up a telegram to No. 891--the lady was there. She opened it
and gave a gasp, and then she said, very jolly like: 'Bring me up a
Bradshaw, and an A.B.C., and look sharp, Henry.' My name isn't Henry,
but----"

"Never mind your name," said Tommy impatiently. "Go on." "Yes, sir. I brought them, and she told me to wait, and looked up
something. And then she looks up at the clock, and 'Hurry up,' she says. 'Tell them to get me a taxi,' and she begins a-shoving on of her hat in
front of the glass, and she was down in two ticks, almost as quick as I
was, and I seed her going down the steps and into the taxi, and I heard
her call out what I told you." The small boy stopped and replenished his lungs. Tommy continued to
stare at him. At that moment Julius rejoined him. He held an open letter
in his hand. "I say, Hersheimmer"--Tommy turned to him--"Tuppence has gone off
sleuthing on her own." "Shucks!" "Yes, she has. She went off in a taxi to Charing Cross in the deuce of a
hurry after getting a telegram." His eye fell on the letter in Julius's
hand. "Oh; she left a note for you. That's all right. Where's she off
to?" Almost unconsciously, he held out his hand for the letter, but
Julius folded it up and placed it in his pocket. He seemed a trifle
embarrassed. "I guess this is nothing to do with it. It's about something
else--something I asked her that she was to let me know about." "Oh!" Tommy looked puzzled, and seemed waiting for more. "See here," said Julius suddenly, "I'd better put you wise. I asked Miss
Tuppence to marry me this morning." "Oh!" said Tommy mechanically. He felt dazed. Julius's words were
totally unexpected. For the moment they benumbed his brain. "I'd like to tell you," continued Julius, "that before I suggested
anything of the kind to Miss Tuppence, I made it clear that I didn't
want to butt in in any way between her and you----"

Tommy roused himself. "That's all right," he said quickly. "Tuppence and I have been pals for
years. Nothing more." He lit a cigarette with a hand that shook ever
so little. "That's quite all right. Tuppence always said that she was
looking out for----"

He stopped abruptly, his face crimsoning, but Julius was in no way
discomposed. "Oh, I guess it'll be the dollars that'll do the trick. Miss Tuppence
put me wise to that right away. There's no humbug about her. We ought to
gee along together very well." Tommy looked at him curiously for a minute, as though he were about
to speak, then changed his mind and said nothing. Tuppence and Julius! Well, why not? Had she not lamented the fact that she knew no rich men? Had she not openly avowed her intention of marrying for money if she
ever had the chance? Her meeting with the young American millionaire
had given her the chance--and it was unlikely she would be slow to avail
herself of it. She was out for money. She had always said so. Why blame
her because she had been true to her creed? Nevertheless, Tommy did blame her. He was filled with a passionate and
utterly illogical resentment. It was all very well to SAY things like
that--but a REAL girl would never marry for money. Tuppence was utterly
cold-blooded and selfish, and he would be delighted if he never saw her
again! And it was a rotten world! Julius's voice broke in on these meditations. "Yes, we ought to get along together very well. I've heard that a girl
always refuses you once--a sort of convention." Tommy caught his arm. "Refuses? Did you say REFUSES?" "Sure thing. Didn't I tell you that? She just rapped out a 'no' without
any kind of reason to it. The eternal feminine, the Huns call it, I've
heard. But she'll come round right enough. Likely enough, I hustled her
some----"

But Tommy interrupted regardless of decorum. "What did she say in that note?" he demanded fiercely. The obliging Julius handed it to him. "There's no earthly clue in it as to where she's gone," he assured
Tommy. "But you might as well see for yourself if you don't believe me." The note, in Tuppence's well-known schoolboy writing, ran as follows:


"DEAR JULIUS,

"It's always better to have things in black and white. I don't feel I
can be bothered to think of marriage until Tommy is found. Let's leave
it till then. "Yours affectionately,

"TUPPENCE." Tommy handed it back, his eyes shining. His feelings had undergone a
sharp reaction. He now felt that Tuppence was all that was noble and
disinterested. Had she not refused Julius without hesitation? True, the
note betokened signs of weakening, but he could excuse that. It read
almost like a bribe to Julius to spur him on in his efforts to find
Tommy, but he supposed she had not really meant it that way. Darling
Tuppence, there was not a girl in the world to touch her! When he saw
her----His thoughts were brought up with a sudden jerk. "As you say," he remarked, pulling himself together, "there's not a hint
here as to what she's up to. Hi--Henry!" The small boy came obediently. Tommy produced five shillings. "One thing more. Do you remember what the young lady did with the
telegram?" Henry gasped and spoke. "She crumpled it up into a ball and threw it into the grate, and made a
sort of noise like 'Whoop!' sir." "Very graphic, Henry," said Tommy. "Here's your five shillings. Come on,
Julius. We must find that telegram." They hurried upstairs. Tuppence had left the key in her door. The room
was as she had left it. In the fireplace was a crumpled ball of orange
and white.