They spoke of"--she closed her
eyes--"torturing me to find out! "I'd never known what fear--really sickening fear--was before! Once
they came to look at me. I shut my eyes and pretended to be still
unconscious, but I was afraid they'd hear the beating of my heart. However, they went away again. I began thinking madly. What could I do? I knew I wouldn't be able to stand up against torture very long. "Suddenly something put the thought of loss of memory into my head. The
subject had always interested me, and I'd read an awful lot about it. I had the whole thing at my finger-tips. If only I could succeed in
carrying the bluff through, it might save me. I said a prayer, and drew
a long breath. Then I opened my eyes and started babbling in FRENCH! "Mrs. Vandemeyer came round the screen at once. Her face was so wicked I
nearly died, but I smiled up at her doubtfully, and asked her in French
where I was. "It puzzled her, I could see. She called the man she had been talking
to. He stood by the screen with his face in shadow. He spoke to me in
French. His voice was very ordinary and quiet, but somehow, I don't know
why, he scared me worse than the woman. I felt he'd seen right through
me, but I went on playing my part. I asked again where I was, and then
went on that there was something I MUST remember--MUST remember--only
for the moment it was all gone. I worked myself up to be more and more
distressed. He asked me my name. I said I didn't know--that I couldn't
remember anything at all. "Suddenly he caught my wrist, and began twisting it. The pain was awful. I screamed. He went on. I screamed and screamed, but I managed to shriek
out things in French. I don't know how long I could have gone on, but
luckily I fainted. The last thing I heard was his voice saying: 'That's
not bluff! Anyway, a kid of her age wouldn't know enough.' I guess he
forgot American girls are older for their age than English ones, and
take more interest in scientific subjects. "When I came to, Mrs. Vandemeyer was sweet as honey to me. She'd had her
orders, I guess. She spoke to me in French--told me I'd had a shock
and been very ill. I should be better soon. I pretended to be rather
dazed--murmured something about the 'doctor' having hurt my wrist. She
looked relieved when I said that. "By and by she went out of the room altogether. I was suspicious still,
and lay quite quiet for some time. In the end, however, I got up and
walked round the room, examining it. I thought that even if anyone
WAS watching me from somewhere, it would seem natural enough under the
circumstances. It was a squalid, dirty place. There were no windows,
which seemed queer. I guessed the door would be locked, but I didn't
try it. There were some battered old pictures on the walls, representing
scenes from Faust." Jane's two listeners gave a simultaneous "Ah!" The girl nodded. "Yes--it was the place in Soho where Mr. Beresford was imprisoned. Of
course, at the time I didn't even know if I was in London. One thing was
worrying me dreadfully, but my heart gave a great throb of relief when
I saw my ulster lying carelessly over the back of a chair. AND THE
MAGAZINE WAS STILL ROLLED UP IN THE POCKET! "If only I could be certain that I was not being overlooked! I looked
carefully round the walls. There didn't seem to be a peep-hole of any
kind--nevertheless I felt kind of sure there must be. All of a sudden I
sat down on the edge of the table, and put my face in my hands, sobbing
out a 'Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu!' I've got very sharp ears. I distinctly heard
the rustle of a dress, and slight creak. That was enough for me. I was
being watched! "I lay down on the bed again, and by and by Mrs. Vandemeyer brought me
some supper. She was still sweet as they make them. I guess she'd been
told to win my confidence. Presently she produced the oilskin packet,
and asked me if I recognized it, watching me like a lynx all the time. "I took it and turned it over in a puzzled sort of way. Then I shook my
head. I said that I felt I OUGHT to remember something about it, that it
was just as though it was all coming back, and then, before I could get
hold of it, it went again. Then she told me that I was her niece, and
that I was to call her 'Aunt Rita.' I did obediently, and she told me
not to worry--my memory would soon come back. "That was an awful night. I'd made my plan whilst I was waiting for her. The papers were safe so far, but I couldn't take the risk of leaving
them there any longer. They might throw that magazine away any minute. I lay awake waiting until I judged it must be about two o'clock in the
morning. Then I got up as softly as I could, and felt in the dark along
the left-hand wall. Very gently, I unhooked one of the pictures from its
nail--Marguerite with her casket of jewels. I crept over to my coat and
took out the magazine, and an odd envelope or two that I had shoved in. Then I went to the washstand, and damped the brown paper at the back
of the picture all round. Presently I was able to pull it away. I had
already torn out the two stuck-together pages from the magazine, and now
I slipped them with their precious enclosure between the picture and its
brown paper backing. A little gum from the envelopes helped me to
stick the latter up again. No one would dream the picture had ever been
tampered with. I rehung it on the wall, put the magazine back in my
coat pocket, and crept back to bed. I was pleased with my hiding-place. They'd never think of pulling to pieces one of their own pictures. I
hoped that they'd come to the conclusion that Danvers had been carrying
a dummy all along, and that, in the end, they'd let me go. "As a matter of fact, I guess that's what they did think at first, and,
in a way, it was dangerous for me. I learnt afterwards that they nearly
did away with me then and there--there was never much chance of their
'letting me go'--but the first man, who was the boss, preferred to keep
me alive on the chance of my having hidden them, and being able to tell
where if I recovered my memory. They watched me constantly for weeks. Sometimes they'd ask me questions by the hour--I guess there was nothing
they didn't know about the third degree!--but somehow I managed to hold
my own. The strain of it was awful, though...

"They took me back to Ireland, and over every step of the Journey again,
in case I'd hidden it somewhere en route. Mrs. Vandemeyer and another
woman never left me for a moment. They spoke of me as a young relative
of Mrs. Vandemeyer's whose mind was affected by the shock of the
Lusitania. There was no one I could appeal to for help without giving
myself away to THEM, and if I risked it and failed--and Mrs. Vandemeyer
looked so rich, and so beautifully dressed, that I felt convinced they'd
take her word against mine, and think it was part of my mental trouble
to think myself 'persecuted'--I felt that the horrors in store for me
would be too awful once they knew I'd been only shamming." Sir James nodded comprehendingly. "Mrs. Vandemeyer was a woman of great personality. With that and her
social position she would have had little difficulty in imposing her
point of view in preference to yours. Your sensational accusations
against her would not easily have found credence." "That's what I thought. It ended in my being sent to a sanatorium at
Bournemouth. I couldn't make up my mind at first whether it was a sham
affair or genuine. A hospital nurse had charge of me. I was a special
patient. She seemed so nice and normal that at last I determined to
confide in her. A merciful providence just saved me in time from falling
into the trap. My door happened to be ajar, and I heard her talking
to some one in the passage. SHE WAS ONE OF THEM! They still fancied it
might be a bluff on my part, and she was put in charge of me to make
sure! After that, my nerve went completely. I dared trust nobody. "I think I almost hypnotized myself. After a while, I almost forgot
that I was really Jane Finn. I was so bent on playing the part of Janet
Vandemeyer that my nerves began to play me tricks. I became really
ill--for months I sank into a sort of stupor. I felt sure I should
die soon, and that nothing really mattered. A sane person shut up in a
lunatic asylum often ends by becoming insane, they say. I guess I was
like that. Playing my part had become second nature to me. I wasn't even
unhappy in the end--just apathetic. Nothing seemed to matter. And the
years went on. "And then suddenly things seemed to change. Mrs. Vandemeyer came down
from London. She and the doctor asked me questions, experimented with
various treatments. There was some talk of sending me to a specialist in
Paris. In the end, they did not dare risk it. I overheard something that
seemed to show that other people--friends--were looking for me. I
learnt later that the nurse who had looked after me went to Paris,
and consulted a specialist, representing herself to be me. He put her
through some searching tests, and exposed her loss of memory to be
fraudulent; but she had taken a note of his methods and reproduced
them on me. I dare say I couldn't have deceived the specialist for a
minute--a man who has made a lifelong study of a thing is unique--but
I managed once again to hold my own with them. The fact that I'd not
thought of myself as Jane Finn for so long made it easier. "One night I was whisked off to London at a moment's notice. They took
me back to the house in Soho. Once I got away from the sanatorium I felt
different--as though something in me that had been buried for a long
time was waking up again. "They sent me in to wait on Mr. Beresford. (Of course I didn't know
his name then.) I was suspicious--I thought it was another trap. But he
looked so honest, I could hardly believe it. However, I was careful in
all I said, for I knew we could be overheard. There's a small hole, high
up in the wall. "But on the Sunday afternoon a message was brought to the house. They
were all very disturbed. Without their knowing, I listened. Word had
come that he was to be killed. I needn't tell the next part, because
you know it. I thought I'd have time to rush up and get the papers from
their hiding-place, but I was caught. So I screamed out that he was
escaping, and I said I wanted to go back to Marguerite. I shouted the
name three times very loud. I knew the others would think I meant
Mrs. Vandemeyer, but I hoped it might make Mr. Beresford think of the
picture. He'd unhooked one the first day--that's what made me hesitate
to trust him." She paused. "Then the papers," said Sir James slowly, "are still at the back of the
picture in that room." "Yes." The girl had sunk back on the sofa exhausted with the strain of
the long story. Sir James rose to his feet. He looked at his watch. "Come," he said, "we must go at once." "To-night?" queried Tuppence, surprised. "To-morrow may be too late," said Sir James gravely. "Besides, by
going to-night we have the chance of capturing that great man and
super-criminal--Mr. Brown!" There was dead silence, and Sir James continued:

"You have been followed here--not a doubt of it. When we leave the house
we shall be followed again, but not molested, FOR IT IS MR. BROWN'S PLAN
THAT WE ARE TO LEAD HIM. But the Soho house is under police supervision
night and day. There are several men watching it. When we enter that
house, Mr. Brown will not draw back--he will risk all, on the chance
of obtaining the spark to fire his mine. And he fancies the risk not
great--since he will enter in the guise of a friend!" Tuppence flushed, then opened her mouth impulsively. "But there's something you don't know--that we haven't told you." Her
eyes dwelt on Jane in perplexity. "What is that?" asked the other sharply. "No hesitations, Miss Tuppence. We need to be sure of our going." But Tuppence, for once, seemed tongue-tied. "It's so difficult--you see, if I'm wrong--oh, it would be dreadful." She made a grimace at the unconscious Jane. "Never forgive me," she
observed cryptically. "You want me to help you out, eh?" "Yes, please. YOU know who Mr. Brown is, don't you?" "Yes," said Sir James gravely. "At last I do." "At last?" queried Tuppence doubtfully. "Oh, but I thought----" She
paused. "You thought correctly, Miss Tuppence. I have been morally certain of
his identity for some time--ever since the night of Mrs. Vandemeyer's
mysterious death." "Ah!" breathed Tuppence. "For there we are up against the logic of facts. There are only two
solutions. Either the chloral was administered by her own hand, which
theory I reject utterly, or else----"

"Yes?" "Or else it was administered in the brandy you gave her. Only three
people touched that brandy--you, Miss Tuppence, I myself, and one
other--Mr. Julius Hersheimmer!" Jane Finn stirred and sat up, regarding the speaker with wide astonished
eyes. "At first, the thing seemed utterly impossible. Mr. Hersheimmer, as the
son of a prominent millionaire, was a well-known figure in America. It
seemed utterly impossible that he and Mr. Brown could be one and the
same. But you cannot escape from the logic of facts. Since the thing
was so--it must be accepted. Remember Mrs. Vandemeyer's sudden and
inexplicable agitation. Another proof, if proof was needed. "I took an early opportunity of giving you a hint. From some words of
Mr. Hersheimmer's at Manchester, I gathered that you had understood and
acted on that hint. Then I set to work to prove the impossible possible. Mr. Beresford rang me up and told me, what I had already suspected,
that the photograph of Miss Jane Finn had never really been out of Mr.
Hersheimmer's possession----"

But the girl interrupted. Springing to her feet, she cried out angrily:

"What do you mean? What are you trying to suggest? That Mr. Brown is
JULIUS? Julius--my own cousin!" "No, Miss Finn," said Sir James unexpectedly. "Not your cousin. The man
who calls himself Julius Hersheimmer is no relation to you whatsoever." CHAPTER XXVI. MR. BROWN

SIR James's words came like a bomb-shell. Both girls looked equally
puzzled. The lawyer went across to his desk, and returned with a small
newspaper cutting, which he handed to Jane. Tuppence read it over
her shoulder. Mr. Carter would have recognized it. It referred to the
mysterious man found dead in New York. "As I was saying to Miss Tuppence," resumed the lawyer, "I set to work
to prove the impossible possible. The great stumbling-block was the
undeniable fact that Julius Hersheimmer was not an assumed name. When I
came across this paragraph my problem was solved. Julius Hersheimmer set
out to discover what had become of his cousin. He went out West, where
he obtained news of her and her photograph to aid him in his search. On
the eve of his departure from New York he was set upon and murdered. His
body was dressed in shabby clothes, and the face disfigured to prevent
identification. Mr. Brown took his place. He sailed immediately for
England. None of the real Hersheimmer's friends or intimates saw him
before he sailed--though indeed it would hardly have mattered if they
had, the impersonation was so perfect. Since then he had been hand and
glove with those sworn to hunt him down. Every secret of theirs has been
known to him. Only once did he come near disaster. Mrs. Vandemeyer knew
his secret. It was no part of his plan that that huge bribe should ever
be offered to her. But for Miss Tuppence's fortunate change of plan, she
would have been far away from the flat when we arrived there. Exposure
stared him in the face. He took a desperate step, trusting in his
assumed character to avert suspicion. He nearly succeeded--but not
quite." "I can't believe it," murmured Jane. "He seemed so splendid." "The real Julius Hersheimmer WAS a splendid fellow! And Mr. Brown is
a consummate actor. But ask Miss Tuppence if she also has not had her
suspicions." Jane turned mutely to Tuppence. The latter nodded. "I didn't want to say it, Jane--I knew it would hurt you. And, after
all, I couldn't be sure. I still don't understand why, if he's Mr.
Brown, he rescued us." "Was it Julius Hersheimmer who helped you to escape?" Tuppence recounted to Sir James the exciting events of the evening,
ending up: "But I can't see WHY!" "Can't you? I can. So can young Beresford, by his actions. As a last
hope Jane Finn was to be allowed to escape--and the escape must be
managed so that she harbours no suspicions of its being a put-up job. They're not averse to young Beresford's being in the neighbourhood, and,
if necessary, communicating with you. They'll take care to get him out
of the way at the right minute. Then Julius Hersheimmer dashes up and
rescues you in true melodramatic style. Bullets fly--but don't hit
anybody. What would have happened next? You would have driven straight
to the house in Soho and secured the document which Miss Finn would
probably have entrusted to her cousin's keeping. Or, if he conducted the
search, he would have pretended to find the hiding-place already rifled. He would have had a dozen ways of dealing with the situation, but the
result would have been the same. And I rather fancy some accident would
have happened to both of you. You see, you know rather an inconvenient
amount. That's a rough outline. I admit I was caught napping; but
somebody else wasn't." "Tommy," said Tuppence softly. "Yes. Evidently when the right moment came to get rid of him--he was too
sharp for them. All the same, I'm not too easy in my mind about him." "Why?" "Because Julius Hersheimmer is Mr. Brown," said Sir James dryly. "And it
takes more than one man and a revolver to hold up Mr. Brown...."

Tuppence paled a little. "What can we do?" "Nothing until we've been to the house in Soho. If Beresford has still
got the upper hand, there's nothing to fear. If otherwise, our enemy
will come to find us, and he will not find us unprepared!" From a drawer
in the desk, he took a service revolver, and placed it in his coat
pocket. "Now we're ready. I know better than even to suggest going without you,
Miss Tuppence----"

"I should think so indeed!" "But I do suggest that Miss Finn should remain here. She will be
perfectly safe, and I am afraid she is absolutely worn out with all she
has been through." But to Tuppence's surprise Jane shook her head. "No. I guess I'm going too. Those papers were my trust. I must go
through with this business to the end. I'm heaps better now anyway." Sir James's car was ordered round. During the short drive Tuppence's
heart beat tumultuously. In spite of momentary qualms of uneasiness
respecting Tommy, she could not but feel exultation. They were going to
win! The car drew up at the corner of the square and they got out. Sir James
went up to a plain-clothes man who was on duty with several others, and
spoke to him. Then he rejoined the girls. "No one has gone into the house so far. It is being watched at the back
as well, so they are quite sure of that. Anyone who attempts to enter
after we have done so will be arrested immediately. Shall we go in?" A policeman produced a key. They all knew Sir James well. They had also
had orders respecting Tuppence. Only the third member of the party was
unknown to them. The three entered the house, pulling the door to behind
them. Slowly they mounted the rickety stairs. At the top was the ragged
curtain hiding the recess where Tommy had hidden that day. Tuppence had
heard the story from Jane in her character of "Annette." She looked at
the tattered velvet with interest. Even now she could almost swear it
moved--as though some one was behind it. So strong was the illusion
that she almost fancied she could make out the outline of a form....
Supposing Mr. Brown--Julius--was there waiting.... Impossible of course! Yet she almost went back to put the curtain aside
and make sure....

Now they were entering the prison room. No place for anyone to hide
here, thought Tuppence, with a sigh of relief, then chided herself
indignantly. She must not give way to this foolish fancying--this
curious insistent feeling that MR. BROWN WAS IN THE HOUSE.... Hark! what
was that? A stealthy footstep on the stairs? There WAS some one in the
house! Absurd! She was becoming hysterical. Jane had gone straight to the picture of Marguerite. She unhooked it
with a steady hand. The dust lay thick upon it, and festoons of cobwebs
lay between it and the wall. Sir James handed her a pocket-knife, and
she ripped away the brown paper from the back.... The advertisement
page of a magazine fell out. Jane picked it up. Holding apart the frayed
inner edges she extracted two thin sheets covered with writing! No dummy this time! The real thing! "We've got it," said Tuppence. "At last...."

The moment was almost breathless in its emotion. Forgotten the faint
creakings, the imagined noises of a minute ago. None of them had eyes
for anything but what Jane held in her hand. Sir James took it, and scrutinized it attentively. "Yes," he said quietly, "this is the ill-fated draft treaty!" "We've succeeded," said Tuppence. There was awe and an almost wondering
unbelief in her voice. Sir James echoed her words as he folded the paper carefully and put it
away in his pocket-book, then he looked curiously round the dingy room. "It was here that our young friend was confined for so long, was
it not?" he said. "A truly sinister room. You notice the absence of
windows, and the thickness of the close-fitting door. Whatever took
place here would never be heard by the outside world." Tuppence shivered. His words woke a vague alarm in her. What if there
WAS some one concealed in the house? Some one who might bar that door on
them, and leave them to die like rats in a trap? Then she realized the
absurdity of her thought. The house was surrounded by police who, if
they failed to reappear, would not hesitate to break in and make a
thorough search. She smiled at her own foolishness--then looked up with
a start to find Sir James watching her. He gave her an emphatic little
nod. "Quite right, Miss Tuppence. You scent danger. So do I. So does Miss
Finn." "Yes," admitted Jane. "It's absurd--but I can't help it." Sir James nodded again. "You feel--as we all feel--THE PRESENCE OF MR. BROWN. Yes"--as Tuppence
made a movement--"not a doubt of it--MR. BROWN IS HERE...."

"In this house?" "In this room.... You don't understand? I AM MR. BROWN...."

Stupefied, unbelieving, they stared at him. The very lines of his face
had changed. It was a different man who stood before them. He smiled a
slow cruel smile. "Neither of you will leave this room alive! You said just now we had
succeeded. I have succeeded! The draft treaty is mine." His smile grew
wider as he looked at Tuppence. "Shall I tell you how it will be? Sooner
or later the police will break in, and they will find three victims of
Mr. Brown--three, not two, you understand, but fortunately the third
will not be dead, only wounded, and will be able to describe the attack
with a wealth of detail! The treaty? It is in the hands of Mr. Brown. So
no one will think of searching the pockets of Sir James Peel Edgerton!" He turned to Jane. "You outwitted me. I make my acknowledgments. But you will not do it
again." There was a faint sound behind him, but, intoxicated with success, he
did not turn his head. He slipped his hand into his pocket. "Checkmate to the Young Adventurers," he said, and slowly raised the big
automatic. But, even as he did so, he felt himself seized from behind in a grip of
iron. The revolver was wrenched from his hand, and the voice of Julius
Hersheimmer said drawlingly:

"I guess you're caught redhanded with the goods upon you." The blood rushed to the K.C. 's face, but his self-control was
marvellous, as he looked from one to the other of his two captors. He
looked longest at Tommy. "You," he said beneath his breath. "YOU! I might have known." Seeing that he was disposed to offer no resistance, their grip
slackened. Quick as a flash his left hand, the hand which bore the big
signet ring, was raised to his lips....

"'Ave, Caesar! te morituri salutant,'" he said, still looking at Tommy. Then his face changed, and with a long convulsive shudder he fell
forward in a crumpled heap, whilst an odour of bitter almonds filled the
air. CHAPTER XXVII. A SUPPER PARTY AT THE SAVOY

THE supper party given by Mr. Julius Hersheimmer to a few friends on the
evening of the 30th will long be remembered in catering circles.