His lips were white, and his voice was not very
steady:

"It is I--Kramenin! Bring down the girl at once! There is no time to
lose!" Whittington had come down the steps. He uttered an exclamation of
astonishment at seeing the other. "You! What's up? Surely you know the plan----"

Kramenin interrupted him, using the words that have created many
unnecessary panics:

"We have been betrayed! Plans must be abandoned. We must save our own
skins. The girl! And at once! It's our only chance." Whittington hesitated, but for hardly a moment. "You have orders--from HIM?" "Naturally! Should I be here otherwise? Hurry! There is no time to be
lost. The other little fool had better come too." Whittington turned and ran back into the house. The agonizing minutes
went by. Then--two figures hastily huddled in cloaks appeared on the
steps and were hustled into the car. The smaller of the two was inclined
to resist and Whittington shoved her in unceremoniously. Julius leaned
forward, and in doing so the light from the open door lit up his face. Another man on the steps behind Whittington gave a startled exclamation. Concealment was at an end. "Get a move on, George," shouted Julius. The chauffeur slipped in his clutch, and with a bound the car started. The man on the steps uttered an oath. His hand went to his pocket. There
was a flash and a report. The bullet just missed the taller girl by an
inch. "Get down, Jane," cried Julius. "Flat on the bottom of the car." He
thrust her sharply forward, then standing up, he took careful aim and
fired. "Have you hit him?" cried Tuppence eagerly. "Sure," replied Julius. "He isn't killed, though. Skunks like that take
a lot of killing. Are you all right, Tuppence?" "Of course I am. Where's Tommy? And who's this?" She indicated the
shivering Kramenin. "Tommy's making tracks for the Argentine. I guess he thought you'd
turned up your toes. Steady through the gate, George! That's right. It'll take 'em at least five minutes to get busy after us. They'll use
the telephone, I guess, so look out for snares ahead--and don't take the
direct route. Who's this, did you say, Tuppence? Let me present Monsieur
Kramenin. I persuaded him to come on the trip for his health." The Russian remained mute, still livid with terror. "But what made them let us go?" demanded Tuppence suspiciously. "I reckon Monsieur Kramenin here asked them so prettily they just
couldn't refuse!" This was too much for the Russian. He burst out vehemently:

"Curse you--curse you! They know now that I betrayed them. My life won't
be safe for an hour in this country." "That's so," assented Julius. "I'd advise you to make tracks for Russia
right away." "Let me go, then," cried the other. "I have done what you asked. Why do
you still keep me with you?" "Not for the pleasure of your company. I guess you can get right off now
if you want to. I thought you'd rather I tooled you back to London." "You may never reach London," snarled the other. "Let me go here and
now." "Sure thing. Pull up, George. The gentleman's not making the return
trip. If I ever come to Russia, Monsieur Kramenin, I shall expect a
rousing welcome, and----"

But before Julius had finished his speech, and before the car had
finally halted, the Russian had swung himself out and disappeared into
the night. "Just a mite impatient to leave us," commented Julius, as the car
gathered way again. "And no idea of saying good-bye politely to the
ladies. Say, Jane, you can get up on the seat now." For the first time the girl spoke. "How did you 'persuade' him?" she asked. Julius tapped his revolver. "Little Willie here takes the credit!" "Splendid!" cried the girl. The colour surged into her face, her eyes
looked admiringly at Julius. "Annette and I didn't know what was going to happen to us," said
Tuppence. "Old Whittington hurried us off. We thought it was lambs to
the slaughter." "Annette," said Julius. "Is that what you call her?" His mind seemed to be trying to adjust itself to a new idea. "It's her name," said Tuppence, opening her eyes very wide. "Shucks!" retorted Julius. "She may think it's her name, because her
memory's gone, poor kid. But it's the one real and original Jane Finn
we've got here." "What?" cried Tuppence. But she was interrupted. With an angry spurt, a bullet embedded itself
in the upholstery of the car just behind her head. "Down with you," cried Julius. "It's an ambush. These guys have got busy
pretty quickly. Push her a bit, George." The car fairly leapt forward. Three more shots rang out, but went
happily wide. Julius, upright, leant over the back of the car. "Nothing to shoot at," he announced gloomily. "But I guess there'll be
another little picnic soon. Ah!" He raised his hand to his cheek. "You are hurt?" said Annette quickly. "Only a scratch." The girl sprang to her feet. "Let me out! Let me out, I say! Stop the car. It is me they're after. I'm the one they want. You shall not lose your lives because of me. Let
me go." She was fumbling with the fastenings of the door. Julius took her by both arms, and looked at her. She had spoken with no
trace of foreign accent. "Sit down, kid," he said gently. "I guess there's nothing wrong with
your memory. Been fooling them all the time, eh?" The girl looked at him, nodded, and then suddenly burst into tears. Julius patted her on the shoulder. "There, there--just you sit tight. We're not going to let you quit." Through her sobs the girl said indistinctly:

"You're from home. I can tell by your voice. It makes me home-sick." "Sure I'm from home. I'm your cousin--Julius Hersheimmer. I came over to
Europe on purpose to find you--and a pretty dance you've led me." The car slackened speed. George spoke over his shoulder:

"Cross-roads here, sir. I'm not sure of the way." The car slowed down till it hardly moved. As it did so a figure climbed
suddenly over the back, and plunged head first into the midst of them. "Sorry," said Tommy, extricating himself. A mass of confused exclamations greeted him. He replied to them
severally:

"Was in the bushes by the drive. Hung on behind. Couldn't let you know
before at the pace you were going. It was all I could do to hang on. Now
then, you girls, get out!" "Get out?" "Yes. There's a station just up that road. Train due in three minutes. You'll catch it if you hurry." "What the devil are you driving at?" demanded Julius. "Do you think you
can fool them by leaving the car?" "You and I aren't going to leave the car. Only the girls." "You're crazed, Beresford. Stark staring mad! You can't let those girls
go off alone. It'll be the end of it if you do." Tommy turned to Tuppence. "Get out at once, Tuppence. Take her with you, and do just as I say. No one will do you any harm. You're safe. Take the train to London. Go
straight to Sir James Peel Edgerton. Mr. Carter lives out of town, but
you'll be safe with him." "Darn you!" cried Julius. "You're mad. Jane, you stay where you are." With a sudden swift movement, Tommy snatched the revolver from Julius's
hand, and levelled it at him. "Now will you believe I'm in earnest? Get out, both of you, and do as I
say--or I'll shoot!" Tuppence sprang out, dragging the unwilling Jane after her. "Come on, it's all right. If Tommy's sure--he's sure. Be quick. We'll
miss the train." They started running. Julius's pent-up rage burst forth. "What the hell----"

Tommy interrupted him. "Dry up! I want a few words with you, Mr. Julius Hersheimmer." CHAPTER XXV. JANE'S STORY

HER arm through Jane's, dragging her along, Tuppence reached the
station. Her quick ears caught the sound of the approaching train. "Hurry up," she panted, "or we'll miss it." They arrived on the platform just as the train came to a standstill. Tuppence opened the door of an empty first-class compartment, and the
two girls sank down breathless on the padded seats. A man looked in, then passed on to the next carriage. Jane started
nervously. Her eyes dilated with terror. She looked questioningly at
Tuppence. "Is he one of them, do you think?" she breathed. Tuppence shook her head. "No, no. It's all right." She took Jane's hand in hers. "Tommy wouldn't
have told us to do this unless he was sure we'd be all right." "But he doesn't know them as I do!" The girl shivered. "You can't
understand. Five years! Five long years! Sometimes I thought I should go
mad." "Never mind. It's all over." "Is it?" The train was moving now, speeding through the night at a gradually
increasing rate. Suddenly Jane Finn started up. "What was that? I thought I saw a face--looking in through the window." "No, there's nothing. See." Tuppence went to the window, and lifting the
strap let the pane down. "You're sure?" "Quite sure." The other seemed to feel some excuse was necessary:

"I guess I'm acting like a frightened rabbit, but I can't help it. If
they caught me now they'd----" Her eyes opened wide and staring. "DON'T!" implored Tuppence. "Lie back, and DON'T THINK. You can be quite
sure that Tommy wouldn't have said it was safe if it wasn't." "My cousin didn't think so. He didn't want us to do this." "No," said Tuppence, rather embarrassed. "What are you thinking of?" said Jane sharply. "Why?" "Your voice was so--queer!" "I WAS thinking of something," confessed Tuppence. "But I don't want to
tell you--not now. I may be wrong, but I don't think so. It's just an
idea that came into my head a long time ago. Tommy's got it too--I'm
almost sure he has. But don't YOU worry--there'll be time enough for
that later. And it mayn't be so at all! Do what I tell you--lie back and
don't think of anything." "I'll try." The long lashes drooped over the hazel eyes. Tuppence, for her part, sat bolt upright--much in the attitude of a
watchful terrier on guard. In spite of herself she was nervous. Her eyes
flashed continually from one window to the other. She noted the exact
position of the communication cord. What it was that she feared, she
would have been hard put to it to say. But in her own mind she was
far from feeling the confidence displayed in her words. Not that she
disbelieved in Tommy, but occasionally she was shaken with doubts as to
whether anyone so simple and honest as he was could ever be a match for
the fiendish subtlety of the arch-criminal. If they once reached Sir James Peel Edgerton in safety, all would be
well. But would they reach him? Would not the silent forces of Mr. Brown
already be assembling against them? Even that last picture of Tommy,
revolver in hand, failed to comfort her. By now he might be overpowered,
borne down by sheer force of numbers.... Tuppence mapped out her plan of
campaign. As the train at length drew slowly into Charing Cross, Jane Finn sat up
with a start. "Have we arrived? I never thought we should!" "Oh, I thought we'd get to London all right. If there's going to be any
fun, now is when it will begin. Quick, get out. We'll nip into a taxi." In another minute they were passing the barrier, had paid the necessary
fares, and were stepping into a taxi. "King's Cross," directed Tuppence. Then she gave a jump. A man looked in
at the window, just as they started. She was almost certain it was the
same man who had got into the carriage next to them. She had a horrible
feeling of being slowly hemmed in on every side. "You see," she explained to Jane, "if they think we're going to Sir
James, this will put them off the scent. Now they'll imagine we're going
to Mr. Carter. His country place is north of London somewhere." Crossing Holborn there was a block, and the taxi was held up. This was
what Tuppence had been waiting for. "Quick," she whispered. "Open the right-hand door!" The two girls stepped out into the traffic. Two minutes later they were
seated in another taxi and were retracing their steps, this time direct
to Carlton House Terrace. "There," said Tuppence, with great satisfaction, "this ought to do them. I can't help thinking that I'm really rather clever! How that other taxi
man will swear! But I took his number, and I'll send him a postal order
to-morrow, so that he won't lose by it if he happens to be genuine. What's this thing swerving----Oh!" There was a grinding noise and a bump. Another taxi had collided with
them. In a flash Tuppence was out on the pavement. A policeman was
approaching. Before he arrived Tuppence had handed the driver five
shillings, and she and Jane had merged themselves in the crowd. "It's only a step or two now," said Tuppence breathlessly. The accident
had taken place in Trafalgar Square. "Do you think the collision was an accident, or done deliberately?" "I don't know. It might have been either." Hand-in-hand, the two girls hurried along. "It may be my fancy," said Tuppence suddenly, "but I feel as though
there was some one behind us." "Hurry!" murmured the other. "Oh, hurry!" They were now at the corner of Carlton House Terrace, and their spirits
lightened. Suddenly a large and apparently intoxicated man barred their
way. "Good evening, ladies," he hiccupped. "Whither away so fast?" "Let us pass, please," said Tuppence imperiously. "Just a word with your pretty friend here." He stretched out an unsteady
hand, and clutched Jane by the shoulder. Tuppence heard other footsteps
behind. She did not pause to ascertain whether they were friends or
foes. Lowering her head, she repeated a manoeuvre of childish days,
and butted their aggressor full in the capacious middle. The success of
these unsportsmanlike tactics was immediate. The man sat down abruptly
on the pavement. Tuppence and Jane took to their heels. The house they
sought was some way down. Other footsteps echoed behind them. Their
breath was coming in choking gasps as they reached Sir James's door. Tuppence seized the bell and Jane the knocker. The man who had stopped them reached the foot of the steps. For a moment
he hesitated, and as he did so the door opened. They fell into the hall
together. Sir James came forward from the library door. "Hullo! What's this?" He stepped forward, and put his arm round Jane as she swayed
uncertainly. He half carried her into the library, and laid her on the
leather couch. From a tantalus on the table he poured out a few drops of
brandy, and forced her to drink them. With a sigh she sat up, her eyes
still wild and frightened. "It's all right. Don't be afraid, my child. You're quite safe." Her breath came more normally, and the colour was returning to her
cheeks. Sir James looked at Tuppence quizzically. "So you're not dead, Miss Tuppence, any more than that Tommy boy of
yours was!" "The Young Adventurers take a lot of killing," boasted Tuppence. "So it seems," said Sir James dryly. "Am I right in thinking that the
joint venture has ended in success, and that this"--he turned to the
girl on the couch--"is Miss Jane Finn?" Jane sat up. "Yes," she said quietly, "I am Jane Finn. I have a lot to tell you." "When you are stronger----"

"No--now!" Her voice rose a little. "I shall feel safer when I have told
everything." "As you please," said the lawyer. He sat down in one of the big arm-chairs facing the couch. In a low
voice Jane began her story. "I came over on the Lusitania to take up a post in Paris. I was
fearfully keen about the war, and just dying to help somehow or other. I
had been studying French, and my teacher said they were wanting help in
a hospital in Paris, so I wrote and offered my services, and they were
accepted. I hadn't got any folk of my own, so it made it easy to arrange
things. "When the Lusitania was torpedoed, a man came up to me. I'd noticed him
more than once--and I'd figured it out in my own mind that he was afraid
of somebody or something. He asked me if I was a patriotic American,
and told me he was carrying papers which were just life or death to
the Allies. He asked me to take charge of them. I was to watch for an
advertisement in the Times. If it didn't appear, I was to take them to
the American Ambassador. "Most of what followed seems like a nightmare still. I see it in my
dreams sometimes.... I'll hurry over that part. Mr. Danvers had told me
to watch out. He might have been shadowed from New York, but he didn't
think so. At first I had no suspicions, but on the boat to Holyhead I
began to get uneasy. There was one woman who had been very keen to look
after me, and chum up with me generally--a Mrs. Vandemeyer. At first I'd
been only grateful to her for being so kind to me; but all the time I
felt there was something about her I didn't like, and on the Irish
boat I saw her talking to some queer-looking men, and from the way they
looked I saw that they were talking about me. I remembered that she'd
been quite near me on the Lusitania when Mr. Danvers gave me the packet,
and before that she'd tried to talk to him once or twice. I began to get
scared, but I didn't quite see what to do. "I had a wild idea of stopping at Holyhead, and not going on to London
that day, but I soon saw that that would be plumb foolishness. The only
thing was to act as though I'd noticed nothing, and hope for the best. I couldn't see how they could get me if I was on my guard. One thing
I'd done already as a precaution--ripped open the oilskin packet and
substituted blank paper, and then sewn it up again. So, if anyone did
manage to rob me of it, it wouldn't matter. "What to do with the real thing worried me no end. Finally I opened it
out flat--there were only two sheets--and laid it between two of the
advertisement pages of a magazine. I stuck the two pages together
round the edge with some gum off an envelope. I carried the magazine
carelessly stuffed into the pocket of my ulster. "At Holyhead I tried to get into a carriage with people that looked all
right, but in a queer way there seemed always to be a crowd round me
shoving and pushing me just the way I didn't want to go. There was
something uncanny and frightening about it. In the end I found myself in
a carriage with Mrs. Vandemeyer after all. I went out into the corridor,
but all the other carriages were full, so I had to go back and sit down. I consoled myself with the thought that there were other people in the
carriage--there was quite a nice-looking man and his wife sitting just
opposite. So I felt almost happy about it until just outside London. I
had leaned back and closed my eyes. I guess they thought I was asleep,
but my eyes weren't quite shut, and suddenly I saw the nice-looking man
get something out of his bag and hand it to Mrs. Vandemeyer, and as he
did so he WINKED....

"I can't tell you how that wink sort of froze me through and through. My
only thought was to get out in the corridor as quick as ever I could. I
got up, trying to look natural and easy. Perhaps they saw something--I
don't know--but suddenly Mrs. Vandemeyer said 'Now,' and flung something
over my nose and mouth as I tried to scream. At the same moment I felt a
terrific blow on the back of my head...."

She shuddered. Sir James murmured something sympathetically. In a minute
she resumed:

"I don't know how long it was before I came back to consciousness. I
felt very ill and sick. I was lying on a dirty bed. There was a
screen round it, but I could hear two people talking in the room. Mrs.
Vandemeyer was one of them. I tried to listen, but at first I couldn't
take much in. When at last I did begin to grasp what was going on--I was
just terrified! I wonder I didn't scream right out there and then. "They hadn't found the papers. They'd got the oilskin packet with the
blanks, and they were just mad! They didn't know whether I'd changed the
papers, or whether Danvers had been carrying a dummy message, while
the real one was sent another way.