TUPPENCE ENTERS DOMESTIC SERVICE

WHEN Tommy set forth on the trail of the two men, it took all Tuppence's
self-command to refrain from accompanying him. However, she contained
herself as best she might, consoled by the reflection that her reasoning
had been justified by events. The two men had undoubtedly come from the
second floor flat, and that one slender thread of the name "Rita" had
set the Young Adventurers once more upon the track of the abductors of
Jane Finn. The question was what to do next? Tuppence hated letting the grass grow
under her feet. Tommy was amply employed, and debarred from joining him
in the chase, the girl felt at a loose end. She retraced her steps
to the entrance hall of the mansions. It was now tenanted by a small
lift-boy, who was polishing brass fittings, and whistling the latest air
with a good deal of vigour and a reasonable amount of accuracy. He glanced round at Tuppence's entry. There was a certain amount of the
gamin element in the girl, at all events she invariably got on well
with small boys. A sympathetic bond seemed instantly to be formed. She
reflected that an ally in the enemy's camp, so to speak, was not to be
despised. "Well, William," she remarked cheerfully, in the best approved
hospital-early-morning style, "getting a good shine up?" The boy grinned responsively. "Albert, miss," he corrected. "Albert be it," said Tuppence. She glanced mysteriously round the hall. The effect was purposely a broad one in case Albert should miss it. She
leaned towards the boy and dropped her voice: "I want a word with you,
Albert." Albert ceased operations on the fittings and opened his mouth slightly. "Look! Do you know what this is?" With a dramatic gesture she flung back
the left side of her coat and exposed a small enamelled badge. It was
extremely unlikely that Albert would have any knowledge of it--indeed,
it would have been fatal for Tuppence's plans, since the badge in
question was the device of a local training corps originated by the
archdeacon in the early days of the war. Its presence in Tuppence's coat
was due to the fact that she had used it for pinning in some flowers a
day or two before. But Tuppence had sharp eyes, and had noted the corner
of a threepenny detective novel protruding from Albert's pocket, and the
immediate enlargement of his eyes told her that her tactics were good,
and that the fish would rise to the bait. "American Detective Force!" she hissed. Albert fell for it. "Lord!" he murmured ecstatically. Tuppence nodded at him with the air of one who has established a
thorough understanding. "Know who I'm after?" she inquired genially. Albert, still round-eyed, demanded breathlessly:

"One of the flats?" Tuppence nodded and jerked a thumb up the stairs. "No. 20. Calls herself Vandemeyer. Vandemeyer! Ha! ha!" Albert's hand stole to his pocket. "A crook?" he queried eagerly. "A crook? I should say so. Ready Rita they call her in the States." "Ready Rita," repeated Albert deliriously. "Oh, ain't it just like the
pictures!" It was. Tuppence was a great frequenter of the kinema. "Annie always said as how she was a bad lot," continued the boy. "Who's Annie?" inquired Tuppence idly. "'Ouse-parlourmaid. She's leaving to-day. Many's the time Annie's said
to me: 'Mark my words, Albert, I wouldn't wonder if the police was to
come after her one of these days.' Just like that. But she's a stunner
to look at, ain't she?" "She's some peach," allowed Tuppence carelessly. "Finds it useful in her
lay-out, you bet. Has she been wearing any of the emeralds, by the way?" "Emeralds? Them's the green stones, isn't they?" Tuppence nodded. "That's what we're after her for. You know old man Rysdale?" Albert shook his head. "Peter B. Rysdale, the oil king?" "It seems sort of familiar to me." "The sparklers belonged to him. Finest collection of emeralds in the
world. Worth a million dollars!" "Lumme!" came ecstatically from Albert. "It sounds more like the
pictures every minute." Tuppence smiled, gratified at the success of her efforts. "We haven't exactly proved it yet. But we're after her. And"--she
produced a long-drawn-out wink--"I guess she won't get away with the
goods this time." Albert uttered another ejaculation indicative of delight. "Mind you, sonny, not a word of this," said Tuppence suddenly. "I guess
I oughtn't to have put you wise, but in the States we know a real smart
lad when we see one." "I'll not breathe a word," protested Albert eagerly. "Ain't there
anything I could do? A bit of shadowing, maybe, or such like?" Tuppence affected to consider, then shook her head. "Not at the moment, but I'll bear you in mind, son. What's this about
the girl you say is leaving?" "Annie? Regular turn up, they 'ad. As Annie said, servants is some one
nowadays, and to be treated accordingly, and, what with her passing the
word round, she won't find it so easy to get another." "Won't she?" said Tuppence thoughtfully. "I wonder----"

An idea was dawning in her brain. She thought a minute or two, then
tapped Albert on the shoulder. "See here, son, my brain's got busy. How would it be if you mentioned
that you'd got a young cousin, or a friend of yours had, that might suit
the place. You get me?" "I'm there," said Albert instantly. "You leave it to me, miss, and I'll
fix the whole thing up in two ticks." "Some lad!" commented Tuppence, with a nod of approval. "You might say
that the young woman could come in right away. You let me know, and if
it's O.K. I'll be round to-morrow at eleven o'clock." "Where am I to let you know to?" "Ritz," replied Tuppence laconically. "Name of Cowley." Albert eyed her enviously. "It must be a good job, this tec business." "It sure is," drawled Tuppence, "especially when old man Rysdale backs
the bill. But don't fret, son. If this goes well, you shall come in on
the ground floor." With which promise she took leave of her new ally, and walked briskly
away from South Audley Mansions, well pleased with her morning's work. But there was no time to be lost. She went straight back to the Ritz and
wrote a few brief words to Mr. Carter. Having dispatched this, and Tommy
not having yet returned--which did not surprise her--she started off
on a shopping expedition which, with an interval for tea and assorted
creamy cakes, occupied her until well after six o'clock, and she
returned to the hotel jaded, but satisfied with her purchases. Starting
with a cheap clothing store, and passing through one or two second-hand
establishments, she had finished the day at a well-known hairdresser's. Now, in the seclusion of her bedroom, she unwrapped that final purchase. Five minutes later she smiled contentedly at her reflection in the
glass. With an actress's pencil she had slightly altered the line of her
eyebrows, and that, taken in conjunction with the new luxuriant growth
of fair hair above, so changed her appearance that she felt confident
that even if she came face to face with Whittington he would not
recognize her. She would wear elevators in her shoes, and the cap and
apron would be an even more valuable disguise. From hospital experience
she knew only too well that a nurse out of uniform is frequently
unrecognized by her patients. "Yes," said Tuppence aloud, nodding at the pert reflection in the glass,
"you'll do." She then resumed her normal appearance. Dinner was a solitary meal. Tuppence was rather surprised at Tommy's
non-return. Julius, too, was absent--but that to the girl's mind was
more easily explained. His "hustling" activities were not confined
to London, and his abrupt appearances and disappearances were fully
accepted by the Young Adventurers as part of the day's work. It
was quite on the cards that Julius P. Hersheimmer had left for
Constantinople at a moment's notice if he fancied that a clue to his
cousin's disappearance was to be found there. The energetic young
man had succeeded in making the lives of several Scotland Yard men
unbearable to them, and the telephone girls at the Admiralty had learned
to know and dread the familiar "Hullo!" He had spent three hours in
Paris hustling the Prefecture, and had returned from there imbued with
the idea, possibly inspired by a weary French official, that the true
clue to the mystery was to be found in Ireland. "I dare say he's dashed off there now," thought Tuppence. "All very
well, but this is very dull for ME! Here I am bursting with news, and
absolutely no one to tell it to! Tommy might have wired, or something. I
wonder where he is. Anyway, he can't have 'lost the trail' as they say. That reminds me----" And Miss Cowley broke off in her meditations, and
summoned a small boy. Ten minutes later the lady was ensconced comfortably on her bed,
smoking cigarettes and deep in the perusal of Garnaby Williams, the Boy
Detective, which, with other threepenny works of lurid fiction, she had
sent out to purchase. She felt, and rightly, that before the strain
of attempting further intercourse with Albert, it would be as well to
fortify herself with a good supply of local colour. The morning brought a note from Mr. Carter:

"DEAR MISS TUPPENCE,

"You have made a splendid start, and I congratulate you. I feel, though,
that I should like to point out to you once more the risks you are
running, especially if you pursue the course you indicate. Those people
are absolutely desperate and incapable of either mercy or pity. I feel
that you probably underestimate the danger, and therefore warn you
again that I can promise you no protection. You have given us valuable
information, and if you choose to withdraw now no one could blame you. At any rate, think the matter over well before you decide. "If, in spite of my warnings, you make up your mind to go through with
it, you will find everything arranged. You have lived for two years with
Miss Dufferin, The Parsonage, Llanelly, and Mrs. Vandemeyer can apply to
her for a reference. "May I be permitted a word or two of advice? Stick as near to the truth
as possible--it minimizes the danger of 'slips.' I suggest that you
should represent yourself to be what you are, a former V.A.D., who has
chosen domestic service as a profession. There are many such at the
present time. That explains away any incongruities of voice or manner
which otherwise might awaken suspicion. "Whichever way you decide, good luck to you. "Your sincere friend,

"MR. CARTER." Tuppence's spirits rose mercurially. Mr. Carter's warnings passed
unheeded. The young lady had far too much confidence in herself to pay
any heed to them. With some reluctance she abandoned the interesting part she had sketched
out for herself. Although she had no doubts of her own powers to sustain
a role indefinitely, she had too much common sense not to recognize the
force of Mr. Carter's arguments. There was still no word or message from Tommy, but the morning post
brought a somewhat dirty postcard with the words: "It's O.K." scrawled
upon it. At ten-thirty Tuppence surveyed with pride a slightly battered tin trunk
containing her new possessions. It was artistically corded. It was with
a slight blush that she rang the bell and ordered it to be placed in a
taxi. She drove to Paddington, and left the box in the cloak room. She then repaired with a handbag to the fastnesses of the ladies'
waiting-room. Ten minutes later a metamorphosed Tuppence walked demurely
out of the station and entered a bus. It was a few minutes past eleven when Tuppence again entered the hall
of South Audley Mansions. Albert was on the look-out, attending to his
duties in a somewhat desultory fashion. He did not immediately recognize
Tuppence. When he did, his admiration was unbounded. "Blest if I'd have known you! That rig-out's top-hole." "Glad you like it, Albert," replied Tuppence modestly. "By the way, am I
your cousin, or am I not?" "Your voice too," cried the delighted boy. "It's as English as anything! No, I said as a friend of mine knew a young gal. Annie wasn't best
pleased. She's stopped on till to-day--to oblige, SHE said, but really
it's so as to put you against the place." "Nice girl," said Tuppence. Albert suspected no irony. "She's style about her, and keeps her silver a treat--but, my word,
ain't she got a temper. Are you going up now, miss? Step inside the
lift. No. 20 did you say?" And he winked. Tuppence quelled him with a stern glance, and stepped inside. As she rang the bell of No. 20 she was conscious of Albert's eyes slowly
descending beneath the level of the floor. A smart young woman opened the door. "I've come about the place," said Tuppence. "It's a rotten place," said the young woman without hesitation. "Regular
old cat--always interfering. Accused me of tampering with her letters. Me! The flap was half undone anyway. There's never anything in the
waste-paper basket--she burns everything. She's a wrong 'un, that's what
she is. Swell clothes, but no class. Cook knows something about her--but
she won't tell--scared to death of her. And suspicious! She's on to you
in a minute if you as much as speak to a fellow. I can tell you----"

But what more Annie could tell, Tuppence was never destined to learn,
for at that moment a clear voice with a peculiarly steely ring to it
called:

"Annie!" The smart young woman jumped as if she had been shot. "Yes, ma'am." "Who are you talking to?" "It's a young woman about the situation, ma'am." "Show her in then. At once." "Yes, ma'am." Tuppence was ushered into a room on the right of the long passage. A
woman was standing by the fireplace. She was no longer in her first
youth, and the beauty she undeniably possessed was hardened and
coarsened. In her youth she must have been dazzling. Her pale gold hair,
owing a slight assistance to art, was coiled low on her neck, her eyes,
of a piercing electric blue, seemed to possess a faculty of boring into
the very soul of the person she was looking at. Her exquisite figure was
enhanced by a wonderful gown of indigo charmeuse. And yet, despite her
swaying grace, and the almost ethereal beauty of her face, you felt
instinctively the presence of something hard and menacing, a kind of
metallic strength that found expression in the tones of her voice and in
that gimlet-like quality of her eyes. For the first time Tuppence felt afraid. She had not feared Whittington,
but this woman was different. As if fascinated, she watched the long
cruel line of the red curving mouth, and again she felt that sensation
of panic pass over her. Her usual self-confidence deserted her. Vaguely
she felt that deceiving this woman would be very different to deceiving
Whittington. Mr. Carter's warning recurred to her mind. Here, indeed,
she might expect no mercy. Fighting down that instinct of panic which urged her to turn tail and
run without further delay, Tuppence returned the lady's gaze firmly and
respectfully. As though that first scrutiny had been satisfactory, Mrs. Vandemeyer
motioned to a chair. "You can sit down. How did you hear I wanted a house-parlourmaid?" "Through a friend who knows the lift boy here. He thought the place
might suit me." Again that basilisk glance seemed to pierce her through. "You speak like an educated girl?" Glibly enough, Tuppence ran through her imaginary career on the lines
suggested by Mr. Carter. It seemed to her, as she did so, that the
tension of Mrs. Vandemeyer's attitude relaxed. "I see," she remarked at length. "Is there anyone I can write to for a
reference?" "I lived last with a Miss Dufferin, The Parsonage, Llanelly. I was with
her two years." "And then you thought you would get more money by coming to London,
I suppose? Well, it doesn't matter to me. I will give you
L50--L60--whatever you want. You can come in at once?" "Yes, ma'am. To-day, if you like. My box is at Paddington." "Go and fetch it in a taxi, then. It's an easy place. I am out a good
deal. By the way, what's your name?" "Prudence Cooper, ma'am." "Very well, Prudence. Go away and fetch your box. I shall be out to
lunch. The cook will show you where everything is." "Thank you, ma'am." Tuppence withdrew. The smart Annie was not in evidence. In the hall
below a magnificent hall porter had relegated Albert to the background. Tuppence did not even glance at him as she passed meekly out. The adventure had begun, but she felt less elated than she had done
earlier in the morning. It crossed her mind that if the unknown Jane
Finn had fallen into the hands of Mrs. Vandemeyer, it was likely to have
gone hard with her. CHAPTER X. ENTER SIR JAMES PEEL EDGERTON

TUPPENCE betrayed no awkwardness in her new duties. The daughters of the
archdeacon were well grounded in household tasks. They were also experts
in training a "raw girl," the inevitable result being that the raw girl,
once trained, departed elsewhere where her newly acquired knowledge
commanded a more substantial remuneration than the archdeacon's meagre
purse allowed. Tuppence had therefore very little fear of proving inefficient. Mrs.
Vandemeyer's cook puzzled her. She evidently went in deadly terror of
her mistress. The girl thought it probable that the other woman had some
hold over her. For the rest, she cooked like a chef, as Tuppence had
an opportunity of judging that evening. Mrs. Vandemeyer was expecting a
guest to dinner, and Tuppence accordingly laid the beautifully polished
table for two. She was a little exercised in her own mind as to this
visitor. It was highly possible that it might prove to be Whittington. Although she felt fairly confident that he would not recognize her, yet
she would have been better pleased had the guest proved to be a total
stranger. However, there was nothing for it but to hope for the best. At a few minutes past eight the front door bell rang, and Tuppence went
to answer it with some inward trepidation. She was relieved to see that
the visitor was the second of the two men whom Tommy had taken upon
himself to follow. He gave his name as Count Stepanov. Tuppence announced him, and Mrs.
Vandemeyer rose from her seat on a low divan with a quick murmur of
pleasure. "It is delightful to see you, Boris Ivanovitch," she said. "And you, madame!" He bowed low over her hand. Tuppence returned to the kitchen. "Count Stepanov, or some such," she remarked, and affecting a frank and
unvarnished curiosity: "Who's he?" "A Russian gentleman, I believe." "Come here much?" "Once in a while. What d'you want to know for?" "Fancied he might be sweet on the missus, that's all," explained the
girl, adding with an appearance of sulkiness: "How you do take one up!" "I'm not quite easy in my mind about the souffle," explained the other. "You know something," thought Tuppence to herself, but aloud she only
said: "Going to dish up now? Right-o." Whilst waiting at table, Tuppence listened closely to all that was said. She remembered that this was one of the men Tommy was shadowing when she
had last seen him. Already, although she would hardly admit it, she was
becoming uneasy about her partner. Where was he? Why had no word of any
kind come from him? She had arranged before leaving the Ritz to have
all letters or messages sent on at once by special messenger to a small
stationer's shop near at hand where Albert was to call in frequently. True, it was only yesterday morning that she had parted from Tommy, and
she told herself that any anxiety on his behalf would be absurd. Still,
it was strange that he had sent no word of any kind. But, listen as she might, the conversation presented no clue. Boris and
Mrs. Vandemeyer talked on purely indifferent subjects: plays they had
seen, new dances, and the latest society gossip. After dinner they
repaired to the small boudoir where Mrs. Vandemeyer, stretched on the
divan, looked more wickedly beautiful than ever. Tuppence brought in the
coffee and liqueurs and unwillingly retired. As she did so, she heard
Boris say:

"New, isn't she?" "She came in to-day. The other was a fiend. This girl seems all right. She waits well." Tuppence lingered a moment longer by the door which she had carefully
neglected to close, and heard him say:

"Quite safe, I suppose?" "Really, Boris, you are absurdly suspicious. I believe she's the cousin
of the hall porter, or something of the kind. And nobody even dreams
that I have any connection with our--mutual friend, Mr. Brown." "For heaven's sake, be careful, Rita. That door isn't shut." "Well, shut it then," laughed the woman. Tuppence removed herself speedily. She dared not absent herself longer from the back premises, but she
cleared away and washed up with a breathless speed acquired in hospital. Then she slipped quietly back to the boudoir door. The cook, more
leisurely, was still busy in the kitchen and, if she missed the other,
would only suppose her to be turning down the beds. Alas! The conversation inside was being carried on in too low a tone
to permit of her hearing anything of it. She dared not reopen the
door, however gently. Mrs. Vandemeyer was sitting almost facing it, and
Tuppence respected her mistress's lynx-eyed powers of observation. Nevertheless, she felt she would give a good deal to overhear what was
going on. Possibly, if anything unforeseen had happened, she might get
news of Tommy. For some moments she reflected desperately, then her
face brightened. She went quickly along the passage to Mrs. Vandemeyer's
bedroom, which had long French windows leading on to a balcony that ran
the length of the flat. Slipping quickly through the window, Tuppence
crept noiselessly along till she reached the boudoir window. As she
had thought it stood a little ajar, and the voices within were plainly
audible. Tuppence listened attentively, but there was no mention of anything
that could be twisted to apply to Tommy. Mrs. Vandemeyer and the Russian
seemed to be at variance over some matter, and finally the latter
exclaimed bitterly:

"With your persistent recklessness, you will end by ruining us!" "Bah!" laughed the woman. "Notoriety of the right kind is the best way
of disarming suspicion. You will realize that one of these days--perhaps
sooner than you think!" "In the meantime, you are going about everywhere with Peel Edgerton. Not only is he, perhaps, the most celebrated K.C. in England, but his
special hobby is criminology! It is madness!" "I know that his eloquence has saved untold men from the gallows," said
Mrs. Vandemeyer calmly. "What of it? I may need his assistance in that
line myself some day. If so, how fortunate to have such a friend at
court--or perhaps it would be more to the point to say IN court." Boris got up and began striding up and down. He was very excited. "You are a clever woman, Rita; but you are also a fool! Be guided by me,
and give up Peel Edgerton." Mrs. Vandemeyer shook her head gently. "I think not." "You refuse?" There was an ugly ring in the Russian's voice. "I do." "Then, by Heaven," snarled the Russian, "we will see----" But Mrs.
Vandemeyer also rose to her feet, her eyes flashing. "You forget, Boris," she said. "I am accountable to no one. I take my
orders only from--Mr. Brown." The other threw up his hands in despair. "You are impossible," he muttered. "Impossible! Already it may be too
late. They say Peel Edgerton can SMELL a criminal! How do we know what
is at the bottom of his sudden interest in you? Perhaps even now his
suspicions are aroused. He guesses----"

Mrs. Vandemeyer eyed him scornfully. "Reassure yourself, my dear Boris. He suspects nothing. With less than
your usual chivalry, you seem to forget that I am commonly accounted a
beautiful woman. I assure you that is all that interests Peel Edgerton." Boris shook his head doubtfully. "He has studied crime as no other man in this kingdom has studied it. Do
you fancy that you can deceive him?" Mrs. Vandemeyer's eyes narrowed. "If he is all that you say--it would amuse me to try!" "Good heavens, Rita----"

"Besides," added Mrs. Vandemeyer, "he is extremely rich. I am not one
who despises money. The 'sinews of war,' you know, Boris!" "Money--money! That is always the danger with you, Rita. I believe you
would sell your soul for money. I believe----" He paused, then in a
low, sinister voice he said slowly: "Sometimes I believe that you would
sell--us!" Mrs. Vandemeyer smiled and shrugged her shoulders. "The price, at any rate, would have to be enormous," she said lightly. "It would be beyond the power of anyone but a millionaire to pay." "Ah!" snarled the Russian. "You see, I was right!" "My dear Boris, can you not take a joke?" "Was it a joke?" "Of course." "Then all I can say is that your ideas of humour are peculiar, my dear
Rita." Mrs. Vandemeyer smiled. "Let us not quarrel, Boris.