"That may perhaps be arranged." "It must be." "We will see about it. Only one person can decide that." "Who?" asked Tommy. But he knew the answer. "Mr. Brown----"

"Shall I see him?" "Perhaps." "Come," said Conrad harshly. Tommy rose obediently. Outside the door his gaoler motioned to him to
mount the stairs. He himself followed close behind. On the floor above
Conrad opened a door and Tommy passed into a small room. Conrad lit a
hissing gas burner and went out. Tommy heard the sound of the key being
turned in the lock. He set to work to examine his prison. It was a smaller room than the
one downstairs, and there was something peculiarly airless about the
atmosphere of it. Then he realized that there was no window. He walked
round it. The walls were filthily dirty, as everywhere else. Four
pictures hung crookedly on the wall representing scenes from Faust. Marguerite with her box of jewels, the church scene, Siebel and his
flowers, and Faust and Mephistopheles. The latter brought Tommy's mind
back to Mr. Brown again. In this sealed and closed chamber, with its
close-fitting heavy door, he felt cut off from the world, and the
sinister power of the arch-criminal seemed more real. Shout as he would,
no one could ever hear him. The place was a living tomb....

With an effort Tommy pulled himself together. He sank on to the bed
and gave himself up to reflection. His head ached badly; also, he was
hungry. The silence of the place was dispiriting. "Anyway," said Tommy, trying to cheer himself, "I shall see the
chief--the mysterious Mr. Brown and with a bit of luck in bluffing I
shall see the mysterious Jane Finn also. After that----"

After that Tommy was forced to admit the prospect looked dreary. CHAPTER XVII. ANNETTE

THE troubles of the future, however, soon faded before the troubles of
the present. And of these, the most immediate and pressing was that of
hunger. Tommy had a healthy and vigorous appetite. The steak and
chips partaken of for lunch seemed now to belong to another decade. He
regretfully recognized the fact that he would not make a success of a
hunger strike. He prowled aimlessly about his prison. Once or twice he discarded
dignity, and pounded on the door. But nobody answered the summons. "Hang it all!" said Tommy indignantly. "They can't mean to starve me
to death." A new-born fear passed through his mind that this might,
perhaps, be one of those "pretty ways" of making a prisoner speak, which
had been attributed to Boris. But on reflection he dismissed the idea. "It's that sour faced brute Conrad," he decided. "That's a fellow I
shall enjoy getting even with one of these days. This is just a bit of
spite on his part. I'm certain of it." Further meditations induced in him the feeling that it would be
extremely pleasant to bring something down with a whack on Conrad's
egg-shaped head. Tommy stroked his own head tenderly, and gave himself
up to the pleasures of imagination. Finally a bright idea flashed
across his brain. Why not convert imagination into reality? Conrad
was undoubtedly the tenant of the house. The others, with the possible
exception of the bearded German, merely used it as a rendezvous. Therefore, why not wait in ambush for Conrad behind the door, and when
he entered bring down a chair, or one of the decrepit pictures, smartly
on to his head. One would, of course, be careful not to hit too hard. And then--and then, simply walk out! If he met anyone on the way down,
well----Tommy brightened at the thought of an encounter with his fists. Such an affair was infinitely more in his line than the verbal encounter
of this afternoon. Intoxicated by his plan, Tommy gently unhooked the
picture of the Devil and Faust, and settled himself in position. His
hopes were high. The plan seemed to him simple but excellent. Time went on, but Conrad did not appear. Night and day were the same
in this prison room, but Tommy's wrist-watch, which enjoyed a certain
degree of accuracy, informed him that it was nine o'clock in the
evening. Tommy reflected gloomily that if supper did not arrive soon
it would be a question of waiting for breakfast. At ten o'clock hope
deserted him, and he flung himself on the bed to seek consolation in
sleep. In five minutes his woes were forgotten. The sound of the key turning in the lock awoke him from his slumbers. Not belonging to the type of hero who is famous for awaking in full
possession of his faculties, Tommy merely blinked at the ceiling and
wondered vaguely where he was. Then he remembered, and looked at his
watch. It was eight o'clock. "It's either early morning tea or breakfast," deduced the young man,
"and pray God it's the latter!" The door swung open. Too late, Tommy remembered his scheme of
obliterating the unprepossessing Conrad. A moment later he was glad that
he had, for it was not Conrad who entered, but a girl. She carried a
tray which she set down on the table. In the feeble light of the gas burner Tommy blinked at her. He decided
at once that she was one of the most beautiful girls he had ever seen. Her hair was a full rich brown, with sudden glints of gold in it as
though there were imprisoned sunbeams struggling in its depths. There
was a wild-rose quality about her face. Her eyes, set wide apart, were
hazel, a golden hazel that again recalled a memory of sunbeams. A delirious thought shot through Tommy's mind. "Are you Jane Finn?" he asked breathlessly. The girl shook her head wonderingly. "My name is Annette, monsieur." She spoke in a soft, broken English. "Oh!" said Tommy, rather taken aback. "Francaise?" he hazarded. "Oui, monsieur. Monsieur parle francais?" "Not for any length of time," said Tommy. "What's that? Breakfast?" The girl nodded. Tommy dropped off the bed and came and inspected the
contents of the tray. It consisted of a loaf, some margarine, and a jug
of coffee. "The living is not equal to the Ritz," he observed with a sigh. "But
for what we are at last about to receive the Lord has made me truly
thankful. Amen." He drew up a chair, and the girl turned away to the door. "Wait a sec," cried Tommy. "There are lots of things I want to ask you,
Annette. What are you doing in this house? Don't tell me you're Conrad's
niece, or daughter, or anything, because I can't believe it." "I do the SERVICE, monsieur. I am not related to anybody." "I see," said Tommy. "You know what I asked you just now. Have you ever
heard that name?" "I have heard people speak of Jane Finn, I think." "You don't know where she is?" Annette shook her head. "She's not in this house, for instance?" "Oh no, monsieur. I must go now--they will be waiting for me." She hurried out. The key turned in the lock. "I wonder who 'they' are," mused Tommy, as he continued to make inroads
on the loaf. "With a bit of luck, that girl might help me to get out of
here. She doesn't look like one of the gang." At one o'clock Annette reappeared with another tray, but this time
Conrad accompanied her. "Good morning," said Tommy amiably. "You have NOT used Pear's soap, I
see." Conrad growled threateningly. "No light repartee, have you, old bean? There, there, we can't always
have brains as well as beauty. What have we for lunch? Stew? How did I
know? Elementary, my dear Watson--the smell of onions is unmistakable." "Talk away," grunted the man. "It's little enough time you'll have to
talk in, maybe." The remark was unpleasant in its suggestion, but Tommy ignored it. He
sat down at the table. "Retire, varlet," he said, with a wave of his hand. "Prate not to thy
betters." That evening Tommy sat on the bed, and cogitated deeply. Would Conrad
again accompany the girl? If he did not, should he risk trying to make
an ally of her? He decided that he must leave no stone unturned. His
position was desperate. At eight o'clock the familiar sound of the key turning made him spring
to his feet. The girl was alone. "Shut the door," he commanded. "I want to speak to you." She obeyed. "Look here, Annette, I want you to help me get out of this." She shook
her head. "Impossible. There are three of them on the floor below." "Oh!" Tommy was secretly grateful for the information. "But you would
help me if you could?" "No, monsieur." "Why not?" The girl hesitated. "I think--they are my own people. You have spied upon them. They are
quite right to keep you here." "They're a bad lot, Annette. If you'll help me, I'll take you away from
the lot of them. And you'd probably get a good whack of money." But the girl merely shook her head. "I dare not, monsieur; I am afraid of them." She turned away. "Wouldn't you do anything to help another girl?" cried Tommy. "She's
about your age too. Won't you save her from their clutches?" "You mean Jane Finn?" "Yes." "It is her you came here to look for? Yes?" "That's it." The girl looked at him, then passed her hand across her forehead. "Jane Finn. Always I hear that name. It is familiar." Tommy came forward eagerly. "You must know SOMETHING about her?" But the girl turned away abruptly. "I know nothing--only the name." She walked towards the door. Suddenly
she uttered a cry. Tommy stared. She had caught sight of the picture
he had laid against the wall the night before. For a moment he caught a
look of terror in her eyes. As inexplicably it changed to relief. Then
abruptly she went out of the room. Tommy could make nothing of it. Did
she fancy that he had meant to attack her with it? Surely not. He rehung
the picture on the wall thoughtfully. Three more days went by in dreary inaction. Tommy felt the strain
telling on his nerves. He saw no one but Conrad and Annette, and the
girl had become dumb. She spoke only in monosyllables. A kind of dark
suspicion smouldered in her eyes. Tommy felt that if this solitary
confinement went on much longer he would go mad. He gathered from Conrad
that they were waiting for orders from "Mr. Brown." Perhaps, thought
Tommy, he was abroad or away, and they were obliged to wait for his
return. But the evening of the third day brought a rude awakening. It was barely seven o'clock when he heard the tramp of footsteps outside
in the passage. In another minute the door was flung open. Conrad
entered. With him was the evil-looking Number 14. Tommy's heart sank at
the sight of them. "Evenin', gov'nor," said the man with a leer. "Got those ropes, mate?" The silent Conrad produced a length of fine cord. The next minute Number
14's hands, horribly dexterous, were winding the cord round his limbs,
while Conrad held him down. "What the devil----?" began Tommy. But the slow, speechless grin of the silent Conrad froze the words on
his lips. Number 14 proceeded deftly with his task. In another minute Tommy was a
mere helpless bundle. Then at last Conrad spoke:

"Thought you'd bluffed us, did you? With what you knew, and what you
didn't know. Bargained with us! And all the time it was bluff! Bluff! You know less than a kitten. But your number's up now all right, you
b----swine." Tommy lay silent. There was nothing to say. He had failed. Somehow
or other the omnipotent Mr. Brown had seen through his pretensions. Suddenly a thought occurred to him. "A very good speech, Conrad," he said approvingly. "But wherefore the
bonds and fetters? Why not let this kind gentleman here cut my throat
without delay?" "Garn," said Number 14 unexpectedly. "Think we're as green as to do you
in here, and have the police nosing round? Not 'alf! We've ordered the
carriage for your lordship to-morrow mornin', but in the meantime we're
not taking any chances, see!" "Nothing," said Tommy, "could be plainer than your words--unless it was
your face." "Stow it," said Number 14. "With pleasure," replied Tommy. "You're making a sad mistake--but yours
will be the loss." "You don't kid us that way again," said Number 14. "Talking as though
you were still at the blooming Ritz, aren't you?" Tommy made no reply. He was engaged in wondering how Mr. Brown had
discovered his identity. He decided that Tuppence, in the throes of
anxiety, had gone to the police, and that his disappearance having been
made public the gang had not been slow to put two and two together. The two men departed and the door slammed. Tommy was left to his
meditations. They were not pleasant ones. Already his limbs felt cramped
and stiff. He was utterly helpless, and he could see no hope anywhere. About an hour had passed when he heard the key softly turned, and the
door opened. It was Annette. Tommy's heart beat a little faster. He had
forgotten the girl. Was it possible that she had come to his help? Suddenly he heard Conrad's voice:

"Come out of it, Annette. He doesn't want any supper to-night." "Oui, oui, je sais bien. But I must take the other tray. We need the
things on it." "Well, hurry up," growled Conrad. Without looking at Tommy the girl went over to the table, and picked up
the tray. She raised a hand and turned out the light. "Curse you"--Conrad had come to the door--"why did you do that?" "I always turn it out. You should have told me. Shall I relight it,
Monsieur Conrad?" "No, come on out of it." "Le beau petit monsieur," cried Annette, pausing by the bed in the
darkness. "You have tied him up well, hein? He is like a trussed
chicken!" The frank amusement in her tone jarred on the boy; but at
that moment, to his amazement, he felt her hand running lightly over
his bonds, and something small and cold was pressed into the palm of his
hand. "Come on, Annette." "Mais me voila." The door shut. Tommy heard Conrad say:

"Lock it and give me the key." The footsteps died away. Tommy lay petrified with amazement. The object
Annette had thrust into his hand was a small penknife, the blade open. From the way she had studiously avoided looking at him, and her action
with the light, he came to the conclusion that the room was overlooked. There must be a peep-hole somewhere in the walls. Remembering how
guarded she had always been in her manner, he saw that he had probably
been under observation all the time. Had he said anything to give
himself away? Hardly. He had revealed a wish to escape and a desire
to find Jane Finn, but nothing that could have given a clue to his
own identity. True, his question to Annette had proved that he was
personally unacquainted with Jane Finn, but he had never pretended
otherwise. The question now was, did Annette really know more? Were her
denials intended primarily for the listeners? On that point he could
come to no conclusion. But there was a more vital question that drove out all others. Could he,
bound as he was, manage to cut his bonds? He essayed cautiously to
rub the open blade up and down on the cord that bound his two wrists
together. It was an awkward business, and drew a smothered "Ow" of pain
from him as the knife cut into his wrist. But slowly and doggedly he
went on sawing to and fro. He cut the flesh badly, but at last he felt
the cord slacken. With his hands free, the rest was easy. Five minutes
later he stood upright with some difficulty, owing to the cramp in his
limbs. His first care was to bind up his bleeding wrist. Then he sat on
the edge of the bed to think. Conrad had taken the key of the door, so
he could expect little more assistance from Annette. The only outlet
from the room was the door, consequently he would perforce have to wait
until the two men returned to fetch him. But when they did... Tommy
smiled! Moving with infinite caution in the dark room, he found and
unhooked the famous picture. He felt an economical pleasure that his
first plan would not be wasted. There was now nothing to do but to wait. He waited. The night passed slowly. Tommy lived through an eternity of hours, but
at last he heard footsteps. He stood upright, drew a deep breath, and
clutched the picture firmly. The door opened. A faint light streamed in from outside. Conrad went
straight towards the gas to light it. Tommy deeply regretted that it was
he who had entered first. It would have been pleasant to get even with
Conrad. Number 14 followed. As he stepped across the threshold, Tommy
brought the picture down with terrific force on his head. Number 14 went
down amidst a stupendous crash of broken glass. In a minute Tommy had
slipped out and pulled to the door. The key was in the lock. He turned
it and withdrew it just as Conrad hurled himself against the door from
the inside with a volley of curses. For a moment Tommy hesitated. There was the sound of some one stirring
on the floor below. Then the German's voice came up the stairs. "Gott im Himmel! Conrad, what is it?" Tommy felt a small hand thrust into his. Beside him stood Annette. She
pointed up a rickety ladder that apparently led to some attics. "Quick--up here!" She dragged him after her up the ladder. In another
moment they were standing in a dusty garret littered with lumber. Tommy
looked round. "This won't do. It's a regular trap. There's no way out." "Hush! Wait." The girl put her finger to her lips. She crept to the top
of the ladder and listened. The banging and beating on the door was terrific. The German and another
were trying to force the door in. Annette explained in a whisper:

"They will think you are still inside. They cannot hear what Conrad
says. The door is too thick." "I thought you could hear what went on in the room?" "There is a peep-hole into the next room. It was clever of you to guess. But they will not think of that--they are only anxious to get in." "Yes--but look here----"

"Leave it to me." She bent down. To his amazement, Tommy saw that she
was fastening the end of a long piece of string to the handle of a big
cracked jug. She arranged it carefully, then turned to Tommy. "Have you the key of the door?" "Yes." "Give it to me." He handed it to her. "I am going down. Do you think you can go halfway, and then swing
yourself down BEHIND the ladder, so that they will not see you?" Tommy nodded. "There's a big cupboard in the shadow of the landing. Stand behind
it. Take the end of this string in your hand. When I've let the others
out--PULL!" Before he had time to ask her anything more, she had flitted lightly
down the ladder and was in the midst of the group with a loud cry:

"Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu! Qu'est-ce qu'il y a?" The German turned on her with an oath. "Get out of this. Go to your room!" Very cautiously Tommy swung himself down the back of the ladder. So
long as they did not turn round... all was well. He crouched behind the
cupboard. They were still between him and the stairs. "AH!" Annette appeared to stumble over something. She stooped. "Mon
Dieu, voila la clef!" The German snatched it from her. He unlocked the door. Conrad stumbled
out, swearing. "Where is he? Have you got him?" "We have seen no one," said the German sharply. His face paled. "Who do
you mean?" Conrad gave vent to another oath. "He's got away." "Impossible. He would have passed us." At that moment, with an ecstatic smile Tommy pulled the string. A crash
of crockery came from the attic above. In a trice the men were pushing
each other up the rickety ladder and had disappeared into the darkness
above. Quick as a flash Tommy leapt from his hiding-place and dashed down the
stairs, pulling the girl with him. There was no one in the hall. He
fumbled over the bolts and chain. At last they yielded, the door swung
open. He turned.