'They will meet strong competition from the pipers,' said Logan, while
the Earl rose, and walked rapidly after the musicians. 'I do not like the pipes myself,' Logan went on, 'but when I hear them in
a London street my heart does warm to the skirl and the shabby tartans.' 'I feel with you,' said the Prince, 'when I see the smiling faces of
these poor sons of the South among--well, your English faces are not
usually joyous--if one may venture to be critical.' He looked up, and, his eyes meeting those of Lady Alice, he had occasion
to learn that every rule has its exceptions. The young people rose and
wandered off on the lawn, while the Earl came back and said that he had
invited the foreigners to refresh themselves. 'I saw Father Riccoboni in the hall, and asked him to speak to them a
little in their own lingo,' he added, 'though he does not appear to be
partial to the music of his native land.' 'He seems to be of the Romansch districts,' Logan said; 'his accent is
almost German.' 'I daresay he will make himself understood,' said the Earl. 'Do you
understand this house, Mr. Logan? It looks very modern, does it not?' 'Early Georgian, surely?' said Logan. 'The shell, at least on this side, is early Georgian--I rather regret it;
but the interior, northward, except for the rooms in front here, is of
the good old times. We have secret stairs--not that there is any secret
about them--and odd cubicles, in the old Border keep, which was re-faced
about 1750; and we have a priest's hole or two, in which Father Riccoboni
might have been safe, but would have been very uncomfortable, three
hundred years ago. I can show you the places to-morrow; indeed, we have
very little in the way of amusement to offer you. Do you fish?' 'I always take a trout rod about with me, in case of the best,' said
Logan, 'but this is "soolky July," you know, and the trout usually seem
sound asleep.' 'Their habits are dissipated here,' said Lord Embleton. 'They begin to
feed about ten o'clock at night. Did you ever try night fishing with the
bustard?' 'The bustard?' asked Logan. 'It is a big fluffy fly, like a draggled mayfly, fished wet, in the dark. I used to be fond of it, but age,' sighed the Earl, 'and fear of
rheumatism have separated the bustard and me.' 'I should like to try it very much,' said Logan. 'I often fished Tweed
and Whitadder, at night, when I was a boy, but we used a small dark fly.' 'You must be very careful if you fish at night here,' said Lady Mary. 'It
is so dark in the valley under the woods, and the Coquet is so dangerous. The flat sandstone ledges are like the floor of a room, and then a step
may land you in water ten feet deep, flowing in a narrow channel. I am
always anxious when anyone fishes here at night. You can swim?' Logan confessed that he was not destitute of that accomplishment, and
that he liked, of all things, to be by a darkling river, where you came
across the night side of nature in the way of birds, beasts, and fishes. 'Mr. Logan can take very good care of himself, I am sure,' said Lord
Embleton, 'and Fenwick knows every inch of the water, and will go with
him. Fenwick is the water-keeper, Mr. Logan, and represents man in the
fishing and shooting stage. His one thought is the destruction of animal
life. He is a very happy man.' 'I never knew but one keeper who was not,' said Logan. 'That was in
Galloway. He hated shooting, he hated fishing. My impression is that he
was what we call a "Stickit Minister."' 'Nothing of that about Fenwick,' said the Earl. 'I daresay you would
like to see your room?' Thither Logan was conducted, through a hall hung with pikes, and guns,
and bows, and clubs from the South Seas, and Zulu shields and assegais,
while a few empty figures in tilting armour, lance in hand, stood on
pedestals. Thence up a broad staircase, along a little gallery, up a few
steps of an old 'turnpike' staircase, Logan reached his room, which
looked down through the trees of the cliff to the Coquet. Dinner passed in the silver light of the long northern day, that threw
strange blue reflections, softer than sapphire, on the ancient plate--the
ambassadorial plate of a Jacobean ancestor. 'It should all have gone to the melting-pot for King Charles's service,'
said the Earl, with a sigh, 'but my ancestor of that day stood for the
Parliament.' Logan's position at dinner was better for observation than for
entertainment. He sat on the right hand of Lady Mary, where the Prince
ought to have been seated, but Lady Alice sat on her father's left, and
next her, of course, the Prince. 'Love rules the camp, the court, the
grove,' and Love deranged the accustomed order, for the Prince sat
between Lady Alice and Logan. Opposite Logan, and at Lady Mary's left,
was the Jesuit, and next him, Scremerston, beside whom was Miss
Willoughby, on the Earl's right. Inevitably the conversation of the
Prince and Lady Alice was mainly directed to each other--so much so that
Logan did not once perceive the princely eyes attracted to Miss
Willoughby opposite to him, though it was not easy for another to look at
anyone else. Logan, in the pauses of his rather conventional
entertainment by Lady Mary, _did_ look, and he was amazed no less by the
beauty than by the spirits and gaiety of the young lady so recently left
forlorn by the recreant Jephson. This flower of the Record Office and of
the British Museum was obviously not destined to blush unseen any longer. She manifestly dazzled Scremerston, who seemed to remember Miss Bangs,
her charms, and her dollars no more than Miss Willoughby appeared to
remember the treacherous Don. Scremerston was very unlike his father: he was a small, rather fair man,
with a slight moustache, a close-clipped beard, and little grey eyes with
pink lids. His health was not good: he had been invalided home from the
Imperial Yeomanry, after a slight wound and a dangerous attack of enteric
fever, and he had secured a pair for the rest of the Session. He was not
very clever, but he certainly laughed sufficiently at what Miss
Willoughby said, who also managed to entertain the Earl with great
dexterity and _aplomb_. Meanwhile Logan and the Jesuit amused the
excellent Lady Mary as best they might, which was not saying much. Lady
Mary, though extremely amiable, was far from brilliant, and never having
met a Jesuit before, she regarded Father Riccoboni with a certain
hereditary horror, as an animal of a rare species, and, of habits perhaps
startling and certainly perfidious. However, the lady was philanthropic
in a rural way, and Father Riccoboni enlightened her as to the reasons
why his enterprising countrymen leave their smiling land, and open small
ice-shops in little English towns, or, less ambitious, invest their
slender capital in a monkey and a barrel-organ. 'I don't so very much mind barrel-organs myself,' said Logan; 'I don't
know anything prettier than to see the little girls dancing to the music
in a London side street.' 'But do not the musicians all belong to that dreadful Camorra?' asked the
lady. 'Not if they come from the North, madam,' said the Jesuit. 'And do not
all your Irish reapers belong to that dreadful Land League, or whatever
it is called?' 'They are all Pap---' said Lady Mary, who then stopped, blushed, and
said, with some presence of mind, 'paupers, I fear, but they are quite
safe and well-behaved on this side of the Irish Channel.' 'And so are our poor people,' said the Jesuit. 'If they occasionally use
the knife a little--_naturam expellas furca_, Mr. Logan, but the knife is
a different thing--it is only in a homely war among themselves that they
handle it in the East-end of London.' '_Coelum non animum_,' said Logan, determined not to be outdone in
classical felicities; and, indeed, he thought his own quotation the more
appropriate. At this moment a great silvery-grey Persian cat, which had sat hitherto
in a stereotyped Egyptian attitude on the arm of the Earl's chair, leaped
down and sprang affectionately on the shoulder of the Jesuit. He
shuddered strongly and obviously repressed an exclamation with
difficulty, as he gently removed the cat. 'Fie, Meriamoun!' said the Earl, as the puss resumed her Egyptian pose
beside him. 'Shall I send the animal out of the room? I know some
people cannot endure a cat,' and he mentioned the gallant Field Marshal
who is commonly supposed to share this infirmity. 'By no means, my lord,' said the Jesuit, who looked strangely pale. 'Cats
have an extraordinary instinct for caressing people who happen to be born
with exactly the opposite instinct. I am like the man in Aristotle who
was afraid of the cat.' 'I wish we knew more about that man,' said Miss Willoughby, who was
stroking Meriamoun. 'Are _you_ afraid of cats, Lord Scremerston?--but
you, I suppose, are afraid of nothing.' 'I am terribly afraid of all manner of flying things that buzz and bite,'
said Scremerston. 'Except bullets,' said Miss Willoughby--Beauty rewarding Valour with a
smile and a glance so dazzling that the good little Yeoman blushed with
pleasure. 'It is a shame!' thought Logan. 'I don't like it now I see it.' 'As to horror of cats,' said the Earl, 'I suppose evolution can explain
it. I wonder how they would work it out in _Science Jottings_. There is
a great deal of electricity in a cat.' 'Evolution can explain everything,' said the Jesuit demurely, 'but who
can explain evolution?' 'As to electricity in the cat,' said Logan, 'I daresay there is as much
in the dog, only everybody has tried stroking a cat in the dark to see
the sparks fly, and who ever tried stroking a dog in the dark, for
experimental purposes?--did you, Lady Mary?' Lady Mary never had tried, but the idea was new to her, and she would
make the experiment in winter. 'Deer skins, stroked, do sparkle,' said Logan, 'I read that in a book. I
daresay horses do, only nobody tries. I don't think electricity is the
explanation of why some people can't bear cats.' 'Electricity is the modern explanation of everything--love, faith,
everything,' remarked the Jesuit; 'but, as I said, who shall explain
electricity?' Lady Mary, recognising the orthodoxy of these sentiments, felt more
friendly towards Father Riccoboni. He might be a Jesuit, but he was
_bien pensant_. 'What I am afraid of is not a cat, but a mouse,' said Miss Willoughby,
and the two other ladies admitted that their own terrors were of the same
kind. 'What I am afraid of,' said the Prince, 'is a banging door, by day or
night. I am not, otherwise, of a nervous constitution, but if I hear a
door bang, I _must_ go and hunt for it, and stop the noise, either by
shutting the door, or leaving it wide open. I am a sound sleeper, but,
if a door bangs, it wakens me at once. I try not to notice it. I hope
it will leave off. Then it does leave off--that is the artfulness of
it--and, just as you are falling asleep, _knock_ it goes! A double
knock, sometimes. Then I simply _must_ get up, and hunt for that door,
upstairs or downstairs--'

'Or in my--' interrupted Miss Willoughby, and stopped, thinking better of
it, and not finishing the quotation, which passed unheard. 'That research has taken me into some odd places,' the Prince ended; and
Logan reminded the Society of the Bravest of the Brave. What _he_ was
afraid of was a pair of tight boots. These innocent conversations ended, and, after dinner, the company walked
about or sat beneath the stars in the fragrant evening air, the Earl
seated by Miss Willoughby, Scremerston smoking with Logan; while the
white dress of Lady Alice flitted ghost-like on the lawn, and the tip of
the Prince's cigar burned red in the neighbourhood. In the drawing-room
Lady Mary was tentatively conversing with the Jesuit, that mild but
probably dangerous animal. She had the curiosity which pious maiden
ladies feel about the member of a community which they only know through
novels. Certainly this Jesuit was very unlike Aramis. 'And who _is_ he like?' Logan happened to be asking Scremerston at that
moment. 'I know the face--I know the voice; hang it!--where have I seen
the man?' 'Now you mention it,' said Scremerston, '_I_ seem to remember him too. But I can't place him. What do you think of a game of billiards,
father?' he asked, rising and addressing Lord Embleton. 'Rosamond--Miss
Willoughby, I mean--'

'Oh, we are cousins, Lord Embleton says, and you may call me Rosamond. I
have never had any cousins before,' interrupted the young lady. 'Rosamond,' said Scremerston, with a gulp, 'is getting on wonderfully
well for a beginner.' 'Then let us proceed with her education: it is growing chilly, too,' said
the Earl; and they all went to billiards, the Jesuit marking with much
attention and precision. Later he took a cue, and was easily the master
of every man there, though better acquainted, he said, with the foreign
game. The late Pope used to play, he said, nearly as well as Mr. Herbert
Spencer. Even for a beginner, Miss Willoughby was not a brilliant
player; but she did not cut the cloth, and her arms were remarkably
beautiful--an excellent but an extremely rare thing in woman. She was
rewarded, finally, by a choice between bedroom candles lit and offered by
her younger and her elder cousins, and, after a momentary hesitation,
accepted that of the Earl. 'How is this going to end?' thought Logan, when he was alone. 'Miss
Bangs is out of the running, that is certain: millions of dollars cannot
bring her near Miss Willoughby with Scremerston. The old gentleman ought
to like that--it relieves him from the bacon and lard, and the dollars,
and the associations with a Straddle; and then Miss Willoughby's family
is all right, but the girl is reckless. A demon has entered into her:
she used to be so quiet. I'd rather marry Miss Bangs without the
dollars. Then it is all very well for Scremerston to yield to Venus
Verticordia, and transfer his heart to this new enchantress. But, if I
am not mistaken, the Earl himself is much more kind than kin. The heart
has no age, and he is a very well-preserved peer. You might take him for
little more than forty, though he quite looked his years when I saw him
first. Well, _I_ am safe enough, in spite of Merton's warning: this new
Helen has no eyes for me, and the Prince has no eyes for her, I think. But who is the Jesuit?' Logan fought with his memory till he fell asleep, but he recovered no
gleam of recollection about the holy man. It did not seem to Logan, next day, that he was in for a very lively
holiday. His host carried off Miss Willoughby to the muniment-room after
breakfast; that was an advantage he had over Scremerston, who was
decidedly restless and ill at ease. He took Logan to see the keeper, and
they talked about fish and examined local flies, and Logan arranged to go
and try the trout with the bustard some night; and then they pottered
about, and ate cherries in the garden, and finally the Earl found them
half asleep in the smoking-room. He routed the Jesuit out of the
library, where he was absorbed in a folio containing the works of the
sainted Father Parsons, and then the Earl showed Logan and Father
Riccoboni over the house. From a window of the gallery Scremerston could
be descried playing croquet with Miss Willoughby, an apparition radiant
in white. The house was chiefly remarkable for queer passages, which, beginning
from the roof of the old tower, above the Father's chamber, radiated
about, emerging in unexpected places. The priests' holes had offered to
the persecuted clergy of old times the choice between being grilled erect
behind a chimney, or of lying flat in a chamber about the size of a
coffin near the roof, where the martyr Jesuits lived on suction, like the
snipe, absorbing soup from a long straw passed through a wall into a
neighbouring garret. 'Those were cruel times,' said Father Riccoboni, who presently, at
luncheon, showed that he could thoroughly appreciate the tender mercies
of the present or Christian era. Logan watched him, and once when,
something that interested him being said, the Father swept the table with
his glance without raising his head, a memory for a fraction of a moment
seemed to float towards the surface of Logan's consciousness. Even as
when an angler, having hooked a salmon, a monster of the stream, long the
fish bores down impetuous, seeking the sunken rocks, disdainful of the
steel, and the dark wave conceals him; then anon is beheld a gleam of
silver, and again is lost to view, and the heart of the man rejoices--even
so fugitive a glimpse had Logan of what he sought in the depths of
memory. But it fled, and still he was puzzled. Logan loafed out after luncheon to a seat on the lawn in the shade of a
tree. They were all to be driven over to an Abbey not very far away,
for, indeed, in July, there is little for a man to do in the country. Logan sat and mused. Looking up he saw Miss Willoughby approaching,
twirling an open parasol on her shoulder. Her face was radiant; of old
it had often looked as if it might be stormy, as if there were thunder
behind those dark eyebrows. Logan rose, but the lady sat down on the
garden seat, and he followed her example. 'This is better than Bloomsbury, Mr. Logan, and cocoa _pour tout potage_:
singed cocoa usually.' 'The _potage_ here is certainly all that heart can wish,' said Logan. 'The chrysalis,' said Miss Willoughby, 'in its wildest moments never
dreamed of being a butterfly, as the man said in the sermon; and I feel
like a butterfly that remembers being a chrysalis. Look at me now!' 'I could look for ever,' said Logan, 'like the sportsman in Keats's
_Grecian Urn_: "For ever let me look, and thou be fair!"' 'I am so sorry for people in town,' said Miss Willoughby. 'Don't you
wish dear old Milo was here?' Milo was the affectionate nickname--a tribute to her charms--borne by
Miss Markham at St. Ursula's. 'How can I wish that anyone was here but you?' asked Logan. 'But,
indeed, as to her being here, I should like to know in what capacity she
was a guest.' The Clytemnestra glance came into Miss Willoughby's grey eyes for a
moment, but she was not to be put out of humour. 'To be here as a kinswoman, and an historian, with a maid--fancy me with
a maid!--and everything handsome about me, is sufficiently excellent for
me, Mr. Logan; and if it were otherwise, do you disapprove of the
proceedings of your own Society? But there is Lord Scremerston calling
to us, and a four-in-hand waiting at the door. And I am to sit on the
box-seat. Oh, this is better than the dingy old Record Office all day.' With these words Miss Willoughby tripped over the sod as lightly as the
Fairy Queen, and Logan slowly followed. No; he did _not_ approve of the
proceedings of his Society as exemplified by Miss Willoughby, and he was
nearly guilty of falling asleep during the drive to Winderby Abbey. Scremerston was not much more genial, for his father was driving and
conversing very gaily with his fair kinswoman. 'Talk about a distant cousin!' thought Logan, who in fact felt
ill-treated. However deep in love a man may be, he does not like to see
a fair lady conspicuously much more interested in other members of his
sex than in himself. The Abbey was a beautiful ruin, and Father Riccoboni did not conceal from
Lady Mary the melancholy emotions with which it inspired him. 'When shall our prayers be heard?' he murmured. 'When shall England
return to her Mother's bosom?' Lady Mary said nothing, but privately trusted that the winds would
disperse the orisons of which the Father spoke. Perhaps nuns had been
bricked up in these innocent-looking mossy walls, thought Lady Mary,
whose ideas on this matter were derived from a scene in the poem of
_Marmion_. And deep in Lady Mary's heart was a half-formed wish that, if
there was to be any bricking up, Miss Willoughby might be the interesting
victim. Unlike her brother the Earl, she was all for the Bangs alliance. Scremerston took the reins on the homeward way, the Earl being rather
fatigued; and, after dinner, _two_ white robes flitted ghost-like on the
lawn, and the light which burned red beside one of them was the cigar-tip
of Scremerston. The Earl had fallen asleep in the drawing-room, and
Logan took a lonely stroll, much regretting that he had come to a house
where he felt decidedly 'out of it.' He wandered down to the river, and
stood watching. He was beside the dark-brown water in the latest
twilight, beside a long pool with a boat moored on the near bank. He sat
down in the boat pensively, and then--what was that? It was the sound of
a heavy trout rising. '_Plop_, _plop_!' They were feeding all round
him. 'By Jove! I'll try the bustard to-morrow night, and then I'll go back to
town next day,' thought Logan. 'I am doing no good here, and I don't
like it. I shall tell Merton that I have moral objections to the whole
affair. Miserable, mercenary fraud!' Thus, feeling very moral and
discontented, Logan walked back to the house, carefully avoiding the
ghostly robes that still glimmered on the lawn, and did not re-enter the
house till bedtime. The following day began as the last had done; Lord Embleton and Miss
Willoughby retiring to the muniment-room, the lovers vanishing among the
walks. Scremerston later took Logan to consult Fenwick, who visibly
brightened at the idea of night-fishing. 'You must take one of those long landing-nets, Logan,' said Scremerston. 'They are about as tall as yourself, and as stout as lance-shafts. They
are for steadying you when you wade, and feeling the depth of the water
in front of you.' Scremerston seemed very pensive. The day was hot; they wandered to the
smoking-room. Scremerston took up a novel, which he did not read; Logan
began a letter to Merton--a gloomy epistle. 'I say, Logan,' suddenly said Scremerston, 'if your letter is not very
important, I wish you would listen to me for a moment.' Logan turned round. 'Fire away,' he said; 'my letter can wait.' Scremerston was in an attitude of deep dejection. Logan lit a cigarette
and waited. 'Logan, I am the most miserable beggar alive.' 'What is the matter? You seem rather in-and-out in your moods,' said
Logan. 'Why, you know, I am in a regular tight place. I don't know how to put
it. You see, I can't help thinking that--that--I have rather committed
myself--it seems a beastly conceited thing to say--that there's a girl
who likes me, I'm afraid.' 'I don't want to be inquisitive, but is she in this country?' asked
Logan. 'No; she's at Homburg.' 'Has it gone very far? Have you _said_ anything?' asked Logan. 'No; my father did not like it. I hoped to bring him round.' 'Have you _written_ anything? Do you correspond?' 'No, but I'm afraid I have _looked_ a lot.' As the Viscount Scremerston's eyes were by no means fitted to express
with magnetic force the language of the affections, Logan had to command
his smile. 'But why have you changed your mind, if you liked her?' he asked. 'Oh, _you_ know very well! Can anybody see her and not love her?' said
Scremerston, with a vagueness in his pronouns, but referring to Miss
Willoughby. Logan was inclined to reply that he could furnish, at first hand, an
exception to the rule, but this appeared tactless. 'No one, I daresay, whose affections were not already engaged, could see
her without loving her; but I thought yours had been engaged to a lady
now at Homburg?' 'So did I,' said the wretched Scremerston, 'but I was mistaken. Oh,
Logan, you don't know the difference! _This_ is genuine biz,' remarked
the afflicted nobleman with much simplicity. He went on: 'Then there's
my father--you know him. He was against the other affair, but, if he
thinks I have committed myself and then want to back out, why, with his
ideas, he'd rather see me dead. But I can't go on with the other thing
now: I simply can _not_. I've a good mind to go out after rabbits, and
pot myself crawling through a hedge.' 'Oh, nonsense!' said Logan; 'that is stale and superfluous. For all that
I can see, there is no harm done. The young lady, depend upon it, won't
break her heart. As a matter of fact, they don't--_we_ do. You have
only to sit tight. You are no more committed than I am. You would only
make both of you wretched if you went and committed yourself now, when
you don't want to do it. In your position I would certainly sit tight:
don't commit yourself--either here or there, so to speak; or, if you
can't sit tight, make a bolt for it. Go to Norway. I am very strongly
of opinion that the second plan is the best. But, anyhow, keep up your
pecker. You are all right--I give you my word that I think you are all
right.' 'Thanks, old cock,' said Scremerston. 'Sorry to have bored you, but I
_had_ to speak to somebody.' * * * * * *

'Best thing you could do,' said Logan. 'You'll feel ever so much better. That kind of worry comes of keeping things to oneself, till molehills
look mountains. If you like I'll go with you to Norway myself.' 'Thanks, awfully,' said Scremerston, but he did not seem very keen. Poor
little Scremerston! Logan 'breasted the brae' from the riverside to the house. His wading-
boots were heavy, for he had twice got in over the tops thereof; heavy
was his basket that Fenwick carried behind him, but light was Logan's
heart, for the bustard had slain its dozens of good trout. He and the
keeper emerged from the wood on the level of the lawn. All the great
mass of the house lay dark before them. Logan was to let himself in by
the locked French window; for it was very late--about two in the morning. He had the key of the window-door in his pocket. A light moved through
the long gallery: he saw it pass each window and vanish. There was dead
silence: not a leaf stirred. Then there rang out a pistol-shot, or was
it two pistol-shots? Logan ran for the window, his rod, which he had
taken down after fishing, in his hand. 'Hurry to the back door, Fenwick!' he said; and Fenwick, throwing down
the creel, but grasping the long landing-net, flew to the back way. Logan
opened the drawing-room window, took out his matchbox, with trembling
ringers lit a candle, and, with the candle in one hand, the rod in the
other, sped through the hall, and along a back passage leading to the
gunroom. He had caught a glimpse of the Earl running down the main
staircase, and had guessed that the trouble was on the ground floor. As
he reached the end of the long dark passage, Fenwick leaped in by the
back entrance, of which the door was open. What Logan saw was a writhing
group--the Prince of Scalastro struggling in the arms of three men: a
long white heap lay crumpled in a corner. Fenwick, at this moment, threw
the landing-net over the head of one of the Prince's assailants, and with
a twist, held the man half choked and powerless. Fenwick went on
twisting, and, with the leverage of the long shaft of the net, dragged
the wretch off the Prince, and threw him down. Another of the men turned
on Logan with a loud guttural oath, and was raising a pistol. Logan knew
the voice at last--knew the Jesuit now. '_Rien ne va plus_!' he cried,
and lunged, with all the force and speed of an expert fencer, at the
fellow's face with the point of the rod. The metal joints clicked and
crashed through the man's mouth, his pistol dropped, and he staggered,
cursing through his blood, against the wall. Logan picked up the
revolver as the Prince, whose hands were now free, floored the third of
his assailants with an upper cut. Logan thrust the revolver into the
Prince's hand. 'Keep them quiet with that,' he said, and ran to where
the Earl, who had entered unseen in the struggle, was kneeling above the
long, white, crumpled heap. It was Scremerston, dead, in his night dress: poor plucky little
Scremerston. * * * * * *

Afterwards, before the trial, the Prince told Logan how matters had
befallen. 'I was wakened,' he said--'you were very late, you know, and
we had all gone to bed--I was wakened by a banging door. If you
remember, I told you all, on the night of your arrival at Rookchester,
how I hated that sound. I tried not to think of it, and was falling
asleep when it banged again--a double knock. I was nearly asleep, when
it clashed again. There was no wind, my window was open and I looked
out: I only heard the river murmuring and the whistle of a passing train. The stillness made the abominable recurrent noise more extraordinary. I
dressed in a moment in my smoking-clothes, lit a candle, and went out of
my room, listening. I walked along the gallery--'

'It was your candle that I saw as I crossed the lawn,' said Logan. 'When a door opened,' the Prince went on--'the door of one of the rooms
on the landing--and a figure, all in white,--it was Scremerston,--emerged
and disappeared down the stairs. I followed at the top of my speed. I
heard a shot, or rather two pistols that rang out together like one. I
ran through the hall into the long back passage at right-angles to it,
down the passage to the glimmer of light through the partly glazed door
at the end of it. Then my candle was blown out and three men set on me. They had nearly pinioned me when you and Fenwick took them on both
flanks. You know the rest. They had the boat unmoored, a light cart
ready on the other side, and a steam-yacht lying off Warkworth. The
object, of course, was to kidnap me, and coerce or torture me into
renewing the lease of the tables at Scalastro. Poor Scremerston, who was
a few seconds ahead of me, not carrying a candle, had fired in the dark,
and missed. The answering fire, which was simultaneous, killed him. The
shots saved me, for they brought you and Fenwick to the rescue. Two of
the fellows whom we damaged were--'

'The Genoese pipers, of course,' said Logan. 'And you guessed, from the cry you gave, who my confessor (_he_ banged
the door, of course to draw me) turned out to be?' 'Yes, the head croupier at Scalastro years ago; but he wore a beard and
blue spectacles in the old time, when he raked in a good deal of my
patrimony,' said Logan. 'But how was he planted on _you_?' 'My old friend, Father Costa, had died, and it is too long a tale of
forgery and fraud to tell you how this wretch was forced on me. He _had_
been a Jesuit, but was unfrocked and expelled from Society for all sorts
of namable and unnamable offences. His community believed that he was
dead. So he fell to the profession in which you saw him, and, when the
gambling company saw that I was disinclined to let that hell burn any
longer on my rock, ingenious treachery did the rest.' 'By Jove!' said Logan. * * * * *

The Prince of Scalastro, impoverished by his own generous impulse, now
holds high rank in the Japanese service. His beautiful wife is much
admired in Yokohama. The Earl was nursed through the long and dangerous illness which followed
the shock of that dreadful July night, by the unwearying assiduity of his
kinswoman, Miss Willoughby. On his recovery, the bride (for the Earl won
her heart and hand) who stood by him at the altar looked fainter and more
ghostly than the bridegroom. But her dark hour of levity was passed and
over. There is no more affectionate pair than the Earl and Countess of
Embleton. Lady Mary, who lives with them, is once more an aunt, and
spoils, it is to be feared, the young Viscount Scremerston, a fine but
mischievous little boy. On the fate of the ex-Jesuit we do not dwell:
enough to say that his punishment was decreed by the laws of our country,
not of that which he had disgraced. The manuscripts of the Earl have been edited by him and the Countess for
the Roxburghe Club. VIII. THE ADVENTURE OF THE LADY PATRONESS


'I cannot bring myself to refuse my assent. It would break the dear
child's heart. She has never cared for anyone else, and, oh, she is
quite wrapped up in him. I have heard of your wonderful cures, Mr.
Merton, I mean successes, in cases which everyone has given up, and
though it seems a very strange step to me, I thought that I ought to
shrink from no remedy'--

'However unconventional,' said Merton, smiling. He felt rather as if he
were being treated like a quack doctor, to whom people (if foolish
enough) appeal only as the last desperate resource. The lady who filled, and amply filled, the client's chair, Mrs. Malory,
of Upwold in Yorkshire, was a widow, obviously, a widow indeed. 'In
weed' was an unworthy _calembour_ which flashed through Merton's mind,
since Mrs. Malory's undying regret for her lord (a most estimable man for
a coal owner) was explicitly declared, or rather was blazoned abroad, in
her costume. Mrs. Mallory, in fact, was what is derisively styled 'Early
Victorian'--'Middle' would have been, historically, more accurate. Her
religion was mildly Evangelical; she had been brought up on the Memoirs
of the Fairchild Family, by Mrs. Sherwood, tempered by Miss Yonge and the
Waverley Novels. On these principles she had trained her family. The
result was that her sons had not yet brought the family library, and the
family Romneys and Hoppners, to Christie's. Not one of them was a
director of any company, and the name of Malory had not yet been
distinguished by decorating the annals of the Courts of Bankruptcy or of
Divorce. In short, a family more deplorably not 'up to date,' and more
'out of the swim' could scarcely be found in England. Such, and of such connections, was the lady, fair, faded, with mildly
aquiline features, and an aspect at once distinguished and dowdy, who
appealed to Merton. She sought him in what she, at least, regarded as
the interests of her eldest daughter, an heiress under the will of a
maternal uncle. Merton had met the young lady, who looked like a
portrait of her mother in youth. He knew that Miss Malory, now 'wrapped
up in' her betrothed lover, would, in a few years, be equally absorbed in
'her boys.' She was pretty, blonde, dull, good, and cast by Providence
for the part of one of the best of mothers, and the despair of what man
soever happened to sit next her at a dinner party. Such women are the
safeguards of society--though sneered at by the frivolous as 'British
Matrons.' 'I have laid the case before the--where I always take my troubles,' said
Mrs. Malory, 'and I have not felt restrained from coming to consult you. When I permitted my daughter's engagement (of course after carefully
examining the young man's worldly position) I was not aware of what I
know now. Matilda met him at a visit to some neighbours--he really is
very attractive, and very attentive--and it was not till we came to
London for the season that I heard the stories about him. Some of them
have been pointed out to me, in print, in the dreadful French newspapers,
others came to me in anonymous letters. As far as a mother may, I tried
to warn Matilda, but there are subjects on which one can hardly speak to
a girl. The Vidame, in fact,' said Mrs. Malory, blushing, 'is
celebrated--I should say infamous--both in France and Italy, Poland too,
as what they call _un homme aux bonnes fortunes_. He has caused the
break-up of several families. Mr. Merton, he is a rake,' whispered the
lady, in some confusion. 'He is still young; he may reform,' said Merton, 'and no doubt a pure
affection will be the saving of him.' 'So Matilda believes, but, though a Protestant--his ancestors having left
France after the Revocation of the Edict of Nancy--Nantes I mean--I am
certain that he is _not_ under conviction.' 'Why does he call himself Vidame, "the Vidame de la Lain"?' asked Merton. 'It is an affectation,' said Mrs. Malory. 'None of his family used the
title in England, but he has been much on the Continent, and has lands in
France; and, I suppose, has romantic ideas. He is as much French as
English, more I am afraid. The wickedness of that country! And I fear
it has affected ours. Even now--I am not a scandal-monger, and I hope
for the best--but even last winter he was talked about,' Mrs. Malory
dropped her voice, 'with a lady whose husband is in America, Mrs. Brown-
Smith.' 'A lady for whom I have the very highest esteem,' said Merton, for,
indeed, Mrs. Brown-Smith was one of his references or Lady Patronesses;
he knew her well, and had a respect for her character, _au fond_, as well
as an admiration for her charms. 'You console me indeed,' said Mrs. Malory. 'I had heard--'

'People talk a great deal of ill-natured nonsense,' said Merton warmly. 'Do you know Mrs. Brown-Smith?' 'We have met, but we are not in the same set; we have exchanged visits,
but that is all.' 'Ah!' said Merton thoughtfully. He remembered that when his enterprise
was founded Mrs. Brown-Smith had kindly offered her practical services,
and that he had declined them for the moment. 'Mrs. Malory,' he went on,
after thinking awhile, 'may I take your case into my consideration--the
marriage is not till October, you say, we are in June--and I may ask for
a later interview? Of course you shall be made fully aware of every
detail, and nothing shall be done without your approval. In fact all
will depend on your own co-operation. I don't deny that there may be
distasteful things, but if you are quite sure about this gentleman's--'

'Character?'