A gate was taken from its hinges, cloaks
were strewn on it, and Blake was laid on this ambulance. Merton ventured to speak. 'May I take your boat, sir, across to the ferry, and send the fishermen
from the village to search each end of the loch on their side? It is
after midnight,' he added grimly. 'They will not refuse to go; it is
Monday.' 'I will accompany them,' said Bude, 'with your leave, Mr. Macrae, Merton
can search our side of the loch, he can borrow another boat at the
village in addition to yours. You, at the Castle, can organise the
measures for to-morrow.' 'Thank you both,' said Mr. Macrae. 'I should have thought of that. Thank
you, Mr. Merton, for the idea. I am a little dazed. There is the key of
the boat.' Merton snatched it, and ran, followed by Bude and four gillies, to the
little pier where the boat was moored. He must be doing something for
her, or go mad. The six men crowded into the boat, and pulled swiftly
away, Merton taking the stroke oar. Meanwhile Blake was carried by four
gillies towards the Castle, the men talking low to each other in Gaelic. Mr. Macrae walked silently in front. Such was the mournful procession that Lady Bude ran out to meet. She
passed Mr. Macrae, whose face was set with an expression of deadly rage,
and looked for Bude. He was not there, a gillie told her what they knew,
and, with a convulsive sob, she followed Mr. Macrae into the Castle. 'Mr. Blake must be taken to his room,' said Mr. Macrae. 'Benson, bring
something to eat and drink. Lady Bude, I deeply regret that this thing
should have troubled your stay with me. She has been carried off, Mr.
Blake has been rendered unconscious; your husband and Mr. Merton are
trying nobly to find the track of the miscreants. You will excuse me, I
must see to Mr. Blake.' Mr. Macrae rose, bowed, and went out. He saw Blake carried to a bathroom
in the observatory; they undressed him and put him in the hot water. Then
they put him to bed, and brought him wine and food. He drank the wine
eagerly. 'We were set on suddenly from behind by fellows from a boat,' he said. 'We saw them land and go up from the cove; they took us in the rear: they
felled me and pegged me out. Have you my poems?' 'Mr. Merton has the poems,' said Mr. Macrae. 'What became of my
daughter?' 'I don't know, I was unconscious.' 'What kind of boat was it?' 'An ordinary coble, a country boat.' 'What kind of looking men were they?' 'Rough fellows with beards. I only saw them when they first passed us at
some distance. Oh, my head! Oh damn, how these bites do sting! Get me
some ammonia; you'll find it in a bottle on the dressing-table.' Mr. Macrae brought him the bottle and a handkerchief. 'That is all you
know?' he asked. But Blake was babbling some confusion of verse and prose: his wits were
wandering. Mr. Macrae turned from him, and bade one of the men watch him. He
himself passed downstairs and into the hall, where Lady Bude was standing
at the window, gazing to the north. 'Indeed you must not watch, Lady Bude,' said the millionaire. 'Let me
persuade you to take something and go to bed. I forget myself; I do not
believe that you have dined.' He himself sat down at the table, he ate
and drank, and induced Lady Bude to join him. 'Now, do let me persuade
you to go back and to try to sleep,' said Mr. Macrae gently. 'Your
husband is well accompanied.' 'It is not for him that I am afraid,' said the lady, who was in tears. 'I must arrange for the day's work,' said the millionaire, and Lady Bude
sighed and left him. 'First,' he said aloud, 'we must get the doctor from Lairg to see Blake. Over forty miles.' He rang. 'Benson,' he said to the butler, 'order the
tandem for seven. The yacht to have steam up at the same hour. Breakfast
at half-past six.' The millionaire then went to his own study, where he sat lost in thought. Morning had come before the sound of voices below informed him that Bude
and Merton had returned. He hurried down; their faces told him all. 'Nothing?' he asked calmly. Nothing! They had rowed along the loch sides, touching at every cottage
and landing-place. They had learned nothing. He explained his ideas for
the day. 'If you will allow me to go in the yacht, I can telegraph from Lochinver
in all directions to the police,' said Bude. 'We can use the wireless thing,' said Mr. Macrae. 'But if you would be
so good, you could at least see the local police, and if anything
occurred to you, telegraph in the ordinary way.' 'Right,' said Bude, 'I shall now take a bath.' 'You will stay with me, Mr. Merton,' said Mr. Macrae. 'It is a dreadful country for men in our position,' said Merton, for the
sake of saying something. 'Police and everything so remote.' 'It gave them their chance; they have waited for it long enough, I dare
say. Have you any ideas?' 'They must have a steamer somewhere.' 'That is why I have ordered the balloon, to reconnoitre the sea from,'
said Mr. Macrae. 'But they have had all the night to escape in. I think
they will take her to America, to some rascally southern republic,
probably.' 'I have thought of the outer islands,' said Merton, 'out behind the Lewis
and the Long Island.' 'We shall have them searched,' said Mr. Macrae. 'I can think of no more
at present, and you are tired.' Merton had slept ill and strangely on the night of Saturday; on Sunday
night, of course, he had never lain down. Unshaven, dirty, with haggard
eyes, he looked as wretched as he felt. 'I shall have a bath, and then please employ me, it does not matter on
what, as long as I am at work for--you,' said Merton. He had nearly said
'for her.' Mr. Macrae looked at him rather curiously. 'You are dying of fatigue,'
he said. 'All your ideas have been excellent, but I cannot let you kill
yourself. Ideas are what I want. You must stay with me to-day: I shall
be communicating with London and other centres by the Giambresi machine;
I shall need your advice, your suggestions. Now, do go to bed: you shall
be called if you are needed.' He wrung Merton's hand, and Merton crept up to his bedroom. He took a
bath, turned in, and was wrapped in all the blessedness of sleep. Before five o'clock the house was astir. Bude, in the yacht, steamed
down the coast, touching at Lochinver, and wherever there seemed a faint
hope of finding intelligence. But he learned nothing. Yachts and other
vessels came and went (on Sundays, of course, more seldom), and if the
heiress had been taken straight to sea, northwards or west, round the
Butt of Lewis, by night, there could be no chance of news of her. Returning, Bude learned that the local search parties had found nothing
but the black ashes of a burned boat in a creek on the south side of the
cliffs. There the captors of Miss Macrae must have touched, burned their
coble, and taken to some larger and fleeter vessel. But no such vessel
had been seen by shepherd, fisher, keeper, or gillie. The grooms arrived
from Lairg, in the tandem, with the doctor and a rural policeman. Bude
had telegraphed to Scotland Yard from Lochinver for detectives, and to
Glasgow, Oban, Tobermory, Salen, in fact to every place he thought
likely, with minute particulars of Miss Macrae's appearance and dress. All this Merton learned from Bude, when, long after luncheon time, our
hero awoke suddenly, refreshed in body, but with the ghastly blank of
misery and doubt before the eyes of his mind. 'I wired,' said Bude, 'on the off chance that yesterday's storm might
have deranged the wireless machine, and, by Jove, it is lucky I did. The
wireless machine won't work, not a word of message has come through; it
is jammed or something. I met Donald Macdonald, who told me.' 'Have you seen our host yet?' 'No,' said Bude, 'I was just going to him.' They found the millionaire seated at a table, his head in his hands. On
their approach he roused himself. 'Any news?' he asked Bude, who shook his head. He explained how he had
himself sent various telegrams, and Mr. Macrae thanked him. 'You did well,' he said. 'Some electric disturbance has cut us off from
our London correspondent. We sent messages in the usual way, but there
has been no reply. You sent to Scotland Yard for detectives, I think you
said?' 'I did.' 'But, unluckily, what can London detectives do in a country like this?' said Mr. Macrae. 'I told them to send one who had the Gaelic,' said Bude. 'It was well thought of,' said Mr. Macrae, 'but this was no local job. Every man for miles round has been examined, and accounted for.' 'I hope you have slept well, Mr. Merton?' he asked. 'Excellently. Can you not put me on some work if it is only to copy
telegraphic despatches? But, by the way, how is Blake?' 'The doctor is still with him,' said Mr. Macrae; 'a case of concussion of
the brain, he says it is. But you go out and take the air, you must be
careful of yourself.' Bude remained with the millionaire, Merton sauntered out to look at the
river: running water drew him like a magnet. By the side of the stream,
on a woodland path, he met Lady Bude. She took his hand silently in her
right, and patted it with her left. Merton turned his head away. 'What can I say to you?' she asked. 'Oh, this is too horrible, too
cruel.' 'If I had listened to you and not irritated her I might have been with
her, not Blake,' said Merton, with keen self-respect. 'I don't quite see that you would be any the better for concussion of the
brain,' said Lady Bude, smiling. 'Oh, Mr. Merton, you _must_ find her, I
know how you have worked already. You must rescue her. Consider, this
is your chance, this is your opportunity to do something great. Take
courage!' Merton answered, with a rather watery smile, 'If I had Logan with me.' 'With or without Lord Fastcastle, you _must do it_!' said Lady Bude. They saw Mr. Macrae approaching them deep in thought and advanced to meet
him. 'Mr. Macrae,' asked Lady Bude suddenly, 'have you had Donald with you
long?' 'Ever since he was a lad in Canada,' answered the millionaire. 'I have
every confidence in Donald's ability, and he was for half a year with
Gianesi and Giambresi, learning to work their system.' Donald's honesty, it was clear, he never dreamed of suspecting. Merton
blushed, as he remembered that a doubt as to whether the engineer had
been 'got at' had occurred to his own mind. For a heavy bribe (Merton
had fancied) Donald might have been induced, perhaps by some Stock
Exchange operator, to tamper with the wireless centre of communication. But, from Mr. Macrae's perfect confidence, he felt obliged to drop this
attractive hypothesis. They dined at the usual hour, and not long after dinner Lady Bude said
good-night, while her lord, who was very tired, soon followed her
example. Merton and the millionaire paid a visit to Blake, whom they
found asleep, and the doctor, having taken supper and accepted an
invitation to stay all night, joined the two other men in the smoking-
room. In answer to inquiries about the patient, Dr. MacTavish said,
'It's jist concussion, slight concussion, and nervous shoke. No that
muckle the maiter wi' him but a clour on the hairnspan, and midge bites,
forbye the disagreeableness o' being clamped doon for a wheen hours in a
wat tussock o' bracken.' This diagnosis, though not perfectly intelligible to Merton, seemed to
reassure Mr. Macrae. 'He's a bit concetty, the chiel,' added the worthy physician, 'and it may
be a day or twa or he judges he can leave his bed. Jist nervous
collapse. But, bless my soul, what's thon?' 'Thon' had brought Mr. Macrae to his feet with a bound. It was the
thrill of the electric bell which preluded to communications from the
wireless communicator! The instrument began to tick, and to emit its
inscribed tape. 'Thank heaven,' cried the millionaire, 'now we shall have light on this
mystery.' He read the message, stamped his foot with an awful
execration, and then, recovering himself, handed the document to Merton. 'The message is a disgusting practical joke,' he said. 'Some one at the
central agency is playing tricks with the instrument.' 'Am I to read the message aloud?' asked Merton. It was rather a difficult question, for the doctor was a perfect stranger
to all present, and the matters involved were of an intimate delicacy,
affecting the most sacred domestic relations. 'Dr. MacTavish,' said Mr. Macrae, 'speaking as Highlander to Highlander,
these are circumstances, are they not, under the seal of professional
confidence?' The big doctor rose to his feet. 'They are, sir, but, Mr. Macrae, I am a married man. This sad business
of yours, I say it with sorrow, will be the talk of the world to-morrow,
as it is of the country side to-day. If you will excuse me, I would
rather know nothing, and be able to tell nothing, so I'll take my pipe
outside with me.' 'Not alone, don't go alone, Dr. MacTavish,' said Merton; 'Mr. Macrae will
need his telegraphic operator probably. Let me play you a hundred up at
billiards.' The doctor liked nothing better; soon the balls were rattling, while the
millionaire was closeted alone with Donald Macdonald and the wireless
thing. After one game, of which he was the winner, the doctor, with much
delicacy, asked leave to go to bed. Merton conducted him to his room,
and, returning, was hailed by Mr. Macrae. 'Here is the pleasant result of our communications,' he said, reading
aloud the message which he had first received. 'The Seven Hunters. August 9, 7.47 p.m.

   'Do not be anxious about Miss Macrae. She is in perfect health, and
   accompanied by three chaperons accustomed to move in the first
   circles. The one question is How Much? Sorry to be abrupt, but the
   sooner the affair is satisfactorily concluded the better. A reply
   through your Gianesi machine will reach us, and will meet with prompt
   attention.' 'A practical joke,' said Merton. 'The melancholy news has reached town
through Bude's telegrams, and somebody at the depot is playing tricks
with the instrument.' 'I have used the instrument to communicate that opinion to the
manufacturers,' said Mr. Macrae, 'but I have had no reply.' 'What does the jester mean by heading his communication "The Seven
Hunters"?' asked Merton. 'The name of a real or imaginary public-house, I suppose,' said Mr.
Macrae. At this moment the electric bell gave its signal, and the tape began to
exude. Mr. Macrae read the message aloud; it ran thus:

'No good wiring to Gianesi and Giambresi at headquarters. You are
hitched on to us, and to nobody else. Better climb down. What are your
terms?' 'This is infuriating,' said Mr. Macrae. 'It _must_ be a practical joke,
but how to reach the operators?' 'Let me wire to-morrow by the old-fashioned way,' said Merton; 'I hear
that one need not go to Lairg to wire. One can do that from Inchnadampf,
much nearer. That is quicker than steaming to Loch Inver.' 'Thank you very much, Mr. Merton; I must be here myself. You had better
take the motor--trouble dazes a man--I forgot the motor when I ordered
the tandem this morning.' 'Very good,' said Merton. 'At what hour shall I start?' 'We all need rest; let us say at ten o'clock.' 'All right,' replied Merton. 'Now do, pray, try to get a good night of
sleep.' Mr. Macrae smiled wanly: 'I mean to force myself to read _Emma_, by Miss
Austen, till the desired effect is produced.' Merton went to bed, marvelling at the self-command of the millionaire. He
himself slept ill, absorbed in regret and darkling conjecture. After writing out several telegrams for Merton to carry, the smitten
victim of enormous opulence sought repose. But how vainly! Between him
and the pages which report the prosings of Miss Bates and Mr. Woodhouse
intruded visions of his daughter, a captive, perhaps crossing the
Atlantic, perhaps hidden, who knew, in a shieling or a cavern in the
untrodden wastes of Assynt or of Lord Reay's country. At last these
appearances were merged in sleep. III. Logan to the Rescue! As Merton sped on the motor next day to the nearest telegraph station,
with Mr. Macrae's sheaf of despatches, Dr. MacTavish found him a very
dull companion. He named the lochs and hills, Quinag, Suilvean, Ben Mor,
he dwelt on the merits of the trout in the lochs; he showed the
melancholy improvements of the old Duke; he spoke of duchesses and of
crofters, of anglers and tourists; he pointed to the ruined castle of the
man who sold the great Montrose--or did not sell him. Merton was
irresponsive, trying to think. What was this mystery? Why did the
wireless machine bring no response from its headquarters; or how could
practical jokers have intruded into the secret chambers of Messrs.
Gianesi and Giambresi? These dreams or visions of his own on the night
before Miss Macrae was taken--were they wholly due to tobacco and the
liver? 'I thought I was awake,' said Merton to himself, 'when I was only
dreaming about the crimson blot on the ceiling. Was I asleep when I saw
the tartans go down the stairs? I used to walk in my sleep as a boy. It
is very queer!' 'Frae the top o' Ben Mor,' the doctor was saying, 'on a fine day, they
tell me, with a glass you can pick up "The Seven Hunters."' 'Eh, what? I beg your pardon, I am so confused by this wretched affair. What did you say you can pick up?' 'Just "The Seven Hunters,"' said the doctor rather sulkily. 'And what are "The Seven Hunters"?' 'Just seven wee sma' islandies ahint the Butt of Lewis. The maps ca'
them the Flanan Islands.' Merton's heart gave a thump. The first message from the Gianesi
invention was dated 'The Seven Hunters.' Here was a clue. 'Are the islands inhabited?' asked Merton. 'Just wi' wild goats, and, maybe, fishers drying their fish. And three
men in a lighthouse on one of them,' said the doctor. They now rushed up to the hotel and telegraph office of Inchnadampf. The
doctor, after visiting the bar, went on in the motor to Lairg; it was to
return for Merton, who had business enough on hand in sending the
despatches. He was thinking over 'The Seven Hunters.' It might be,
probably was, a blind, or the kidnappers, having touched there, might
have departed in any direction--to Iceland, for what he knew. But the
name, 'the Seven Hunters,' was not likely to have been invented by a
practical joker in London. If not, the conspirators had really captured
and kept to themselves Mr. Macrae's line of wireless communications. How
could that have been done? Merton bitterly regretted that his general
information did not include electrical science. However, he had first to send the despatches. In one Mr. Macrae informed
Gianesi and Giambresi of the condition of their instrument, and bade them
send another at once with a skilled operator, and to look out for
probable tamperers in their own establishment. This despatch was in a
cypher which before he got the new invention, and while he used the old
wires, Mr. Macrae had arranged with the electricians. The words of the
despatch were, therefore, peculiar, and the Highland lass who operated, a
girl of great beauty and modesty, at first declined to transmit the
message. 'It's maybe no proper, for a' that I ken,' she urged, and only by
invoking a local person of authority, and using the name of Mr. Macrae
very freely, could Merton obtain the transmission of the despatch. In another document Mr. Macrae ordered 'more motors' and a dozen
bicycles, as the Nabob of old ordered 'more curricles.' He also
telegraphed to the Home Office, the Admiralty, the Hereditary Lord High
Admiral of the West Coast, to Messrs. McBrain, of the steamers, and to
every one who might have any access to the control of marine police or
information. He wired to the police at New York, bidding them warn all
American stations, and to the leading New York newspapers, knowing the
energy and inquiring, if imaginative, character of their reporters. Bude
ought to have done all this on the previous day, but Bude's ideas were
limited. Nothing, however, was lost, as America is not reached in forty-
eight hours. The millionaire instructed Scotland Yard to warn all
foreign ports, and left them _carte-blanche_ as to the offer of a reward
for the discovery of his missing daughter. He also put off all the
guests whom he had been expecting at Castle Skrae. Merton was amazed at the energy and intelligence of a paternal mind
smitten by sudden grief. Mr. Macrae had even telegraphed to every London
newspaper, and to the leading Scottish and provincial journals, 'No
Interviewers need Apply.' Several hours were spent, as may be imagined,
in getting off these despatches from a Highland rural office, and Merton
tried to reward the fair operator. But she declined to accept a present
for doing her duty, and expressed lively sympathy for the poor young lady
who was lost. In a few days a diamond-studded watch and chain arrived
for Miss MacTurk. Merton himself wired to Logan, imploring him, in the name of friendship,
to abandon all engagements, and come to Inchnadampf. Where kidnapping
was concerned he knew that Logan must be interested, and might be useful;
but, of course, he could not invite him to Castle Skrae. Meanwhile he
secured rooms for Logan at the excellent inn. Lady Fastcastle, he knew,
was in England, brooding over her first-born, the Master of Fastcastle. Before these duties were performed the motor returned from Lairg, bearing
the two London detectives, one disguised as a gillie (he was the
detective who had the Gaelic), the other as a clergyman of the Church of
England. To Merton he whispered that he was to be an early friend of Mr.
Macrae, come to comfort him on the first news of his disaster. As to the
other, the gillie, Mr. Macrae was known to have been in want of an
assistant to the stalker, and Duncan Mackay (of Scotland Yard) had
accepted the situation. Merton approved of these arrangements; they were
such as he would himself have suggested. 'But I don't see what we can do, sir,' said the clerical detective (the
Rev. Mr. Williams), 'except perhaps find out if it was a put up thing
from within.' Merton gave him a succinct sketch of the events, and he could see that
Mr. Williams already suspected Donald Macdonald, the engineer. Merton,
Mr. Williams, and the driver now got into the motor, and were followed by
the gillie-detective and a man to drive in a dog-cart hired from the inn. Merton ordered all answers to telegrams to be sent by boys on bicycles. It was late ere he returned to Castle Skrae. There nothing of importance
had occurred, except the arrival of more messages from the wireless
machine. They insisted that Miss Macrae was in perfect health, but
implored the millionaire to settle instantly, lest anxiety for a father's
grief should undermine her constitution. Mr. Williams had a long interview with Mr. Macrae. It was arranged that
he should read family prayers in the morning and evening. He left _The
Church Quarterly Review_ and numbers of _The Expositor_, _The Guardian_,
and _The Pilot_ in the hall with his great coat, and on the whole his
entry was very well staged. Duncan Mackay occupied a room at the
keeper's, who had only eight children. Mr. Williams asked if he might see Mr. Blake; he could impart religious
consolation. Merton carried this message, in answer to which Blake, who
was in bed very sulky and sleepy, merely replied, 'Kick out the
hell-hound.' Merton was obliged to soften this rude message, saying that unfortunately
Mr. Blake was of the older faith, though he had expressed no wish for the
ministrations of Father McColl. On hearing this Mr. Williams merely sighed, as the Budes were present. He
had been informed as to their tenets, and had even expressed a desire to
labour for their enlightenment, by way of giving local colour. He had,
he said, some stirring Protestant tracts among his clerical properties. Mr. Macrae, however, had gently curbed this zeal, so on hearing of
Blake's religious beliefs the sigh of Mr. Williams was delicately
subdued. Dinner-time arrived. Blake did not appear; the butler said that he
supported existence solely on dried toast and milk and soda-water. He
was one of the people who keep a private clinical thermometer, and he
sent the bulletin that his temperature was 103. He hoped to come
downstairs to-morrow. Mr. Williams gave the party some news of the outer
world. He had brought the _Scotsman_, and Mr. Macrae had the gloomy
satisfaction of reading a wildly inaccurate report of his misfortune. Correct news had not reached the press, but deep sympathy was expressed. The melancholy party soon broke up, Mr. Williams conducting family
prayers with much unction, after the Budes had withdrawn. In a private interview with the millionaire Merton told him how he had
discovered the real meaning of 'The Seven Hunters,' whence the first
telegram of the kidnappers was dated. Neither man thought the
circumstance very important. 'They would hardly have ventured to name the islands if they had any idea
of staying there,' the millionaire said, 'besides any heartless jester
could find the name on a map.' This was obvious, but as Lady Bude was much to be pitied, alone, in the
circumstances, Mr. Macrae determined to send her and Bude on the yacht,
the _Flora Macdonald_, to cruise round the Butt of Lewis and examine the
islets. Both Bude and his wife were devoted to yachting, and the isles
might yield something in the way of natural history. Next day (Wednesday) the Budes steamed away, and there came many answers
to the telegrams of Mr. Macrae, and one from Logan to Merton. Logan was
hard by, cruising with his cousin, Admiral Chirnside, at the naval
manoeuvres on the northeast coast. He would come to Inchnadampf at once. Mr. Macrae heard from Gianesi and Giambresi. Gianesi himself was coming
with a fresh machine. Mr. Macrae wished it had been Giambresi, whom he
knew; Gianesi he had never met. Condolences, of course, poured in from
all quarters, even the most exalted. The Emperor of Germany was most
sympathetic. But there was no news of importance. Several yachting
parties had been suspected and examined; three young ladies at Oban,
Applecross, and Tobermory, had established their identity and proved that
they were not Miss Macrae. All day the wireless machine was silent. Mr. Williams was shown all the
rooms in the castle, and met Blake, who appeared at luncheon. Blake was
most civil. He asked for a private interview with Mr. Macrae, who
inquired whether his school friend, Mr. Williams, might share it? Blake
was pleased to give them both all the information he had, though his
head, he admitted, still rang with the cowardly blow that had stunned
him. He was told of the discovery of the burned boat, and was asked
whether it had approached from east or west, from the side of the
Atlantic, or from the head of the sea loch. 'From Kinlocharty,' he said, 'from the head of the loch, the landward
side.' This agreed with the evidence of the villagers on the other side
of the sea loch. Would he recognise the crew? He had only seen them at a certain
distance, when they landed, but in spite of the blow on his head he
remembered the black beard of one man, and the red beard of another. To
be sure they might shave off their beards, yet these two he thought he
could identify. Speaking to Miss Macrae as the men passed them, he had
called one Donald Dubh, or 'black,' and the other Donald Ban, or 'fair.' They carried heavy shepherds' crooks in their hands. Their dress was
Lowland, but they wore unusually broad bonnets of the old sort, drooping
over the eyes. Blake knew no more, except his anguish from the midges. He expressed his hope to be well enough to go away on Friday; he would
retire to the inn at Scourie, and try to persevere with his literary
work. Mr. Macrae would not hear of this; as, if the miscreants were
captured, Blake alone could have a chance of identifying them. To this
Blake replied that, as long as Mr. Macrae thought that he might be
useful, he was at his service. To Merton, Blake displayed himself in a new light. He said that he
remembered little of what occurred after he was found at the foot of the
cliff. Probably he was snappish and selfish; he was suffering very much. His head, indeed, was still bound up, and his face showed how he had
suffered. Merton shook hands with him, and said that he hoped Blake
would forget his own behaviour, for which he was sincerely sorry. 'Oh, the chaff?' said Blake. 'Never mind, I dare say I played the fool. I have been thinking, when my brain would give me leave, as I lay in bed. Merton, you are a trifle my senior, and you know the world much better. I
have lived in a writing and painting set, where we talked nonsense till
it went to our heads, and we half believed it. And, to tell you the
truth, the presence of women always sets me off. I am a humbug; I do
_not_ know Gaelic, but I mean to work away at my drama for all that. This
kind of shock against the realities of life sobers a fellow.' Blake spoke simply, in an unaffected, manly way. '_Semel in saninivimus omnes_!' said Merton. '_Nec lusisse pudet_!' said Blake, 'and the rest of it. I know there's a
parallel in the _Greek Anthology_, somewhere. I'll go and get my copy.' He went into the observatory (they had been sitting on a garden seat
outside), and Merton thought to himself:

'He is not such a bad fellow. Not many of your young poets know anything
but French.' Blake seemed to have some difficulty in finding his Anthology. At last
he came out with rather a 'carried' look, as the Scots say, rather
excited. 'Here it is,' he said, and handed Merton the little volume, of a
Tauchnitz edition, open at the right page. Merton read the epigram. 'Very neat and good,' he said. 'Now, Merton,' said Blake, 'it is not usual, is it, for ministers of the
Anglican sect to play the spy?' 'What in the world do you mean?' asked Merton. 'Oh, I guess, the Rev. Mr. Williams! Were you not told that his cure of souls is in Scotland
Yard?