The superstitious natives, much as they dread the
Berbalangs, believe that they will not attack a person who wears a cocoa-
nut pearl. Why this should be so, if so it is, I cannot guess. But, as
it is always well to be on the safe side, I provided myself five years
ago with a collection of these objects, and when I heard that we were
ordered to Cagayan Sulu I distributed them among my crew. My friend, you
may observe, wears one of the pearls. I have several about my person.' He disengaged a pin from his necktie, a muddy pearl set with burning
rubies. 'Perhaps, Captain Funkal, you will honour me by accepting this
specimen, and wearing it while we are in these latitudes? If it does no
good, it can do no harm. We, at least, have not been molested, though we
witnessed the phenomena.' 'Sir,' said the captain, 'I appreciate your kindness, and I value your
gift as a memorial of one of the most singular experiences in a seafaring
life. I drink your health and your friend's. Mr. Logan, to _you_.' The
captain pledged his guests. 'And now, gentlemen, what am I to do?' 'That, captain, is for your own consideration.' 'I'll carpet that lubber, Jenkins,' said the captain, and leaving the
cabin, he returned with the Fellow of All Souls. His shirt front was
ruffled, his white neckcloth awry, his pallid countenance betrayed a
sensitive second-rate mind, not at unity with itself. He nodded sullenly
to Logan: Bude he did not know. 'Professor Jenkins, Mr. Jones Harvey,' said the captain. 'Sit down, sir. Take a drink; you seem to need one.' Jenkins drained the tumbler, and
sat with downcast eyes, his finger drumming nervously on the table. 'Professor Jenkins, sir, I reckon you are the cause of the unparalleled
disaster to this exploring expedition. Why did you bring these two
natives of our territory on board, you well and duly knowing that the end
would not justify the proceedings?' A furtive glance from Jenkins
lighted on the diamonds that sparkled in Logan's ring. He caught Logan's
hand. 'Traitor!' he cried. 'What will not scientific jealousy dare, that
meanest of the passions!' 'What the devil do you mean?' said Logan angrily, wrenching his hand
away. 'You leave Mr. Logan alone, sir,' said the captain. 'I have two minds to
put you in irons, Mr. Professor Jenkins. If you please, explain
yourself.' 'I denounce this man and his companion,' said Jenkins, noticing a pearl
ring on Bude's finger; 'I denounce them of conspiracy, mean conspiracy,
against this expedition, and against the American flag.' 'As how?' inquired the captain, lighting a cigar with irritating
calmness. 'They wear these pearls, in which I had trusted for absolute security
against the Berbalangs.' 'Well, I wear one too,' said the captain, pointing to the pin in his
necktie. 'Are you going to tell me that _I_ am a traitor to the flag,
sir? I warn you Professor, to be careful.' 'What am I to think?' asked Jenkins. 'It is rather more important what you _say_,' replied the captain. 'What
is this fine conspiracy?' 'I had read in England about the Berbalangs.' 'Probably in Mr. Skertchley's curious paper in the Journal of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal?' asked Bude with suavity. Jenkins merely stared at him. 'I deemed that specimens of these American subjects, dowered with their
strange and baneful gift, were well worthy of the study of American
savants; and I knew that the pearls were a certain prophylactic.' 'What's that?' asked the captain. 'A kind of Universal Pain-Killer,' said Jenkins. 'Well, you surprise me,' said the captain, 'a man of your education. Pain-
Killer!' and he expectorated dexterously. 'I mean that the pearls keep off the Berbalangs,' said Jenkins. 'Then why didn't you lay in a stock of the pearls?' asked the captain. 'Because these conspirators had been before me. These men, or their
agents, had bought up, just before our arrival, every pearl in the
island. They had wormed out my secret, knew the object of my adventure,
knew how to ruin us all, and I denounce them.' 'A corner in pearls. Well, it was darned 'cute,' said the captain
impartially. 'Now, Mr. Jones Harvey, and Mr. Logan, sir, what have _you_
to say?' 'Did Mr. Jenkins--I think you said that this gentleman's name is
Jenkins?--see the agent engaged in making this corner in pearls, or learn
his name?' asked Bude. 'He was an Irish American, one McCarthy,' answered Jenkins sullenly. 'I am unacquainted with the gentleman,' said Bude, 'and I never employed
any one for any such purpose. My visit to Cagayan Sulu was some years
ago, just after that of Mr. Skertchley. Captain Funkal, I have already
acquainted you with the facts, and you were kind enough to say that you
accepted my statement.' 'I did, sir, and I do,' answered the captain. 'As for _you_,' he went
on, 'Mr. Professor Jenkins, when you found that your game was dangerous,
indeed likely to be ruinous, to this scientific expedition, and to the
crew of the _George Washington_--damn you, sir--you should have dropped
it. I don't know that I ever swore at a passenger before, and I beg your
pardon, you two English gentlemen, for so far forgetting myself. I don't
know, and these gentlemen don't know, who made the corner, but I don't
think our citizens want either you or your exhibits. The whole
population of the States, sir, not to mention the live stock, cannot
afford to go about wearing cocoa-nut pearls, a precaution which would be
necessary if I landed these venomous Berbalangs of yours on our shores:
man and wife too, likely to have a family of young Berbalangs. Snakes
are not a patch on these darkeys, and our coloured population, at least,
would be busted up.' The captain paused, perhaps attracted by the chance of thus solving the
negro problem. 'So, I'll tell you what it is, gentlemen; and, Professor Jenkins, I'll
turn back and land these two native exhibits, and I'll put _you_ on
shore, Professor Jenkins, at Cagayan Sulu. Perhaps before a steamer
touches there--which is not once in a blue moon--you'll have had time to
write an exhaustive monograph on the Berbalangs, their manners and
customs.' Jenkins (who knew what awaited him) threw himself on the floor at the
feet of Captain Funkal. Horrified by the abject distress of one who,
after all, was their countryman, Bude and Logan induced the captain to
seclude Jenkins in his cabin. They then, by their combined entreaties,
prevailed on the officer to land the Berbalangs on their own island,
indeed, but to drop Jenkins later on civilised shores. Dawn saw the
_George Washington_ and the _Pendragon_ in the port of Cagayan Sulu,
where the fetters of the two natives, ill looking people enough, were
knocked off, and they themselves deposited on the quay, where, not being
popular, they were received by a hostile demonstration. The two vessels
then resumed their eastward course. The taxidermic appliances without
which Jones Harvey never sailed, and the services of his staff of
taxidermists, were placed at the disposal of his brother savants. By
this means a stuffed Mylodon, a stuffed Beathach, stuffed five-horned
antelopes and a stuffed Bunyip, with a common gorilla and the Toltec
mummy, now forever silent, were passed through the New York Custom House,
and consigned to the McCabe Museum of Natural Varieties. The immense case that contained the discovery of Jones Harvey was also
carefully conveyed to an apartment prepared for it in the same
repository. The competitors sought their hotels, Te-iki-pa marching
beside Logan and Jones Harvey. But, by special arrangement, either Jones
Harvey or his Maori ally always slept beside their mysterious case, which
they watched with passionate attention. Two or three days were spent in
setting up the stuffed exhibits. Then the trustees, through _The Yellow
Flag_ (the paper founded by the late Mr. McCabe), announced to the
startled citizens the nature of the competition. On successive days the
vast theatre of the McCabe Museum would be open, and each competitor, in
turn, would display to the public his contribution, and lecture on his
adventures and on the variety of nature which he had secured. While the death of the animals was deplored, nothing was said, for
obvious reasons, about the causes of the catastrophe. The general excitement was intense. Interviewers scoured the city, and
flocked, to little purpose, around the officials of the McCabe Museum. Special trains were run from all quarters. The hotels were thronged. 'America,' it was announced, 'had taken hold of science, and was just
going to make science hum.' On the first day of the exhibition, Dr. Hiram Dodge displayed the stuffed
Mylodon. The agitation was unprecedented. America had bred, in ancient
days, and an American citizen had discovered, the monstrous yet amiable
animal whence prehistoric Patagonia drew her milk supplies and cheese
stuffs. Mr. Dodge's adventures, he modestly said, could only be
adequately narrated by Mr. Rider Haggard. Unluckily the Mylodon had not
survived the conditions of the voyage, the change of climates. The
applause was thunderous. Mr. Dodge gracefully expressed his obligations
to his fair and friendly rival, Mr. Jones Harvey, who had loaned his
taxidermic appliances. It did not appear to the public that the Mylodon
could be excelled in interest. The Toltec mummy, as he could no longer
talk, was flat on a falling market, nor was Mr. Rustler's narrative of
its conversational powers accepted by the scepticism of the populace,
though it was corroborated by Captain Funkal, Professor Dodge, and
Professor Wilkinson, who swore affidavits before a notary, within the
hearing of the multitude. The Beathach, exhibited by Professor Potter,
was reckoned of high anatomical interest by scientific characters, but it
was not of American habitat, and left the people relatively cold. On the
other hand, all the Macleans and Macdonnells of Canada and Nova Scotia
wept tears of joy at the corroboration of their tribal legends, and the
popularity of Professor Potter rivalled even that of Mr. Ian Maclaren. He
was at once engaged by Major Pond for a series of lectures. The
adventures of Howard Fry, in the taking of his gorilla, were reckoned
interesting, as were those of the captor of the Bunyip, but both animals
were now undeniably dead. The people could not feed them with waffles
and hominy cakes in the gardens of the institute. The savants wrangled
on the anatomical differences and resemblances of the Bunyip and the
Beathach; still the critters were, to the general mind, only stuffed
specimens, though unique. The African five-horned brutes (though in
quieter times they would have scored a triumph) did not now appeal to the
heart of the people. At last came the day when, in the huge crowded amphitheatre, with Te-iki-
pa by his side, Jones Harvey addressed the congregation. First he
exhibited a skeleton of a dinornis, a bird of about twenty-five feet in
height. 'Now,' he went on, 'thanks to the assistance of a Maori gentleman, my
friend the Tohunga Te-iki-pa'--(cheers, Te-iki bows his
acknowledgments)--'I propose to exhibit to you _this_.' With a touch on the mechanism he unrolled the valves of a gigantic
incubator. Within, recumbent on cotton wool, the almost frenzied
spectators perceived two monstrous eggs, like those of the Roc of Arabian
fable. Te-iki-pa now chanted a brief psalm in his own language. One of
the eggs rolled gently in its place; then the other. A faint crackling
noise was heard, first from one, then from the other egg. From each
emerged the featherless head of a fowl--the species hitherto unknown to
the American continent. The necks pushed forth, then the shoulders, then
both shells rolled away in fragments, and the spectators gazed on two
fledgling Moas. Te-iki-pa, on inspection, pronounced them to be cock and
hen, and in healthy condition. The breed, he said, could doubtless be
acclimatised. The professors of the museum, by Jones Harvey's request, then closely
examined the chickens. There could be no doubt of it, they unanimously
asserted: these specimens were living deinornithe (which for scientific
men, is not a bad shot at the dual of deinornis). The American continent
was now endowed, through the enterprise of Mr. Jones Harvey, not only
with living specimens, but with a probable breed of a species hitherto
thought extinct. The cheering was led by Captain Funkal, who waved the Stars and Stripes
and the Union Jack. Words cannot do justice to the scene. Women
fainted, strong men wept, enemies embraced each other. For details we
must refer to the files of _The Yellow Flag_. A _plebiscite_ to select
the winner of the McCabe Prize was organised by that Journal. The Moas
(bred and exhibited by Mr. Jones Harvey) simply romped in, by 1,732,901
votes, the Mylodon being a bad second, thanks to the Irish vote. Bude telegraphed 'Victory,' and Miss McCabe by cable answered 'Bully for
us.' The secret of these lovers was well kept. None who watches the
fascinating Countess of Bude as she moves through the gilded saloons of
Mayfair guesses that her hand was once the prize of success in a
scientific exploration. The identity of Jones Harvey remains a puzzle to
the learned. For the rest, a letter in which Jenkins told the story of
the Berbalangs was rejected by the Editor of _Nature_, and has not yet
passed even the Literary Committee of the Society for Psychical Research. The classical authority on the Berbalangs is still the paper by Mr.
Skertchley in the _Journal_ of the Asiatic Society of Bengal. {242}The
scientific gentlemen who witnessed the onslaught of the Berbalangs have
convinced themselves (except Jenkins) that nothing of the sort occurred
in their experience. The evidence of Captain Funkal is rejected as
'marine.' Te-iki-pa decided to remain in New York as custodian of the Moas. He
occasionally obliges by exhibiting a few feats of native conjuring, when
his performances are attended by the _elite_ of the city. He knows that
his countrymen hold him in feud, but he is aware that they fear even more
than they hate the ex-medicine man of his Maori Majesty. The generosity of Bude and his Countess heaped rewards on Merton, who
vainly protested that his services had not been professional. The frequent appearance of new American novelists, whose works sell
250,000 copies in their first month, demonstrate that Mr. McCabe's scheme
for raising the level of genius has been as satisfactory as it was
original. Genius is riz. But who 'cornered' the muddy pearls in Cagayan Sulu? That secret is only known to Lady Bude, her confessor, and the
Irish-American agent whom she employed. For she, as we saw, had got at
the nature of poor Jenkins's project and had acquainted herself with the
wonderful properties of the pearls, which she cornered. As a patriot, she consoles herself for the loss of the other exhibits to
her country, by the reflection that Berbalangs would have been the most
mischievous of pauper immigrants. But of all this Bude knows nothing. XI. ADVENTURE OF THE MISERLY MARQUIS


I. The Marquis consults Gray and Graham


Few men were, and perhaps no marquis was so unpopular as the Marquis of
Restalrig, Logan's maternal Scotch cousin, widely removed. He was the
last of his family, in the direct line, and on his death almost all his
vast wealth would go to nobody knew where. To be sure Logan himself
would succeed to the title of Fastcastle, which descends to heirs
general, but nothing worth having went with the title. Logan had only
the most distant memory of seeing the marquis when he himself was a
little boy, and the marquis gave him two sixpences. His relationship to
his opulent though remote kinsman had been of no service to him in the
struggle for social existence. It carried no 'expectations,' and did not
afford the most shadowy basis for a post obit. There was no entail, the
marquis could do as he liked with his own. 'The Jews _may_ have been credulous in the time of Horace,' Logan said,
'but now they insist on the most drastic evidence of prospective wealth. No, they won't lend me a shekel.' Events were to prove that other financial operators were better informed
than the chosen people, though to be sure their belief was displayed in a
manner at once grotesque and painfully embarrassing. Why the marquis was generally disliked we might explain, historically, if
we were acquainted with the tale of his infancy, early youth, and
adolescence. Perhaps he had been betrayed in his affections, and was
'taking it out' of mankind in general. But this notion implies that the
marquis once had some affections, a point not hitherto substantiated by
any evidence. Perhaps heredity was to blame, some unhappy blend of
parentage. An ancestor at an unknown period may have bequeathed to the
marquis the elements of his unalluring character. But the only ancestor
of marked temperament was the festive Logan of Restalrig, who conspired
over his cups to kidnap a king, laid out his plot on the lines of an
Italian novel, and died without being detected. This heroic ancestor
admitted that he hated 'arguments derived from religion,' and, so far,
the Marquis of Restalrig was quite with him, if the arguments bore on
giving to the poor, or, indeed, to any one. In fact the marquis was that unpopular character, a miser. Your miser
may be looked up to, in a way, as an ideal votary of Mammon, but he is
never loved. On his vast possessions, mainly in coal-fields, he was even
more detested than the ordinary run of capitalists. The cottages and
farmhouses on his estates were dilapidated and insanitary beyond what is
endurable. Of his many mansions, some were kept in decent repair,
because he drew many shillings from tourists admitted to view them. But
his favourite abode was almost as ruinous as his cottages, and an artist
in search of a model for the domestic interior of the Master of
Ravenswood might have found what he wanted at Kirkburn, the usual lair of
this avaricious nobleman. It was a keep of the sixteenth century, and
looked as if it had never been papered or painted since Queen Mary's
time. But it was near the collieries; and within its blackened walls,
and among its bleak fields and grimy trees, Lord Restalrig chose to live
alone, with an old man and an old woman for his attendants. The woman
had been his nurse; it was whispered in the district that she was also
his illegal-aunt, or perhaps even, so to speak, his illegal stepmother. At all events, she endured more than anybody but a Scotch woman who had
been his nurse in childhood would have tolerated. To keep her in his
service saved him the cost of a pension, which even the marquis, people
thought, could hardly refuse to allow her. The other old servitor was
her husband, and entirely under her domination. Both might be reckoned
staunch, in the old fashion, 'to the name,' which Logan only bore by
accident, his grandmother having wedded a kinless Logan who had no
demonstrable connection with the house of Restalrig. Any mortal but the
marquis would probably have brought Logan up as his heir, for the
churlish peer had no nearer connection. But the marquis did more than
sympathise with the Roman emperor who quoted 'after me the Last Day.' The
emperor only meant that, after his time, he did not care how soon earth
and fire were mingled. The marquis, on the other hand, gave the
impression that, he once out of the way, he ardently desired the
destruction of the whole human race. He was not known ever to have
consciously benefited man or woman. He screwed out what he might from
everybody in his power, and made no returns which the law did not exact;
even these, as far as the income tax went, he kept at the lowest figure
possible. Such was the distinguished personage whose card was handed to Merton one
morning at the office. There had been no previous exchange of letters,
according to the rules of the Society, and yet Merton could not suppose
that the marquis wished to see him on any but business matters. 'He
wants to put a spoke in somebody's wheel,' thought Merton, 'but whose?' He hastily scrawled a note for Logan, who, as usual, was late, put it in
an envelope, and sealed it. He wrote: '_On no account come in_. _Explanation later_! Then he gave the note to the office boy, impressed
on him the necessity of placing it in Logan's hands when he arrived, and
told the boy to admit the visitor. The marquis entered, clad in rusty black not unlike a Scotch peasant's
best raiment as worn at funerals. He held a dripping umbrella; his boots
were muddy, his trousers had their frayed ends turned up. He wore a
hard, cruel red face, with keen grey eyes beneath penthouses where age
had touched the original tawny red with snow. Merton, bowing, took the
umbrella and placed it in a stand. 'You'll not have any snuff?' asked the marquis. Trevor had placed a few enamelled snuff-boxes of the eighteenth century
among the other costly _bibelots_ in the rooms, and, by an unusual
chance, one of them actually did contain what the marquis wanted. Merton
opened it and handed it to the peer, who, after trying a pinch on his
nostrils, poured a quantity into his hand and thence into a little black
mull made of horn, which he took from his breast pocket. 'It's good,' he
said. 'Better than I get at Kirkburn. You'll know who I am?' His
accent was nearly as broad as that of one of his own hinds, and he
sometimes used Scottish words, to Merton's perplexity. 'Every one has heard of the Marquis of Restalrig,' said Merton. 'Ay, and little to his good, I'll be bound?' 'I do not listen to gossip,' said Merton. 'I presume, though you have
not addressed me by letter, that your visit is not unconnected with
business?' 'No, no, no letters! I never was wasteful in postage stamps. But as I
was in London, to see the doctor, for the Edinburgh ones can make nothing
of the case--a kind of dwawming--I looked in at auld Nicky Maxwell's. She
gave me a good character of you, and she is one to lippen to. And you
make no charge for a first interview.' Merton vaguely conjectured that to 'lippen' implied some sort of caress;
however, he only said that he was obliged to Miss Maxwell for her kind
estimate of his firm. 'Gray and Graham, good Scots names. You'll not be one of the Grahams of
Netherby, though?' 'The name of the firm is merely conventional, a trading title,' said
Merton; 'if you want to know my name, there it is,' and he handed his
card to the marquis, who stared at it, and (apparently from motiveless
acquisitiveness) put it into his pocket. 'I don't like an alias,' he said. 'But it seems you are to lippen to.' From the context Merton now understood that the marquis probably wished
to signify that he was to be trusted. So he bowed, and expressed a hope
that he was 'all that could be desired in the lippening way.' 'You're laughing at my Doric?' asked the nobleman. 'Well, in the only
important way, it's not at my _expense_. Ha! Ha!' He shook a lumbering
laugh out of himself. Merton smiled--and was bored. 'I'm come about stopping a marriage,' said the marquis, at last arriving
at business. 'My experience is at your service,' said Merton. 'Well,' went on the marquis, 'ours is an old name.' Merton remarked that, in the course of historical study, he had made
himself acquainted with the achievements of the house. 'Auld warld tales! But I wish I could tell where the treasure is that
wily auld Logan quarrelled over with the wizard Laird of Merchistoun. Logan would not implement the contract--half profits. But my wits are
wool gathering.' He began to wander round the room, looking at the mezzotints. He stopped
in front of one portrait, and said 'My Aunt!' Merton took this for an
exclamation of astonishment, but later found that the lady (after
Lawrence) really had been the great aunt of the marquis. Merton conceived that the wits of his visitor were worse than 'wool
gathering,' that he had 'softening of the brain.' But circumstances
presently indicated that Lord Restalrig was actually suffering from a
much less common disorder--softening of the heart. He returned to his seat, and helped himself to snuff out of the enamelled
gold box, on which Merton deemed it politic to keep a watchful eye. 'Man, I'm sweir' (reluctant) 'to come to the point,' said Lord Restalrig. Merton erroneously understood him to mean that he was under oath or vow
to come to the point, and showed a face of attention. 'I'm not the man I was. The doctors don't understand my case--they take
awful fees--but I see they think ill of it. And that sets a body
thinking. Have you a taste of brandy in the house?' As the visitor's weather-beaten ruddiness had changed to a ghastly ashen
hue, rather bordering on the azure, Merton set forth the liqueur case,
and drew a bottle of soda water. 'No water,' said the peer; 'it's just ma twal' ours, an auld Scotch
fashion,' and he took without winking an orthodox dram of brandy. Then
he looked at the silver tops of the flasks. 'A good coat!' he said. 'Yours?' Merton nodded. 'Ye quarter the Douglas Heart. A good coat. Dod, I'll speak plain. The
name, Mr. Merton, when ye come to the end o' the furrow, the name is all
ye have left. We brought nothing into the world but the name, we take
out nothing else. A sore dispensation. I'm not the man I was, not this
two years. I must dispone, I know it well. Now the name, that I thought
that I cared not an empty whistle for, is worn to a rag, but I cannot
leave it in the mire. There's just one that bears it, one Logan by name,
and true Logan by the mother's blood. The mother's mother, my cousin,
was a bonny lass.' He paused; his enfeebled memory was wandering, no doubt, in scenes more
vivid to him than those of yesterday. Merton was now attentive indeed. The miserly marquis had become, to him,
something other than a curious survival of times past. There was a
chance for Logan, his friend, the last of the name, but Logan was firmly
affianced to Miss Markham, of the cloak department at Madame Claudine's. And the marquis, as he said, 'had come about stopping a marriage,' and
Merton was to help him in stopping it, in disentangling Logan! The old man aroused himself. 'I have never seen the lad but once, when
he was a bairn. But I've kept eyes on him. He _has_ nothing, and since
I came to London I hear that he has gone gyte, I mean--ye'll not
understand me--he is plighted to a long-legged shop-lass, the daughter of
a ne'er-do-well Australian land-louper, a doctor. This must not be. Now
I'll speak plain to you, plainer than to Tod and Brock, my doers--ye call
them lawyers. _They_ did not make my will.' Merton prevented himself, by an effort, from gasping. He kept a
countenance of cold attention. But the marquis was coming to the point. 'I have left all to the name, lands and rents, and mines, and money. But,
unless the lad marries in his own rank, I'll change my will. It's in the
hidie hole at Kirkburn, that Logan built to keep King Jamie in, when he
caught him. But the fool Ruthvens marred that job, and got their kail
through the reek. I'm wandering.' He helped himself to another dram,
and went on, 'Ye see what I want, ye must stop that marriage.' 'But,' said Merton, 'as you are so kindly disposed towards your kinsman,
this Mr. Logan, may I ask whether it would not be wise to address him
yourself, as the head of his house? He may, surely he will, listen to
your objections.' 'Ye do not know the Logans.' Merton concealed his smile. 'Camstairy deevils! It's in the blood. Never once has he asked me for a
pound, never noticed me by word or letter. Faith, I wish all the world
had been as considerate to auld Restalrig! For me to say a word, let be
to make an offer, would just tie him faster to the lass. "Tyne troth,
tyne a'," that is the old bye-word.' Merton recognised his friend in this description, but he merely shook a
sympathetic head. 'Very unusual,' he remarked. 'You really have no hope
by this method?' 'None at all, or I would not be here on this daft ploy. There's no fool
like an auld fool, and, faith, I hardly know the man I was. But they
cannot dispute the will. I drew doctors to witness that I was of sound
and disponing mind, and I've since been thrice to kirk and market. Lord,
how they stared to see auld Restalrig in his pew, that had not smelt
appleringie these forty years.' Merton noted these words, which he thought curious and obscure. 'Your
case interests me deeply,' he said, 'and shall receive my very best
attention. You perceive, of course, that it is a difficult case, Mr.
Logan's character and tenacity being what you describe. I must make
careful inquiries, and shall inform you of progress. You wish to see
this engagement ended?' 'And the lad on with a lass of his rank,' said the marquis. 'Probably that will follow quickly on the close of his present affection. It usually does in our experience,' said Merton, adding, 'Am I to write
to you at your London address?' 'No, sir; these London hotels would ruin the cunzie' (the Mint). Merton wondered whether the Cunzie was the title of some wealthy Scotch
peer. 'And I'm off for Kirkburn by the night express. Here's wishing luck,'
and the old sinner finished the brandy. 'May I call a cab for you--it still rains?' 'No, no, I'll travel,' by which the economical peer meant that he would
walk. He then shook Merton by the hand, and hobbled downstairs attended by his
adviser. 'Did Mr. Logan call?' Merton asked the office boy when the marquis had
trotted off. 'Yes, sir; he said you would find him at the club.' 'Call a hansom,' said Merton, 'and put up the notice, "out."' He drove
to the club, where he found Logan ordering luncheon. 'Hullo, shall we lunch together?' Logan asked. 'Not yet: I want to speak to you.' 'Nothing gone wrong? Why did you shut me out of the office?' 'Where can we talk without being disturbed?' 'Try the smoking-room on the top storey,' said Logan, 'Nobody will have
climbed so high so early.' They made the ascent, and found the room vacant: the windows looked out
over swirling smoke and trees tossing in a wind of early spring. 'Quiet enough,' said Logan, taking an arm-chair. 'Now out with it! You
make me quite nervous.' 'A client has come with what looks a promising piece of business. We are
to disentangle--'

'A royal duke?' 'No. _You_!' 'A practical joke,' said Logan. 'Somebody pulling your leg, as people
say, a most idiotic way of speaking. What sort of client was he, or she? We'll be even with them.' 'The client's card is here,' said Merton, and he handed to Logan that of
the Marquis of Restalrig. 'You never saw him before; are you sure it was the man?' asked Logan,
staggered in his scepticism. 'A very good imitation. Dressed like a farmer at a funeral. Talked like
all the kailyards. Snuffed, and asked for brandy, and went and came,
walking, in this weather.' 'By Jove, it is my venerated cousin. And he had heard about me and Miss ---'

'He was quite well informed.' Logan looked very grave. He rose and stared out of the window into the
mist. Then he came back, and stood beside Merton's chair. He spoke in a
low voice:

'This can only mean one thing.' 'Only that one thing,' said Merton, dropping his own voice. 'What did you say to him?' 'I told him that his best plan, as the head of the house, was to approach
you himself.' 'And he said?' 'That it was of no use, and that I do not know the Logans.' 'But you do?' 'I think so.' 'You think right. No, not for all his lands and mines I won't.' 'Not for the name?' 'Not for the kingdoms of the earth,' said Logan. 'It is a great refusal.' 'I have really no temptation to accept,' said Logan. 'I am not built
that way. So what next? If the old boy could only see her--'

'I doubt if that would do any good, though, of course, if I were you I
should think so. He goes north to-night. You can't take the lady to
Kirkburn.