'How did you get away?' 'Father took us to Lord's, with Miss Limmer, and there was a crowd, and
Bats and I slipped out; for None-so-pretty said we ought to call on you.' 'Who is Miss Limmer?' 'Our governess.' 'Have you a mother?' The child's brown eyes filled with tears, and his cheeks flushed. 'It
was in India that she--'

'Yes, be a man, Tommy. I am looking the other way,' which Merton did for
some seconds. 'Now, Tommy, is Miss Limmer kind to you?' The child's face became strangely set and blank; his eyes looking vacant. 'Miss Limmer is very kind to us. She loves us and we love her dearly. Ask Batsy,' he said in a monotonous voice, as if he were repeating a
lesson. 'Batsy, come here,' he said in the same voice. 'Is Miss Limmer
kind to us?' Batsy threw up her eyes--it was like a stage effect, 'We love Miss Limmer
dearly, and she loves us. She is very, very kind to us, like our dear
mamma.' Her voice was monotonous too. 'I never can say the last part,'
said Tommy. 'Batsy knows it; about dear mamma.' 'Indeed!' said Merton. 'Tommy, _why_ did you come here?' 'I don't know. I told you that None-so-pretty told us to. She did it
after she saw _that_ when we were bathing.' Tommy raised one of his
little loose breeks that did not cover the knee. _That_ was not pleasant to look on: it was on the inside of the right
thigh. 'How did you get hurt _there_?' asked Merton. The boy's monotonous chant began again: his eyes were fixed and blank as
before. 'I fell off a tree, and my leg hit a branch on the way down.' 'Curious accident,' said Merton; 'and None-so-pretty saw the mark?' 'Yes.' 'And asked you how you got it?' 'Yes, and she saw blue marks on Batsy, all over her arms.' 'And you told None-so-pretty that you fell off a tree?' 'Yes.' 'And she told you to come here?' 'Yes, she had read your printed article.' 'Well, here is luncheon,' said Merton, and bade the office boy call Miss
Blossom from the inner chamber to share the meal. Batsy had as low a
chair as possible, and was disposing her napkin to do the duty of a
pinafore. Miss Blossom entered from within with downcast eyes. 'None-so-pretty!' 'None-so-pretty!' shouted the children, while Tommy rushed to throw his
arms round her neck, to meet which she stooped down, concealing a face of
blushes. Batsy descended from her chair, waddled up, climbed another
chair, and attacked the girl from the rear. The office boy was arranging
luncheon. Merton called him to the writing-table, scribbled a note, and
said, 'Take that to Dr. Maitland, with my compliments.' Maitland had been one of the guests at the inaugural dinner. He was
entirely devoid of patients, and was living on the anticipated gains of a
great work on Clinical Psychology. 'Tell Dr. Maitland he will find me at luncheon if he comes instantly,'
said Merton as the boy fled on his errand. 'I see that I need not
introduce you to my young friends, Miss Blossom,' said Merton. 'May I
beg you to help Miss Apsley to arrange her tucker?' Miss Blossom, almost unbecomingly brilliant in her complexion, did as she
was asked. Batsy had cold chicken, new potatoes, green peas, and two
helpings of apricot tart. Tommy devoted himself to cutlets. A very mild
shandygaff was compounded for him in an old Oriel pewter. Both children
made love to Miss Blossom with their eyes. It was not at all what Merton
felt inclined to do; the lady had entangled him in a labyrinth of
puzzledom. 'None-so-pretty,' exclaimed Tommy, 'I am glad you told us to come here. Your friends are nice.' Merton bowed to Tommy, 'I am glad too,' he said. 'Miss Blossom knew that
we were kindred souls, same kind of chaps, I mean, you and me, you know,
Tommy!' Miss Blossom became more and more like the fabled peony, the crimson
variety. Luckily the office boy ushered in Dr. Maitland, who, exchanging
glances of surprise with Merton, over the children's heads, began to make
himself agreeable. He had nearly as many tricks as Miss Maskelyne. He
was doing the short-sighted man eating celery, and unable to find the
salt because he is unable to find his eyeglass. Merton, seeing his clients absorbed in mirth, murmured something vague
about 'business,' and spirited Miss Blossom away to the inner chamber. 'Sit down, pray, Miss Blossom. There is no time to waste. What do you
know about these children? Why did you send them here?' The girl, who was pale enough now, said, 'I never thought they would
come.' 'They are here, however. What do you know about them?' 'I went to stay, lately, at the Home Farm on their grandmother's place. We became great friends. I found out that they were motherless, and that
they were being cruelly ill-treated by their governess.' 'Miss Limmer?' 'Yes. But they both said they loved her dearly. They always said that
when asked. I gathered from their grandmother, old Mrs. Apsley, that
their father would listen to nothing against the governess. The old lady
cried in a helpless way, and said he was capable of marrying the woman,
out of obstinacy, if anybody interfered. I had your advertisement, and I
thought you might disentangle him. It was a kind of joke. I only told
them that you were a kind gentleman. I never dreamed of their really
coming.' 'Well, you must take them back again presently, there is the address. You
must see their father; you must wait till you see him. And how are you
to explain this escapade? I can't have the children taught to lie.' 'They have been taught _that_ lesson already.' 'I don't think they are aware of it,' said Merton. Miss Blossom stared. 'I can't explain, but you must find a way of keeping them out of a
scrape.' 'I think I can manage it,' said Miss Blossom demurely. 'I hope so. And manage, if you please, to see this Miss Limmer and
observe what kind of person she is,' said Merton, with his hand on the
door handle, adding, 'Please ask Dr. Maitland to come here, and do you
keep the children amused for a moment.' Miss Blossom nodded and left the room; there was laughter in the other
chamber. Presently Maitland joined Merton. 'Look here,' said Merton, 'we must be rapid. These children are being
cruelly ill-treated and deny it. Will you get into talk with the boy,
and ask him if he is fond of his governess, say "Miss Limmer," and notice
what he says and how he says it? Then we must pack them away.' 'All right,' said Maitland. They returned to the children. Miss Blossom retreated to the inner room. Bats simplified matters by falling asleep in the client's chair. Maitland
began by talking about schools. Was Tommy going to Eton? Tommy did not know. He had a governess at home. 'Not at a preparatory school yet? A big fellow like you?' Tommy said that he would like to go to school, but they would not send
him. 'Why not?' Tommy hesitated, blushed, and ended by saying that they didn't think it
safe, as he walked in his sleep. 'You will soon grow out of that,' said Maitland, 'but it is not very safe
at school. A boy I knew was found sound asleep on the roof at school.' 'He might have fallen off,' said Tommy. 'Yes. That's why your people keep you at home. But in a year or two you
will be all right. Know any Latin yet?' Tommy said that Miss Limmer taught him Latin. 'Are you and she great friends?' Tommy's face and voice altered as before, while he mechanically repeated
the tale of the mutual affection which linked him with Miss Limmer. '_That's_ all very jolly,' said Maitland. 'Now, Tommy,' said Merton, 'we must waken Batsy, and Miss Blossom is
going to take you both home. Hope we shall often meet.' He called Miss Blossom; Batsy kissed both of her new friends. Merton
conducted the party to the cab, and settled, in spite of Tommy's
remonstrances, with the cabman, who made a good thing of it, and nodded
when told to drive away as soon as he had deposited his charges at their
door. Then Merton led Maitland upstairs and offered him a cigar. 'What do you think of it?' he asked. 'Common post-hypnotic suggestion by the governess,' said Maitland. 'I guessed as much, but can it really be worked like that? You are not
chaffing?' 'Simplest thing to work in the world,' said Maitland. 'A lot of
nonsense, however, that the public believes in can't be done. The woman
could not sit down in St. John's Wood, and "will" Tommy to come to her if
he was in the next room. At least she might "will" till she was black in
the face, and he would know nothing about it. But she can put him to
sleep, and make him say what he does not want to say, in answer to
questions, afterwards, when he is awake.' 'You're sure of it?' 'It is as certain as anything in the world up to a certain point.' 'The girl said something that the boy did not say, more gushing, about
his dead mother.' 'The hypnotised subject often draws a line somewhere.' 'The woman must be a fiend,' said Merton. 'Some of them are, now and then,' said the author of _Clinical
Psychology_. * * * * *

Miss Blossom's cab, the driver much encouraged by Tommy, who conversed
with him through the trap in the roof, dashed up to the door of a house
close to Lord's. The horse was going fast, and nearly cannoned into
another cab-horse, also going fast, which was almost thrown on its
haunches by the driver. Inside the other hansom was a tall man with a
pale face under the tan, who was nervously gnawing his moustache. Miss
Blossom saw him, Tommy saw him, and cried 'Father!' Half-hidden behind a
blind of the house Miss Blossom beheld a woman's face, expectant. Clearly
she was Miss Limmer. All the while that they were driving Miss Blossom's
wits had been at work to construct a story to account for the absence and
return of the children. Now, by a flash of invention, she called to her
cabman, 'Drive on--fast!' Major Apsley saw his lost children with their
arms round the neck of a wonderfully pretty girl; the pretty girl waved
her parasol to him with a smile, beckoning forwards; the children waved
their arms, calling out 'A race! a race!' What could a puzzled parent do but bid his cabman follow like the wind? Miss Blossom's cab flew past Lord's, dived into Regent's Park, leading by
two lengths; reached the Zoological Gardens, and there its crew alighted,
demurely waiting for the Major. He leaped from his hansom, and taking
off his hat, strode up to Miss Blossom, as if he were leading a charge. The children captured him by the legs. 'What does this mean, Madam? What
are you doing with my children? Who are you?' 'She's None-so-pretty,' said Tommy, by way of introduction. Miss Blossom bowed with grace, and raising her head, shot two violet rays
into the eyes of the Major, which were of a bistre hue. But they
accepted the message, like a receiver in wireless telegraphy. No man,
let be a Major, could have resisted None-so-pretty at that moment. 'Come
into the gardens,' she said, and led the way. 'You would like a ride on
the elephant, Tommy?' she asked Master Apsley. 'And you, Batsy?' The children shouted assent. 'How in the world does she know them?' thought the bewildered officer. The children mounted the elephant. 'Now, Major Apsley,' said Miss Blossom, 'I have found your children.' 'I owe you thanks, Madam; I have been very anxious, but--'

'It is more than your thanks I want. I want you to do something for me,
a very little thing,' said Miss Blossom, with the air of a supplicating
angel, the violet eyes dewy with tears. 'I am sure I shall be delighted to do anything you ask, but--'

'Will you _promise_? It is a very little thing indeed!' and her hands
were clasped in entreaty. 'Please promise!' 'Well, I promise.' 'Then keep your word: it is a little thing! Take Tommy home this
instant, let nobody speak to him or touch him--and--make him take a bath,
and see him take it.' 'Take a bath!' 'Yes, at once, in your presence. Then ask him . . . any questions you
please, but pay extreme attention to his answers and his face, and the
sound of his voice. If that is not enough do the same with Batsy. And
after that I think you had better not let the children out of your sight
for a short time.' 'These are very strange requests.' 'And it was by a strange piece of luck that I met you driving home to see
if the lost children were found, and secured your attention before it
could be pre-engaged.' 'But where did you find them and why?' Miss Blossom interrupted him, 'Here is the address of Dr. Maitland, I
have written it on my own card; he can answer some questions you may want
to ask. Later I will answer anything. And now in the name of God,' said
the girl reverently, with sudden emotion, 'you will keep your promise to
the letter?' 'I will,' said the Major, and Miss Blossom waved her parasol to the
children. 'You must give the poor elephant a rest, he is tired,' she
cried, and the tender-hearted Batsy needed no more to make her descend
from the great earth-shaking beast. The children attacked her with
kisses, and then walked off, looking back, each holding one of the
paternal hands, and treading, after the manner of childhood, on the
paternal toes. Miss Blossom walked till she met an opportune omnibus. About an hour later a four-wheeler bore a woman with blazing eyes, and a
pile of trunks gaping untidily, from the Major's house in St. John's Wood
Road. The Honourable Company had won its first victory: Major Apsley, having
fulfilled Miss Blossom's commands, had seen what she expected him to see,
and was disentangled from Miss Limmer. The children still call their new stepmother None-so-pretty. IV. ADVENTURE OF THE RICH UNCLE


'His God is his belly, Mr. Graham,' said the client, 'and if the text
strikes you as disagreeably unrefined, think how it must pain me to speak
thus of an uncle, if only by marriage.' The client was a meagre matron of forty-five, or thereabouts. Her dark
scant hair was smooth, and divided down the middle. Acerbity spoke in
every line of her face, which was of a dusky yellow, where it did not
rather verge on the faint hues of a violet past its prime. She wore
thread gloves, and she carried a battered reticule of early Victorian
days, in which Merton suspected that tracts were lurking. She had an
anxious peevish mouth; in truth she was not the kind of client in whom
Merton's heart delighted. And yet he was sorry for her, especially as her rich uncle's cook was the
goddess of the gentleman whose god had just been denounced in scriptural
terms by the client, a Mrs. Gisborne. She was sad, as well she might be,
for she was a struggler, with a large family, and great expectations from
the polytheistic uncle who adored his cook and one of his nobler organs. 'What has his history been, this gentleman's--Mr. Fulton, I think you
called him?' 'He was a drysalter in the City, sir,' and across Merton's mind flitted a
vision of a dark shop with Finnan haddocks, bacon, and tongues in the
window, and smelling terribly of cheese. 'Oh, a drysalter?' he said, not daring to display ignorance by asking
questions to corroborate his theory of the drysalting business. 'A drysalter, sir, and isinglass importer.' Merton was conscious of vagueness as to isinglass, and was distantly
reminded of a celebrated racehorse. However, it was clear that Mr.
Fulton was a retired tradesman of some kind. 'He went out of
isinglass--before the cheap scientific substitute was invented (it is
made out of old quill pens)--with seventy-five thousand pounds. And it
_ought_ to come to my children. He has not another relation living but
ourselves; he married my aunt. But we never see him: he said that he
could not stand our Sunday dinners at Hampstead.' A feeling not remote from sympathy with Mr. Fulton stole over Merton's
mind as he pictured these festivals. 'Is his god very--voluminous?' Mrs. Gisborne stared. 'Is he a very portly gentleman?' 'No, Mr. Graham, he is next door to a skeleton, though you would not
expect it, considering.' 'Considering his devotion to the pleasures of the table?' 'Gluttony, shameful waste _I_ call it. And he is a stumbling block and a
cause of offence to others. He is a patron of the City and Suburban
College of Cookery, and founded two scholarships there, for scholars
learning how to pamper the--'

'The epicure,' said Merton. He knew the City and Suburban College of
Cookery. One of his band, a Miss Frere, was a Fellow and Tutor of that
academy. 'And about what age is your uncle?' he asked. 'About sixty, and not a white hair on his head.' 'Then he may marry his cook?' 'He will, sir.' 'And is very likely to have a family.' Mrs. Gisborne sniffed, and produced a pocket handkerchief from the early
Victorian reticule. She applied the handkerchief to her eyes in silence. Merton observed her with pity. 'We need the money so; there are so many
of us,' said the lady. 'Do you think that Mr. Fulton is--passionately in love, with his
domestic?' 'He only loves his meals,' said Mrs. Gisborne; '_he_ does not want to
marry her, but she has a hold over him through--his--'

'Passions, not of the heart,' said Merton hastily. He dreaded an
anatomical reference. 'He is afraid of losing her. He and his cronies give each other dinners,
jealous of each other they are; and he actually pays the woman two
hundred a year.' 'And beer money?' said Merton. He had somewhere read or heard of beer
money as an item in domestic finance. 'I don't know about that. The cruel thing is that she is a woman of
strict temperance principles. So am I.  I am sure it is an awful thing
to say, Mr. Graham, but Satan has sometimes put it into my heart to wish
that the woman, like too, too many of her sort, was the victim of
alcoholic temptations. He has a fearful temper, and if once she was not
fit for duty at one of his dinners, this awful gnawing anxiety would
cease to ride my bosom. He would pack her off.' 'Very natural. She is free from the besetting sin of the artistic
temperament?' 'If you mean drink, she is; and that is one reason why he values her. His
last cook, and his last but one--'  Here Mrs. Gisborne narrated at some
length the tragic histories of these artists. 'Providential, I thought it, but now,' she said despairingly. 'She certainly seems a difficult woman to dislodge,' said Merton. 'A
dangerous entanglement. Any followers allowed? Could anything be done
through the softer emotions? Would a guardsman, for instance--?' 'She hates the men. Never one of them darkens her kitchen fire. Offers
she has had by the score, but they come by post, and she laughs and burns
them. Old Mr. Potter, one of his cronies, tried to get her away _that_
way, but he is over seventy, and old at that, and she thought she had
another chance to better herself. And she'll take it, Mr. Graham, if you
can't do something: she'll take it.' 'Will you permit me to say that you seem to know a good deal about her! Perhaps you have some sort of means of intelligence in the enemy's camp?' 'The kitchen maid,' said Mrs. Gisborne, purpling a little, 'is the sister
of our servant, and tells her things.' 'I see,' said Merton. 'Now can you remember any little weakness of this,
I must frankly admit, admirable artist and exemplary woman?' 'You are not going to take her side, a scheming red-faced hussy, Mr. Graham?' 'I never betrayed a client, Madam, and if you mean that I am likely to
help this person into your uncle's arms, you greatly misconceive me, and
the nature of my profession.' 'I beg your pardon, sir, but I will say that your heart does not seem to
be in the case.' 'It is not quite the kind of case with which we are accustomed to deal,'
said Merton. 'But you have not answered my question. Are there any weak
points in the defence? To Venus she is cold, of Bacchus she is
disdainful.' 'I never heard of the gentlemen I am sure, sir, but as to her weaknesses,
she has the temper of a--'  Here Mrs. Gisborne paused for a comparison. Her knowledge of natural history and of mythology, the usual sources of
parallels, failed to provide a satisfactory resemblance to the cook's
temper. 'The temper of a Megaera,' said Merton, admitting to himself that the
word was not, though mythological, what he could wish. 'Of a Megaera as you know that creature, sir, and impetuous! If
everything is not handy, if that poor girl is not like clockwork with the
sauces, and herbs, and things, if a saucepan boils over, or a ham falls
into the fire, if the girl treads on the tail of one of the cats--and the
woman keeps a dozen--then she flies at her with anything that comes
handy.' 'She is fond of cats?' said Merton; 'really this lady has sympathetic
points:' and he patted the grey Russian puss, Kutuzoff, which was a
witness to these interviews. 'She dotes on the nasty things: and you may well say "lady!" Her Siamese
cat, a wild beast he is, took the first prize at the Crystal Palace Show. The papers said "Miss Blowser's _Rangoon_, bred by the exhibitor." Miss
Blowser! I don't know what the world is coming to. He stands on the
doorsteps, the cat, like a lynx, and as fierce as a lion. Why he got her
into the police-court: flew at a dog, and nearly tore his owner, a
clergyman, to pieces. There were articles about it in the papers.' 'I seem to remember it,' said Merton. '_Christianos ad Leones_'. In
fact he had written this humorous article himself. 'But is there nothing
else?' he asked. 'Only a temper, so natural to genius disturbed or
diverted in the process of composition, and a passion for the _felidae_,
such as has often been remarked in the great. There was Charles
Baudelaire, Mahomet--'

'I don't know what you mean, sir, and,' said Mrs. Gisborne, rising, and
snapping her reticule, 'I think I was a fool for answering your
advertisement. I did not come here to be laughed at, and I think common
politeness--'

'I beg a thousand pardons,' said Merton. 'I am most distressed at my
apparent discourtesy. My mind was preoccupied by the circumstances of
this very difficult case, and involuntarily glided into literary anecdote
on the subject of cats and their owners. They are my passion--cats--and
I regret that they inspire you with antipathy.' Here he picked up
Kutuzoff and carried him into the inner room. 'It is not that I object to any of Heaven's creatures kept in their
place,' said Mrs. Gisborne somewhat mollified, 'but you must make
allowances, sir, for my anxiety. It sours a mother of nine. Friday is
one of his gorging dinner-parties, and who knows what may happen if she
pleases him? The kitchen maid says, I mean I hear, that she wears an
engaged ring already.' 'That is very bad,' said Merton, with sympathy. 'The dinner is on
Friday, you say?' and he made a note of the date. 'Yes, 15 Albany Grove, on the Regent's Canal.' 'You can think of nothing else--no weakness to work on?' 'No, sir, just her awful temper; I would save him from it, for _he_ has
another as bad. And besides hopes from him have kept me up so long, his
only relation, and times are so hard, and schooling and boots, and
everything so dear, and we so many in family.' Tears came into the poor
lady's eyes. 'I'll give the case my very best attention,' he said, shaking hands with
the client. To Merton's horror she tried, Heaven help her, to pass a
circular packet, wrapped in paper, into his hand. He evaded it. It was
a first interview, for which no charge was made. 'What can be done shall
be done, though I confess that I do not see my way,' and he accompanied
her downstairs to the street. 'I behaved like a cad with my chaff,' he said to himself, 'but hang me if
I see how to help her. And I rather admire that cook.' He went into the inner room, wakened the sleeping partner, Logan, on the
sofa, and unfolded the case with every detail. 'What can we do, _que
faire_!' 'There's an exhibition of modern, mediaeval, ancient, and savage cookery
at Earl's Court, the Cookeries,' said Logan. 'Couldn't we seduce an
artist like Miss Blowser there, I mean _thither_ of course, the night
before the dinner, and get her up into the Great Wheel and somehow stop
the Wheel--and make her too late for her duties?' 'And how are you going to stop the Wheel?' 'Speak to the Man at the Wheel. Bribe the beggar.' 'Dangerous, and awfully expensive. Then think of all the other people on
the Wheel! Logan, _vous chassez de race_. The old Restalrig blood is in
your veins.' 'My ancestors nearly nipped off with a king, and why can't I carry off a
cook? Hustle her into a hansom--'

'Oh, bah! these are not modern methods.' '_Il n'y a rien tel que d'enlever_,' said Logan. 'I never shall stain the cause with police-courts,' said Merton. 'It
would be fatal.' 'I've heard of a cook who fell on his sword when the fish did not come up
to time. Now a raid on the fish? She might fall on her carving knife
when they did not arrive, or leap into the flames of the kitchen fire,
like OEnone, don't you know.' 'Bosh. Vatel was far from the sea, and he had not a fish-monger's shop
round the corner. Be modern.' Logan rumpled his hair, 'Can't I get her to lunch at a restaurant and ply
her with the wines of Eastern France? No, she is Temperance personified. Can't we send her a forged telegram to say that her mother is dying? Servants seem to have such lots of mothers, always inconveniently, or
conveniently, moribund.' 'I won't have forgery. Great heavens, how obsolete you are! Besides,
that would not put her employer in a rage.' 'Could I go and consult ---?' he mentioned a specialist. 'He is a man of
ideas.' 'He is a man of the purest principles--and an uncommonly hard hitter.' 'It is his purity I want. My own mind is hereditarily lawless. I want
something not immoral, yet efficacious. There was that parson, whom you
say the woman's cat nearly devoured. Like Paul with beasts he fought the
cat. Now, I wonder if that injured man is not meditating some priestly
revenge that would do our turn and get rid of Miss Blowser?' Merton shook his head impatiently. His own invention was busy, but to no
avail. Miss Blowser seemed impregnable. Kutuzoff Hedzoff, the puss,
stalked up to Logan and leaped on his knees. Logan stroked him, Kutuzoff
purred and blinked, Logan sought inspiration in his topaz eyes. At last
he spoke: 'Will you leave this affair to me, Merton? I think I have
found out a way.' 'What way?'