I ought to have told you, I thought our host would have done so. What was the holy man doing?' 'I was not told,' said Blake, 'I suppose Mr. Macrae was too busy. So I
was rather surprised, when I went into my room for my book, to find the
clergyman examining my things and taking books out of one of my book
boxes.' 'Good heavens!' exclaimed Merton. 'What did you do?' 'I locked the door of the room, and handed Mr. Williams the key of my
despatch box. "I have a few private trifles there," I said, "the key may
save you trouble." Then I sat down and wrote a note to Mr. Macrae, and
rang the bell and asked the servant to carry the note to his master. Mr.
Macrae came, and I explained the situation and asked him to be kind
enough to order the motor, if he could spare it, or anything to carry me
to the nearest inn.' 'I shall order it, Mr. Blake,' said Mr. Macrae, 'but it will be to remove
this person, whom I especially forbade to molest any of my guests. I
don't know how I forgot to tell you who he is, a detective; the others
were told.' 'He confounded himself in excuses; it was horribly awkward.' 'Horribly!' said Merton. 'He rated the man for visiting his guests' rooms without his knowledge. I
dare say the parson has turned over all _your_ things.' Merton blenched. He had some of the correspondence of the Disentanglers
with him, rather private matter, naturally. 'He had not the key of my despatch box,' said Merton. 'He could open it with a quill, I believe,' said Blake. 'They do--in
novels.' Merton felt very uneasy. 'What was the end of it?' he asked. 'Oh, I said that if the man was within his duty the accident was only one
of those which so singular a misfortune brings with it. I would stay
while Mr. Macrae wanted me. I handed over my keys, and insisted that all
my luggage and drawers and things should be examined. But Mr. Macrae
would not listen to me, and forbade the fellow to enter any of--the
bedrooms.' 'Begad, I'll go and look at my own despatch box,' said Merton. 'I shall sit in the shade,' said Blake. Merton did examine his box, but could not see that any of the papers had
been disarranged. Still, as the receptacle was full of family secrets he
did not feel precisely comfortable. Going out on the lawn he met Mr.
Macrae, who took him into a retired place and told him what had occurred. 'I had given the man the strictest orders not to invade the rooms of any
of my guests,' he said; 'it is too odious.' The Rev. Mr. Williams being indisposed, dined alone in his room that
night; so did Blake, who was still far from well. The only other incident was that Donald Macdonald and the new gillie,
Duncan Mackay, were reported to be 'lying around in a frightfully
dissolute state.' Donald was a sober man, but Mackay, he explained next
morning, proved to be his long lost cousin, hence the revel. Mackay,
separately, stated that he had made Donald intoxicated for the purpose of
eliciting any guilty secret which he might possess. But whisky had
elicited nothing. On the whole the London detectives had not been entirely a success. Mr.
Macrae therefore arranged to send both of them back to Lairg, where they
would strike the line, and return to the metropolis. Merton had casually talked of Logan (Lord Fastcastle) to Mr. Macrae on
the previous evening, and mentioned that he was now likely to be at
Inchnadampf. Mr. Macrae knew something of Logan, and before he sped the
parting detectives, asked Merton whether he thought that he might send a
note to Inchnadampf inviting his friend to come and bear him company? Merton gravely said that in such a crisis as theirs he thought that Logan
would be extremely helpful, and that he was a friend of the Budes. Perhaps he himself had better go and pick up Logan and inform him fully
as to the mysterious events? As Mr. Gianesi was also expected from
London on that day (Thursday) to examine the wireless machine, which had
been silent, Mr. Macrae sent off several vehicles, as well as the motor
that carried the detectives. Merton drove the tandem himself. Merton found Logan, with his Spanish bull-dog, Bouncer, loafing outside
the hotel door at Inchnadampf. He greeted Merton in a state of
suppressed glee; the whole adventure was much to the taste of the scion
of Rostalrig. Merton handed him Mr. Macrae's letter of invitation. 'Come, won't I come, rather!' said Logan. 'Of course we must wait to rest the horses,' said Merton. 'The motor has
gone on to Lairg, carrying two detectives who have made a pretty foozle
of it, and it will bring back an electrician.' 'What for?' asked Logan. 'I must tell you the whole story,' said Merton. 'Let us walk a little
way--too many gillies and people loafing about here.' They walked up the road and sat down by little Loch Awe, the lochan on
the way to Alt-na-gealgach. Merton told all the tale, beginning with his
curious experiences on the night before the disappearance of Miss Macrae,
and ending with the dismissal of the detectives. He also confided to
Logan the importance of the matter to himself, and entreated him to be
serious. Logan listened very attentively. When Merton had ended, Logan said, 'Old boy, you were the making of me:
you may trust me. Serious it is. A great deal of capital must have been
put into this business.' 'A sprat to catch a whale,' said Merton. 'You mean about nobbling the
electric machine? How could _that_ be done?' 'That--and other things. I don't know _how_ the machine was nobbled, but
it could not be done cheap. Would you mind telling me your dreams
again?' Merton repeated the story. Logan was silent. 'Do you see your way?' asked Merton. 'I must have time to think it out,' said Logan. 'It is rather mixed. When was Bude to return from his cruise to "The Seven Hunters"?' 'Perhaps to-night,' said Merton. 'We cannot be sure. She is a very
swift yacht, the _Flora Macdonald_.' 'I'll think it all over, Bude may give us a tip.' No more would Logan say, beyond asking questions, which Merton could not
answer, about the transatlantic past of the vanished heiress. They loitered back towards the hotel and lunched. The room was almost
empty, all the guests of the place were out fishing. Presently the motor
returned from Lairg, bringing Mr. Gianesi and a large box of his
electrical appliances. Merton rapidly told him all that he did not
already know through Mr. Macrae's telegrams. He was a reserved man,
rather young, and beyond thanking Merton, said little, but pushed on
towards Castle Skrae in the motor. 'Some other motors,' he said, 'had
arrived, and were being detained at Lairg.' They came later. Merton and Logan followed in the tandem, Logan driving; they had handed
to Gianesi a sheaf of telegrams for the millionaire. As to the objects
of interest on the now familiar road, Merton enlightened Logan, who
seemed as absent-minded as Merton had been, when instructed by Dr.
MacTavish. As they approached the Castle, Merton observed, from a
height, the _Flora Macdonald_ steaming into the sea loch. 'Let us drive straight down to the cove and meet them,' he said. They arrived at the cove just as the boat from the yacht touched the
shore. The Budes were astonished and delighted to see their old friend,
Logan, and his dog, Bouncer, a tawny black muzzled, bow-legged hero, was
admired by Lady Bude. Merton rapidly explained. 'Now, what tidings?' he asked. The party walked aside on the shore, and Bude swiftly narrated what he
had discovered. 'They _have_ been there,' he said. 'We drew six of the islets blank,
including the islet of the lighthouse. The men there had seen a large
yacht, two ladies and a gentleman from it had visited them. They knew no
more. Desert places, the other isles are, full of birds. On the seventh
isle we found some Highland fishermen from the Lewis in a great state of
excitement. They had only landed an hour before to pick up some fish
they had left to dry on the rocks. They had no English, but one of our
crew had the Gaelic, and interpreted in Scots. Regular Gaels, they did
not want to speak, but I offered money, gold, let them see it. Then they
took us to a cave. Do you know Mackinnon's cave in Mull, opposite Iona?' 'Yes, drive on!' said Merton, much interested. 'Well, inside it was pitched an empty corrugated iron house, quite new,
and another, on the further side, outside the cave.' 'I picked up this in the interior of the cave,' said Lady Bude. 'This' was a golden hair-pin of peculiar make. 'That's the kind of hair-pin she wears,' said Lady Bude. 'By Jove!' said Merton and Logan in one voice. 'But that was all,' said Bude. 'There was no other trace, except that
plainly people had been coming and going, and living there. They had
left some empty bottles, and two intact champagne bottles. We tasted it,
it was excellent! The Lewis men, who had not heard of the affair, could
tell nothing more, except, what is absurd, that they had lately seen a
dragon flying far off over the sea. A _dragon volant_, did you ever hear
such nonsense? The interpreter pronounced it "draigon." He had not too
much English himself.' 'The Highlanders are so delightfully superstitious,' said Lady Bude. Logan opened his lips to speak, but said nothing. 'I don't think we should keep Mr. Macrae waiting,' said Lady Bude. 'If Bude will take the reins,' said Merton, 'you and he can be at the
Castle in no time. We shall walk.' 'Excuse me a moment,' said Logan. 'A word with you, Bude.' He took Bude aside, uttered a few rapid sentences, and then helped Lady
Bude into the tandem. Bude followed, and drove away. 'Is your secret to be kept from me?' asked Merton. 'Well, old boy, you never told _me_ the mystery of the Emu's feathers! Secret for secret, out with it; how did the feathers help you, if they
_did_ help you, to find out my uncle, the Marquis? _Gifgaff_, as we say
in Berwickshire. Out with your feathers! and I'll produce my _dragon
volant_, tail and all.' Merton was horrified. The secret of the Emu's feathers involved the
father of Lady Fastcastle, of his old friend's wife, in a very
distasteful way. Logan, since his marriage, had never shown any
curiosity in the matter. His was a joyous nature; no one was less of a
self-tormentor. 'Well, old fellow,' said Merton, 'keep your dragon, and I'll keep my
Emu.' 'I won't keep him long, I assure you,' said Logan. 'Only for a day or
two, I dare say; then you'll know; sooner perhaps. But, for excellent
reasons, I asked Bude and Lady Bude to say nothing about the
hallucination of these second-sighted Highland fishers. I have a plan. I
think we shall run in the kidnappers; keep your pecker up. You shall be
in it!' With this promise, and with Logan's jovial confidence (he kept breaking
into laughter as he went) Merton had to be satisfied, though in no humour
for laughing. 'I'm working up to my _denouement_.' Logan said. 'Tremendously
dramatic! You shall be on all through; I am keeping the fat for you,
Merton. It is no bad thing for a young man to render the highest
possible services to a generous millionaire, especially in the
circumstances.' 'You're rather patronising,' said Merton, a little hurt. 'No, no,' said Logan. 'I have played second fiddle to you often, do let
me take command this time--or, at all events, wait till you see my plot
unfolded. Then you can take your part, or leave it alone, or modify to
taste. Nothing can be fairer.' Merton admitted that these proposals were loyal, and worthy of their old
and tried friendship. '_Un dragon volant_, flying over the empty sea!' said Logan. 'The
Highlanders beat the world for fantastic visions, and the Islanders beat
the Highlanders. But, look here, am I too inquisitive? The night when
we first thought of the Disentanglers you said there was--somebody. But
I understood that she and you were of one mind, and that only parents and
poverty were in the way. And now, from what you told me this morning at
Inchnadampf, it seems that there is no understanding between you and
_this_ lady, Miss Macrae.' 'There is none,' said Merton. 'I tried to keep my feelings to myself--I'm
ashamed to say that I doubt if I succeeded.' 'Any chance?' asked Logan, putting his arm in Merton's in the old
schoolboy way. 'I would rather not speak about it,' said Merton. 'I had meant to go
myself on the Monday. Then came the affair of Sunday night,' and he
sighed. 'Then the somebody before was another somebody?' 'Yes,' said Merton, turning rather red. 'Men have died and the worms have eaten them, but not for love,' muttered
Logan. IV. The Adventure of Eachain of the Hairy Arm


On arriving at the Castle Logan and Merton found poor Mr. Macrae
comparatively cheerful. Bude and Lady Bude had told what they had
gleaned, and the millionaire, recognising his daughter's hair-pin, had
all but broken down. Lady Bude herself had wept as he thanked her for
this first trace, this endearing relic, of the missing girl, and he
warmly welcomed Merton, who had detected the probable meaning of the
enigmatic 'Seven Hunters.' 'It is to _you_,' he said, 'Mr. Merton, that I owe the intelligence of my
daughter's life and probable comfort.' Lady Bude caught Merton's eye; one of hers was slightly veiled by her
long lashes. The telegrams of the day had only brought the usual stories of the
fruitless examination of yachts, and of hopes unfulfilled and clues that
led to nothing. The outermost islets were being searched, and a steamer
had been sent to St. Kilda. At home Mr. Gianesi had explained to Mr.
Macrae that he and his partner were forced, reluctantly, by the nature of
the case, to suspect treason within their own establishment in London, a
thing hitherto unprecedented. They had therefore installed a new machine
in a carefully locked chamber at their place, and Mr. Gianesi was ready
at once to set up a corresponding recipient engine at Castle Skrae. Mr.
Macrae wished first to remove the machine in the smoking-room, but Blake
ventured to suggest that it had better be left where it was. 'The conspirators,' he said, 'have made one blunder already, by
mentioning "The Seven Hunters," unless, indeed, that was intentional;
they _may_ have meant to lighten our anxiety, without leaving any useful
clue. They may make another mistake: in any case it is as well to be in
touch with them.' At this moment the smoking-room machine began to tick and emitted a
message. It ran, 'Glad you visited the Hunters. You see we do ourselves
very well. Hope you drank our health, we left some bottles of champagne
on purpose. No nasty feeling, only a matter of business. Do hurry up
and come to terms.' 'Impudent dogs!' said Mr. Macrae. 'But I think you are right, Mr. Blake;
we had better leave these communications open.' Mr. Gianesi agreed that Blake had spoken words of wisdom. Merton felt
surprised at his practical common sense. It was necessary to get another
pole to erect on the roof of the observatory, with another box at top for
the new machine, but a flagstaff from the Castle leads was found to serve
the purpose, and the rest of the day was passed in arranging the
installation, the new machine being placed in Mr. Merton's own study. Before dinner was over, Mr. Gianesi, who worked like a horse, was able to
announce that all was complete, and that a brief message, 'Yours
received, all right,' had passed through from his firm in London. Soon after dinner Blake retired to his room; his head was still
suffering, and he could not bear smoke. Gianesi and Mr. Macrae were in
the Castle, Mr. Macrae feverishly reading the newspaper speculations on
the melancholy affair: leading articles on Science and Crime, the
potentialities of both, the perils of wealth, and such other thoughts as
occurred to active minds in Fleet Street. Gianesi's room was in the
observatory, but he remained with Mr. Macrae in case he might be needed. Merton and Logan were alone in the smoking-room, where Bude left them
early. 'Now, Merton,' said Logan, 'you are going to come on in the next scene. Have you a revolver?' 'Heaven forbid!' said Merton. 'Well, I have! Now this is what you are to do. We shall both turn in
about twelve, and make a good deal of clatter and talk as we do so. You
will come with me into my room. I'll hand you the revolver, loaded,
silently, while we talk fishing shop with the door open. Then you will
go rather noisily to your room, bang the door, take off your shoes, and
slip out again--absolutely noiselessly--back into the smoking-room. You
see that window in the embrasure here, next the door, looking out towards
the loch? The curtain is drawn already, you will go on the window-seat
and sit tight! Don't fall asleep! I shall give you my portable electric
lamp for reading in the train. You may find it useful. Only don't fall
asleep. When the row begins I shall come on.' 'I see,' said Merton. 'But look here! Suppose you slip out of your own
room, locking the door quietly, and into mine, where you can snore, you
know--I snore myself--in case anybody takes a fancy to see whether I am
asleep? Leave your dog in your own room, _he_ snores, all Spanish bull-
dogs do.' 'Yes, that will serve,' said Logan. 'Merton, your mind is not wholly
inactive.' They had some whisky and soda-water, and carried out the manoeuvres on
which they had decided. Merton, unshod, silently re-entered the smoking-room, his shoes in his
hand; Logan as tactfully occupied Merton's room, and then they waited. Presently, the smoking-room door being slightly ajar, Merton heard Logan
snoring very naturally; the Spanish bull-dog was yet more sonorous. Gianesi came in, walked upstairs to his bedroom, and shut his door; in
half an hour he also was snoring; it was a nasal trio. Merton 'drove the night along,' like Dr. Johnson, by repeating Latin and
other verses. He dared not turn on the light of his portable electric
lamp and read; he was afraid to smoke; he heard the owls towhitting and
towhooing from the woods, and the clock on the Castle tower striking the
quarters and the hours. One o'clock passed, two o'clock passed, a quarter after two, then the
bell of the wireless machine rang, the machine began to tick; Merton sat
tight, listening. All the curtains of the windows were drawn, the room
was almost perfectly dark; the snorings had sometimes lulled, sometimes
revived. Merton lay behind the curtains on the window-seat, facing the
door. He knew, almost without the help of his ears, that the door was
slowly, slowly opening. Something entered, something paused, something
stole silently towards the wireless machine, and paused again. Then a
glow suffused the further end of the room, a disc of electric light,
clearly from a portable lamp. A draped form, in deep shadow, was exposed
to Merton's view. He stole forward on tiptoe with noiseless feet; he
leaped on the back of the figure, threw his left arm round its neck,
caught its right wrist in a grip of steel, and yelled:

'Mr. Eachain of the Hairy Arm, if I am not mistaken!' At the same moment there came a click, the electric light was switched
on, Logan bounced on to the figure, tore away a revolver from the right
hand of which Merton held the wrist, and the two fell on the floor above
a struggling Highland warrior in the tartans of the Macraes. The figure
was thrown on its face. 'Got you now, Mr. Blake!' said Logan, turning the head to the light. 'D---
n!' he added; 'it is Gianesi! I thought we had the Irish minstrel.' The figure only snarled, and swore in Italian. 'First thing, anyhow, to tie him up,' said Logan, producing a serviceable
cord. Both Logan and Merton were muscular men, and presently had the intruder
tightly swathed in inextricable knots and gagged in a homely but
sufficient fashion. 'Now, Merton,' said Logan, 'this is a bitter disappointment! From your
dream, or vision, of Eachain of the Hairy Arm, it was clear to me that
somebody, the poet for choice, had heard the yarn of the Highland ghost,
and was masquerading in the kilt for the purpose of tampering with the
electric dodge and communicating with the kidnappers. Apparently I owe
the bard an apology. You'll sit on this fellow's chest while I go and
bring Mr. Macrae.' 'A message has come in on the machine,' said Merton. 'Well, he can read it; it is not our affair.' Logan went off; Merton poured out a glass of Apollinaris water, added a
little whisky, and lit a cigarette. The figure on the floor wriggled;
Merton put the revolver which the man had dropped and Logan's pistol into
a drawer of the writing-table, which he locked. 'I do detest all that cheap revolver business,' said Merton. The row had awakened Logan's dog, which was howling dolefully in the
neighbouring room. 'Queer situation, eh?' said Merton to the prostrate figure. Hurrying footsteps climbed the stairs; Mr. Macrae (with a shot-gun) and
Logan entered. Mr. Macrae all but embraced Merton. 'Had I a son, I could have wished
him to be like you,' he said; 'but my poor boy--' his voice broke. Merton
had not known before that the millionaire had lost a son. He did
understand, however, that the judicious Logan had given _him_ the whole
credit of the exploit, for reasons too obvious to Merton. 'Don't thank _me_,' he was saying, when Logan interrupted:

'Don't you think, Mr. Macrae, you had better examine the message that has
just come in?' Mr. Macrae read, 'Glad they found the hair-pin, it will console the old
boy. Do not quite see how to communicate, if Gianesi, who, you say, has
arrived, removes the machine.' 'Look here,' cried Merton, 'excuse my offering advice, but we ought, I
think, to send for Donald Macdonald _at once_. We must flash back a
message to those brutes, so they may think they are still in
communication with the traitor in our camp. That beast on the floor
could work it, of course, but he would only warn _them_; we can't check
him. We must use Donald, and keep them thinking that they are sending
news to the traitor.' 'But, by Jove,' said Logan, 'they have heard from _him_, whoever he is,
since Bude came back, for they know about the finding of the hair-pin. You,' he said to the wretched captive, 'have you been at this machine?' The man, being gagged, only gasped. 'There's this, too,' said Merton, 'the senders of the last message
clearly think that Gianesi is against them. If Gianesi removes the
machine, they say--'

Merton did not finish his sentence, he rushed out of the room. Presently
he hurried back. 'Mr. Macrae,' he said, 'Blake's door is locked. I
can't waken him, and, if he were in his room, the noise we have made must
have wakened him already. Logan, ungag that creature!' Logan removed the gag. 'Who are _you_?' he asked. The captive was silent. 'Mr. Macrae,' said Merton, 'may I run and bring Donald and the other
servants here? Donald must work the machine at once, and we must break
in Blake's door, and, if he is off, we must rouse the country after him.' Mr. Macrae seemed almost dazed, the rapid sequence of unusual
circumstances being remote from his experience. In spite of the blaze of
electric light, the morning was beginning to steal into the room; the
refreshments on the table looked oddly dissipated, there was a heavy
stale smell of tobacco, and of whisky from a bottle that had been upset
in the struggle. Mr. Macrae opened a window and inhaled the fresh air
from the Atlantic. This revived him. 'I'll ring the alarm bell,' he said, and, putting a
small key to an unnoticed keyhole in a panel, he opened a tiny door,
thrust in his hand, and pressed a knob. Instantly from the Castle tower
came the thunderous knell of the alarm. 'I had it put in in case of fire
or burglars,' explained the millionaire, adding automatically, 'every
modern improvement.' In a few minutes the servants and gillies had gathered, hastily clad;
they were met by Logan, who briefly bade some bring hammers, and the
caber, or pine-tree trunk that is tossed in Highland sports. It would
make a good battering-ram. Donald Macdonald he sent at once to Mr.
Macrae. He met Bude and Lady Bude, and rapidly explained that there was
no danger of fire. The Countess went back to her rooms, Bude returned
with Logan into the observatory. Here they found Donald telegraphing to
the conspirators, by the wireless engine, a message dictated by Merton:

'Don't be alarmed about communications. I have got them to leave our
machine in its place on the chance that you might say something that
would give you away. Gianesi suspects nothing. Wire as usual, at about
half-past two in the morning, when you mean it for me.' 'That ought to be good enough,' said Logan approvingly, while the hammers
and the caber, under Mr. Macrae's directions, were thundering on the door
of Blake's room. The door, which was very strong, gave way at last with
a crash; in they burst. The room was empty, a rope fastened to the
ironwork of the bedstead showed the poet's means of escape, for a long
rope-ladder swung from the window. On the table lay a letter directed to

   _Thomas Merton, Esq_.,
   _care of Ronald Macrae, Esq_.,
   _Castle Skrae_. Mr. Macrae took the letter, bidding Benson, the butler, search the room,
and conveyed the epistle to Merton, who opened it. It ran thus:--

   'DEAR MERTON,--As a man of the world, and slightly my senior, you must
   have expected to meet me in the smoking-room to-night, or at least
   Lord Fastcastle probably entertained that hope. I saw that things
   were getting a little too warm, and made other arrangements. It is a
   little hard on the poor fellow whom you have probably mauled, if you
   have not shot each other. As he has probably informed you, he is not
   Mr. Gianesi, but a dismissed _employe_, whom we enlisted, and whom I
   found it desirable to leave behind me. These discomforts will occur;
   I myself did not look for so severe an assault as I suffered down at
   the cove on Sunday evening. The others carried out their parts only
   too conscientiously in my case. You will not easily find an
   opportunity of renewing our acquaintance, as I slit and cut the tyres
   of all the motors, except that on which I am now retiring from
   hospitable Castle Skrae, having also slit largely the tyres of the
   bicycles. Mr. Macrae's new wireless machine has been rendered useless
   by my unfortunate associate, and, as I have rather spiked all the
   wheeled conveyances (I could not manage to scuttle the yacht), you
   will be put to some inconvenience to re-establish communications. By
   that time my trail will be lost. I enclose a banknote for 10_l_.,
   which pray, if you would oblige me, distribute among the servants at
   the Castle. Please thank Mr. Macrae for all his hospitality. Among
   my books you may find something to interest you. You may keep my
   manuscript poems. Very faithfully yours,
   GERALD BLAKE.' 'P. S.--The genuine Gianesi will probably arrive at Lairg to-morrow. My unfortunate associate (whom I cannot sufficiently pity), relieved
   him of his ingenious machine _en_ _route_, and left him, heavily
   drugged, in a train bound for Fort William. Or perhaps Gianesi may
   come by sea to Loch Inver. G.B.' When Merton had read this elegant epistle aloud, Benson entered, bearing
electrical apparatus which had been found in the book boxes abandoned by
Blake. What he had done was obvious enough. He had merely smuggled in,
in his book boxes, a machine which corresponded with that of the
kidnappers, and had substituted its mechanism for that supplied to Mr.
Macrae by Gianesi and Giambresi. This he must have arranged on the
Saturday night, when Merton saw the kilted appearance of Eachain of the
Hairy Arm. A few metallic atoms from the coherer on the floor of the
smoking-room had caught Merton's eye before breakfast on Sunday morning. Now it was Friday morning! And still no means of detecting and capturing
the kidnappers had been discovered. Out of the captive nothing could be extracted. The room had been
cleared, save for Mr. Macrae, Logan, and Bude, and the man had been
interrogated. He refused to answer any questions, and demanded to be
taken before a magistrate. Now, where was there a magistrate? Logan lighted the smoking-room fire, thrust the poker into it, and began
tying hard knots in a length of cord, all this silently. His brows were
knit, his lips were set, in his eye shone the wild light of the blood of
Restalrig. Bude and Mr. Macrae looked on aghast. 'What _are_ you about?' asked Merton. 'There are methods of extracting information from reluctant witnesses,'
snarled Logan. 'Oh, bosh!' said Merton. 'Mr. Macrae cannot permit you to revive your
ancestral proceedings.' Logan threw down his knotted cord. 'I beg your pardon, Mr. Macrae,' he
said, 'but if I had that dog in my house of Kirkburn--' he then went out. 'Lord Fastcastle is a little moved,' said Merton. 'He comes of a wild
stock, but I never saw him like this.' Mr. Macrae allowed that the circumstances were unusual. A horrible thought occurred to Merton. 'Mr. Macrae,' he exclaimed, 'may
I speak to you privately? Bude, I dare say, will be kind enough to
remain with that person.' Mr. Macrae followed Merton into the billiard-room. 'My dear sir,' said the pallid Merton, 'Logan and I have made a terrible
blunder! We never doubted that, if we caught any one, our captive would
be Blake. I do not deny that this man is his accomplice, but we have
literally no proof. He may persist, if taken before a magistrate, that
he is Gianesi. He may say that, being in your employment as an
electrician, he naturally entered the smoking-room when the electric bell
rang. He can easily account for his possession of a revolver, in a place
where a mysterious crime has just been committed. As to the Highland
costume, he may urge that, like many Southrons, he had bought it to wear
on a Highland tour, and was trying it on. How can you keep him?