'That's my secret. You are so beastly moral, you might object. One
thing I may tell you--it does not compromise the Honourable Company of
Disentanglers.' 'You are not going to try any detective work; to find out if she is a
woman with a past, with a husband living? You are not going to put a
live adder among the eels? I daresay drysalters eat eels. It is the
reading of sensational novels that ruins our youth.' 'What a suspicious beggar you are. Certainly I am neither a detective
nor a murderer _a la Montepin_! 'No practical jokes with the victuals?' 'Of course not.' 'No kidnapping Miss Blowser?' 'Certainly no kidnapping--Miss Blowser.' 'Now, honour bright, is your plan within the law? No police-court
publicity?' 'No, the police will have no say or show in the matter; at least,' said
Logan, 'as far as my legal studies inform me, they won't. But I can take
counsel's opinion if you insist on it.' 'Then you are sailing near the wind?' 'Really I don't think so: not really what you call near.' 'I am sorry for that unlucky Mrs. Gisborne,' said Merton, musingly. 'And
with two such tempers as the cook's and Mr. Fulton's the match could not
be a happy one. Well, Logan, I suppose you won't tell me what your game
is?' 'Better not, I think, but, I assure you, honour is safe. I am certain
that nobody can say anything. I rather expect to earn public gratitude,
on the whole. _You_ can't appear in any way, nor the rest of us. By-the-
bye do you remember the address of the parson whose dog was hurt?' 'I think I kept a cutting of the police case; it was amusing,' said
Merton, looking through a kind of album, and finding presently the record
of the incident. 'It may come in handy, or it may not,' said Logan. He then went off, and
had Merton followed him he might not have been reassured. For Logan
first walked to a chemist's shop, where he purchased a quantity of a
certain drug. Next he went to the fencing rooms which he frequented,
took his fencing mask and glove, borrowed a fencing glove from a left-
handed swordsman whom he knew, and drove to his rooms with this odd
assortment of articles. Having deposited them, he paid a call at the
dwelling of a fair member of the Disentanglers, Miss Frere, the lady
instructress in the culinary art, at the City and Suburban College of
Cookery, whereof, as we have heard, Mr. Fulton, the eminent drysalter,
was a patron and visitor. Logan unfolded the case and his plan of
campaign to Miss Frere, who listened with intelligent sympathy. 'Do you know the man by sight?' he asked. 'Oh yes, and he knows me perfectly well. Last year he distributed the
prizes at the City and Suburban School of Cookery, and paid me the most
extraordinary compliments.' 'Well deserved, I am confident,' said Logan; 'and now you are sure that
you know exactly what you have to do, as I have explained?' 'Yes, I am to be walking through Albany Grove at a quarter to four on
Friday.' 'Be punctual.' 'You may rely on me,' said Miss Frere. Logan next day went to Trevor's rooms in the Albany; he was the
capitalist who had insisted on helping to finance the Disentanglers. To
Trevor he explained the situation, unfolded his plan, and asked leave to
borrow his private hansom. 'Delighted,' said Trevor. 'I'll put on an old suit of tweeds, and a
seedy bowler, and drive you myself. It will be fun. Or should we take
my motor car?' 'No, it attracts too much attention.' 'Suppose we put a number on my cab, and paint the wheels yellow, like
pirates, you know, when they are disguising a captured ship. It won't do
to look like a private cab.' 'These strike me as judicious precautions, Trevor, and worthy of your
genius. That is, if we are not caught.' 'Oh, we won't be caught,' said Trevor. 'But, in the meantime, let us
find that place you mean to go to on a map of London, and I'll drive you
there now in a dog-cart. It is better to know the lie of the land.' Logan agreed and they drove to his objective in the afternoon; it was
beyond the border of known West Hammersmith. Trevor reconnoitred and
made judicious notes of short cuts. On the following day, which was Thursday, Logan had a difficult piece of
diplomacy to execute. He called at the rooms of the clergyman, a
bachelor and a curate, whose dog and person had suffered from the
assaults of Miss Blowser's Siamese favourite. He expected difficulties,
for a good deal of ridicule, including Merton's article, _Christianos ad
Leones_, had been heaped on this martyr. Logan looked forward to finding
him crusty, but, after seeming a little puzzled, the holy man exclaimed,
'Why, you must be Logan of Trinity?' 'The same,' said Logan, who did not remember the face or name (which was
Wilkinson) of his host. 'Why, I shall never forget your running catch under the scoring-box at
Lord's,' exclaimed Mr. Wilkinson, 'I can see it now. It saved the match. I owe you more than I can say,' he added with deep emotion. 'Then be grateful, and do me a little favour. I want--just for an hour
or two--to borrow your dog,' and he stooped to pat the animal, a
fox-terrier bearing recent and glorious scars. 'Borrow Scout! Why, what can you want with him?' 'I have suffered myself through an infernal wild beast of a cat in Albany
Grove,' said Logan, 'and I have a scheme--it is unchristian I own--of
revenge.' The curate's eyes glittered vindictively: 'Scout is no match for the
brute,' he said in a tone of manly regret. 'Oh, Scout will be all right. There is not going to be a fight. He is
only needed to--give tone to the affair. You will be able to walk him
safely through Albany Grove after to-morrow.' 'Won't there be a row if you kill the cat? He is what they think a
valuable animal. I never could stand cats myself.' 'The higher vermin,' said Logan. 'But not a hair of his whiskers shall
be hurt. He will seek other haunts, that's all.' 'But you don't mean to steal him?' asked the curate anxiously. 'You see,
suspicion might fall on me, as I am known to bear a grudge to the brute.' 'I steal him! Not I,' said Logan. 'He shall sleep in his owner's arms,
if she likes. But Albany Grove shall know him no more.' 'Then you may take Scout,' said Mr. Wilkinson. 'You have a cab there,
shall I drive to your rooms with you and him?' 'Do,' said Logan, 'and then dine at the club.' Which they did, and
talked much cricket, Mr. Wilkinson being an enthusiast. * * * * *

Next day, about 3.40 P.M., a hansom drew up at the corner of Albany
Grove. The fare alighted, and sauntered past Mr. Fulton's house. Rangoon, the Siamese puss, was sitting in a scornful and leonine
attitude, in a tree of the garden above the railings, outside the open
kitchen windows, whence came penetrating and hospitable smells of good
fare. The stranger passed, and as he returned, dropped something here
and there on the pavement. It was valerian, which no cat can resist. Miss Blowser was in a culinary crisis, and could not leave the kitchen
range. Her face was of a fiery complexion; her locks were in a fine
disorder. 'Is Rangoon in his place, Mary?' she inquired of the kitchen
maid. 'Yes, ma'am, in his tree,' said the maid. In this tree Rangoon used to sit like a Thug, dropping down on dogs who
passed by. Presently the maid said, 'Ma'am, Rangoon has jumped down, and is walking
off to the right, after a gentleman.' 'After a sparrow, I dare say, bless him,' said Miss Blowser. Two minutes
later she asked, 'Has Rangy come back?' 'No, ma'am.' 'Just look out and see what he is doing, the dear.' 'He's walking along the pavement, ma'am, sniffing at something. And oh! there's that curate's dog.' 'Yelping little brute! I hope Rangy will give him snuff,' said Miss
Blowser. 'He's flown at him,' cried the maid ambiguously, in much excitement. 'Oh,
ma'am, the gentleman has caught hold of Rangoon. He's got a wire mask on
his face, and great thick gloves, not to be scratched. He's got Rangoon:
he's putting him in a bag,' but by this time Miss Blowser, brandishing a
saucepan with a long handle, had rushed out of the kitchen, through the
little garden, cannoned against Mr. Fulton, who happened to be coming in
with flowers to decorate his table, knocked him against a lamp-post,
opened the garden gate, and, armed and bareheaded as she was, had rushed
forth. You might have deemed that you beheld Bellona speeding to the
fray. What Miss Blowser saw was a man disappearing into a hansom, whence came
the yapping of a dog. Another cab was loitering by, empty; and this
cabman had his orders. Logan had seen to _that_. To hail that cab, to
leap in, to cry, 'Follow the scoundrel in front: a sovereign if you catch
him,' was to the active Miss Blowser the work of a moment. The man
whipped up his horse, the pursuit began, 'there was racing and chasing on
Cannobie Lee,' Marylebone rang with the screams of female rage and
distress. Mr. Fulton, he also, leaped up and rushed in pursuit, wringing
his hands. He had no turn of speed, and stopped panting. He only saw
Miss Blowser whisk into her cab, he only heard her yells that died in the
distance. Mr. Fulton sped back into his house. He shouted for Mary:
'What's the matter with your mistress, with my cook?' he raved. 'Somebody's taken her cat, sir, and is off, in a cab, and her after him.' 'After her cat! D--- her cat,' cried Mr. Fulton. 'My dinner will be
ruined! It is the last she shall touch in _this_ house. Out she
packs--pack her things, Mary; no, don't--do what you can in the kitchen. I _must_ find a cook. Her cat!' and with language unworthy of a
drysalter Mr. Fulton clapped on his hat, and sped into the street, with a
vague idea of hurrying to Fortnum and Mason's, or some restaurant, or a
friend's house, indeed to any conceivable place where a cook might be
recruited _impromptu_. 'She leaves this very day,' he said aloud, as he
all but collided with a lady, a quiet, cool-looking lady, who stopped and
stared at him. 'Oh, Miss Frere!' said Mr. Fulton, raising his hat, with a wild gleam of
hope in the trouble of his eyes, 'I have had such a misfortune!' 'What has happened, Mr. Fulton?' 'Oh, ma'am, I've lost my cook, and me with a dinner-party on to-day.' 'Lost your cook? Not by death, I hope?' 'No, ma'am, she has run away, in the very crisis, as I may call it.' 'With whom?' 'With nobody. After her cat. In a cab. I am undone. Where can I find
a cook? You may know of some one disengaged, though it is late in the
day, and dinner at seven. Can't you help me?' 'Can you trust me, Mr. Fulton?' 'Trust you; how, ma'am?' 'Let me cook your dinner, at least till your cook catches her cat,' said
Miss Frere, smiling. 'You, don't mean it, a lady!' 'But a professed cook, Mr. Fulton, and anxious to help so nobly generous
a patron of the art . . . if you can trust me.' 'Trust you, ma'am!' said Mr. Fulton, raising to heaven his obsecrating
hands. 'Why, you're a genius. It is a miracle, a mere miracle of good
luck.' By this time, of course, a small crowd of little boys and girls, amateurs
of dramatic scenes, was gathering. 'We have no time to waste, Mr. Fulton. Let us go in, and let me get to
work. I dare say the cook will be back before I have taken off my
gloves.' 'Not her, nor does she cook again in my house. The shock might have
killed a man of my age,' said Mr. Fulton, breathing heavily, and leading
the way up the steps to his own door. 'Her cat, the hussy!' he grumbled. Mr. Fulton kept his word. When Miss Blowser returned, with her saucepan
and Rangoon, she found her trunks in the passage, corded by Mr. Fulton's
own trembling hands, and she departed for ever. Her chase had been a stern chase, a long chase, the cab driven by Trevor
had never been out of sight. It led her, in the western wilds, to a Home
for Decayed and Destitute Cats, and it had driven away before she entered
the lane leading to the Home. But there she found Rangoon. He had just
been deposited there, in a seedy old traveller's fur-lined sleeping bag,
the matron of the Home averred, by a very pleasant gentleman, who said he
had found the cat astray, lost, and thinking him a rare and valuable
animal had deemed it best to deposit him at the Home. He had left money
to pay for advertisements. He had even left the advertisement,
typewritten (by Miss Blossom). 'FOUND. A magnificent Siamese Cat. Apply to the Home for Destitute and
Decayed Cats, Water Lane, West Hammersmith.' 'Very thoughtful of the gentleman,' said the matron of the Home. 'No; he
did not leave any address. Said something about doing good by stealth.' 'Stealth, why he stole my cat!' exclaimed Miss Blowser. 'He must have
had the advertisement printed like that ready beforehand. It's a
conspiracy,' and she brandished her saucepan. The matron, who was prejudiced in favour of Logan, and his two
sovereigns, which now need not be expended in advertisements, was alarmed
by the hostile attitude of Miss Blowser. 'There's your cat,' she said
drily; 'it ain't stealing a cat to leave it, with money for its board,
and to pay for advertisements, in a well-conducted charitable
institution, with a duchess for president. And he even left five
shillings to pay for the cab of anybody as might call for the cat. There
is your money.' Miss Blowser threw the silver away. 'Take your old cat in the bag,' said the matron, slamming the door in the
face of Miss Blowser. * * * * *

After the trial for breach of promise of marriage, and after paying the
very considerable damages which Miss Blowser demanded and received, old
Mr. Fulton hardened his heart, and engaged a male _chef_. The gratitude of Mrs. Gisborne, now free from all anxiety, was touching. But Merton assured her that he knew nothing whatever of the stratagem,
scarcely a worthy one, he thought, as she reported it, by which her uncle
was disentangled. It was Logan's opinion, and it is mine, that he had not been guilty of
theft, but perhaps of the wrongous detention or imprisonment of Rangoon. 'But,' he said, 'the Habeas Corpus Act has no clause about cats, and in
Scottish law, which is good enough for _me_, there is no property in
cats. You can't, legally, _steal_ them.' 'How do you know?' asked Merton. 'I took the opinion of an eminent sheriff substitute.' 'What is that?' 'Oh, a fearfully swagger legal official: _you_ have nothing like it.' 'Rum country, Scotland,' said Merton. 'Rum country, England,' said Logan, indignantly. '_You_ have no property
in corpses.' Merton was silenced. Neither could foresee how momentous, to each of them, the question of
property in corpses was to prove. _O pectora caeca_! * * * * *

Miss Blowser is now Mrs. Potter. She married her aged wooer, and Rangoon
still wins prizes at the Crystal Palace. V.  THE ADVENTURE OF THE OFFICE SCREEN


It is not to be supposed that all the enterprises of the Company of
Disentanglers were fortunate. Nobody can command success, though, on the
other hand, a number of persons, civil and military, are able to keep her
at a distance with surprising uniformity. There was one class of
business which Merton soon learned to renounce in despair, just as some
sorts of maladies defy our medical science. 'It is curious, and not very creditable to our chemists,' Merton said,
'that love philtres were once as common as seidlitz powders, while now we
have lost that secret. The wrong persons might drink love philtres, as
in the case of Tristram and Iseult. Or an unskilled rural practitioner
might send out the wrong drug, as in the instance of Lucretius, who went
mad in consequence.' 'Perhaps,' remarked Logan, 'the chemist was voting at the Comitia, and it
was his boy who made a mistake about the mixture.' 'Very probably, but as a rule, the love philtres _worked_. Now, with all
our boasted progress, the secret is totally lost. Nothing but a love
philtre would be of any use in some cases. There is Lord Methusalem,
eighty if he is a day.' 'Methusalem has been unco "wastefu' in wives"!' said Logan. 'His family have been consulting me--the women in tears. He _will_ marry
his grandchildren's German governess, and there is nothing to be done. In
such cases nothing is ever to be done. You can easily distract an aged
man's volatile affections, and attach them to a new charmer. But she is
just as ineligible as the first; marry he _will_, always a young woman. Now if a respectable virgin or widow of, say, fifty, could hand him a
love philtre, and gain his heart, appearances would, more or less, be
saved. But, short of philtres, there is nothing to be done. We turn
away a great deal of business of that sort.' The Society of Disentanglers, then, reluctantly abandoned dealings in
this class of affairs. In another distressing business, Merton, as a patriot, was obliged to
abandon an attractive enterprise. The Marquis of Seakail was serving his
country as a volunteer, and had been mentioned in despatches. But, to
the misery of his family, he had entangled himself, before his departure,
with a young lady who taught in a high school for girls. Her character
was unimpeachable, her person graceful; still, as her father was a
butcher, the duke and duchess were reluctant to assent to the union. They
consulted Merton, and assured him that they would not flinch from
expense. A great idea flashed across Merton's mind. He might send out a
stalwart band of Disentanglers, who, disguised as the enemy, might
capture Seakail, and carry him off prisoner to some retreat where the
fairest of his female staff (of course with a suitable chaperon), would
await him in the character of a daughter of the hostile race. The result
would probably be to detach Seakail's heart from his love in England. But
on reflection, Merton felt that the scheme was unworthy of a patriot. Other painful cases occurred. One lady, a mother, of resolute character,
consulted Merton on the case of her son. He was betrothed to an
excitable girl, a neighbour in the country, who wrote long literary
letters about Mr. George Meredith's novels, and (when abroad) was a
perfect Baedeker, or Murray, or Mr. Augustus Hare: instructing through
correspondence. So the matron complained, but this was not the worst of
it. There was an unhappy family history, of a kind infinitely more
common in fiction than in real life. To be explicit, even according to
the ideas of the most abject barbarians, the young people, unwittingly,
were too near akin for matrimony. 'There is nothing for it but to tell both of them the truth,' said
Merton. 'This is not a case in which we can be concerned.' The resolute matron did not take his counsel. The man was told, not the
girl, who died in painful circumstances, still writing. Her letters were
later given to the world, though obviously not intended for publication,
and only calculated to waken unavailing grief among the sentimental, and
to make the judicious tired. There was, however, a case in which Merton
may be said to have succeeded by a happy accident. Two visitors, ladies,
were ushered into his consulting room; they were announced as Miss
Baddeley and Miss Crofton. Miss Baddeley was attired in black, wore a thick veil, and trembled a
good deal. Miss Crofton, whose dress was a combination of untoward but
decisive hues, and whose hat was enormous and flamboyant, appeared to be
the other young lady's _confidante_, and conducted the business of the
interview. 'My dear friend, Miss Baddeley,' she began, when Miss Baddeley took her
hand, and held it, as if for protection and sympathy. 'My dear friend,'
repeated Miss Crofton, 'has asked me to accompany her, and state her
case. She is too highly strung to speak for herself.' Miss Baddeley wrung Miss Crofton's hand, and visibly quivered. Merton assumed an air of sympathy. 'The situation is grave?' he asked. 'My friend,' said Miss Crofton, thoroughly enjoying herself, 'is the
victim of passionate and unavailing remorse, are you not, Julia?' Julia
nodded. 'Deeply as I sympathise,' said Merton, 'it appears to me that I am
scarcely the person to consult. A mother now--'

'Julia has none.' 'Or a father or sister?' 'But for me, Julia is alone in the world.' 'Then,' said Merton, 'there are many periodicals especially intended for
ladies. There is _The Woman of the World_, _The Girl's Guardian Angel_,
_Fashion and Passion_, and so on. The Editors, in their columns, reply
to questions in cases of conscience. I have myself read the replies to
_Correspondents_, and would especially recommend those published in a
serial conducted by Miss Annie Swan.' Miss Crofton shook her head. 'Miss Baddeley's social position is not that of the people who are
answered in periodicals.' 'Then why does she not consult some discreet and learned person, her
spiritual director? Remorse (entirely due, no doubt, to a conscience too
delicately sensitive) is not in our line of affairs. We only advise in
cases of undesirable matrimonial engagements.' 'So we are aware,' said Miss Crofton. 'Dear Julia _is_ engaged, or
rather entangled, in--how many cases, dear?' Julia shook her head and sobbed behind her veil. 'Is it one, Julia--nod when I come to the exact number--two? three? four?' At the word 'four' Julia nodded assent. Merton very much wished that Julia would raise her veil. Her figure was
excellent, and with so many sins of this kind on her remorseful head, her
face, Merton thought, must be worth seeing. The case was new. As a
rule, clients wanted to disentangle their friends and relations. _This_
client wanted to disentangle herself. 'This case,' said Merton, 'will be difficult to conduct, and the expenses
would be considerable. I can hardly advise you to incur them. Our
ordinary method is to throw in the way of one or other of the engaged, or
entangled persons, some one who is likely to distract their affections;
of course,' he added, 'to a more eligible object. How can I hope to find
an object more eligible, Miss Crofton, than I must conceive your
interesting friend to be?' Miss Crofton caressingly raised Julia's veil. Before the victim of
remorse could bury her face in her hands, Merton had time to see that it
was a very pretty one. Julia was dark, pale, with 'eyes like billiard
balls' (as a celebrated amateur once remarked), with a beautiful mouth,
but with a somewhat wildly enthusiastic expression. 'How can I hope?' Merton went on, 'to find a worthier and more attractive
object? Nay, how can I expect to secure the services not of one, but of
_four_--'

'Three would do, Mr. Merton,' explained Miss Crofton. 'Is it not so,
Julia dearest?' Julia again nodded assent, and a sob came from behind the veil, which she
had resumed. 'Even three,' said Merton, gallantly struggling with a strong inclination
to laugh, 'present difficulties. I do not speak the idle language of
compliment, Miss Crofton, when I say that our staff would be overtaxed by
the exigencies of this case. The expense also, even of three--'

'Expense is no object,' said Miss Crofton. 'But would it not, though I seem to speak against my own interests, be
the wisest, most honourable, and infinitely the least costly course, for
Miss Baddeley openly to inform her suitors, three out of the four at
least, of the actual posture of affairs? I have already suggested that,
as the lady takes the matter so seriously to heart, she should consult
her director, or, if of the Anglican or other Protestant denomination,
her clergyman, who I am sure will agree with me.' Miss Crofton shook her head. 'Julia is unattached,' she said. 'I had gathered that to one of the four Miss Baddeley was--not
indifferent,' said Merton. 'I meant,' said Miss Crofton severely, 'that Miss Baddeley is a Christian
unattached. My friend is sensitive, passionate, and deeply religious,
but not a member of any recognised denomination. The clergy--'

'They never leave one alone,' said Julia in a musical voice. It was the
first time that she had spoken. 'Besides--' she added, and paused. 'Besides, dear Julia _is_--entangled with a young clergyman whom, almost
in despair, she consulted on her case--at a picnic,' said Miss Crofton,
adding, 'he is prepared to seek a martyr's fate, but he insists that she
must accompany him.' 'How unreasonable!' murmured Merton, who felt that this recalcitrant
clergyman was probably not the favourite out of the field of four. 'That is what _I_ say,' remarked Miss Crofton. 'It is unreasonable to
expect Julia to accompany him when she has so much work to overtake in
the home field. But that is the way with all of them.' 'All of them!' exclaimed Merton. 'Are all the devoted young men under
vows to seek the crown of martyrdom? Does your friend act as recruiting
sergeant, if you will pardon the phrase, for the noble army of martyrs?' '_Three_ of them have made the most solemn promises.' 'And the fourth?' '_He_ is not in holy orders.' 'Am I to understand that all the three admirers about whom Miss Baddeley
suffers remorse are clerics?' 'Yes. Julia has a wonderful attraction for the Church,' said Miss
Crofton, 'and that is what causes her difficulties. She _can't_ write to
_them_, or communicate to _them_ in personal interviews (as you advised),
that her heart is no longer--'

'Theirs,' said Merton. 'But why are the clergy more privileged than the
laity? I have heard of such things being broken to laymen. Indeed it
has occurred to many of us, and we yet live.' 'I have urged the same facts on Julia myself,' said Miss Crofton. 'Indeed
I _know_, by personal experience, that what you say of the laity is true. They do not break their hearts when disappointed. But Julia replies that
for her to act as you and I would advise might be to shatter the young
clergymen's ideals.' 'To shatter the ideals of three young men in holy orders!' said Merton. 'Yes, for Julia _is_ their ideal--Julia and Duty,' said Miss Crofton, as
if she were naming a firm. 'She lives only,' here Julia twisted the hand
of Miss Crofton, 'she lives only to do good. Her fortune, entirely under
her own control, enables her to do a great deal of good.' Merton began to understand that the charms of Julia were not entirely
confined to her _beaux yeux_. 'She is a true philanthropist. Why, she rescued _me_ from the snares and
temptations of the stage,' said Miss Crofton. 'Oh, _now_ I understand,' said Merton; 'I knew that your face and voice
were familiar to me. Did you not act in a revival of _The Country
Wife_?' 'Hush,' said Miss Crofton. 'And Lady Teazle at an amateur performance in the Canterbury week?' 'These are days of which I do not desire to be reminded,' said Miss
Crofton. 'I was trying to explain to you that Julia lives to do good,
and has a heart of gold. No, my dear, Mr. Merton will much misconceive
you unless you let me explain everything.' This remark was in reply to
the agitated gestures of Julia. 'Thrown much among the younger clergy in
the exercise of her benevolence, Julia naturally awakens in them emotions
not wholly brotherly. Her sympathetic nature carries her off her feet,
and she sometimes says "Yes," out of mere goodness of heart, when it
would be wiser for her to say "No"; don't you, Julia?' Merton was reminded of one of M. Paul Bourget's amiable married heroines,
who erred out of sheer goodness of heart, but he only signified his
intelligence and sympathy. 'Then poor Julia,' Miss Crofton went on hurriedly, 'finds that she has
misunderstood her heart. Recently, ever since she met Captain
Lestrange--of the Guards--'

'The fourth?' asked Merton. Miss Crofton nodded. 'She has felt more and more certain that she _had_
misread her heart. But on each occasion she _has_ felt this--after
meeting the--well, the next one.' 'I see the awkwardness,' murmured Merton. 'And then Remorse has set in, with all her horrors. Julia has wept, oh! for nights, on my shoulder.' 'Happy shoulder,' murmured Merton. 'And so, as she _dare_ not shatter their ideals, and perhaps cause them
to plunge into excesses, moral or doctrinal, this is what she has done. She has said to each, that what the Church, any Church, needs is martyrs,
and that if they will go to benighted lands, where the crown of martyrdom
may still be won, _then_, if they return safe in five years, then
she--will think of naming a day. You will easily see the attractions of
this plan for Julia, Mr. Merton. No ideals were shattered, the young men
being unaware of the circumstances. They _might_ forget her--'

'Impossible,' cried Merton. 'They might forget her, or, perhaps they--'

Miss Crofton hesitated. 'Perhaps they might never--?' asked Merton.