'Learning ping-pong easily?' asked Merton. 'I have more hopes of teaching Miss Macrae the essential and intimate
elements of Celtic poetry,' said Blake. 'One box of books I brought with
me, another arrived to-day. I am about to begin on my Celtic drama of
"Con of the Hundred Battles."' 'Have you the works of the ancient Sennachie, Macfootle?' asked Merton. He was jealous, and his usual urbanity was sorely tried by the Irish
bard. In short, he was rude; stupid, too. However, Blake had his revenge after dinner, on the roof of the
observatory, where the ladies gathered round him in the faint silver
light, looking over the sleeping sea. 'Far away to the west,' he said,
'lies the Celtic paradise, the Isle of Apples!' 'American apples are excellent,' said Merton, but the beauty of the scene
and natural courtesy caused Miss Macrae to whisper 'Hush!' The poet went on, 'May I speak to you the words of the emissary from the
lovely land?' 'The mysterious female?' said Merton brutally. 'Dr. Hyde calls her "a
mysterious female." It is in his _Literary History of Ireland_.' 'Pray let us hear the poem, Mr. Merton,' said Miss Macrae, attuned to the
charm of the hour and the scene. 'She came to Bran's Court,' said Blake, 'from the Isle of Apples, and no
man knew whence she came, and she chanted to them.' 'Twenty-eight quatrains, no less, a hundred and twelve lines,' said the
insufferable Merton. 'Could you give us them in Gaelic?' The bard went on, not noticing the interruption, 'I shall translate

   'There is a distant isle
   Around which sea horses glisten,
   A fair course against the white swelling surge,
   Four feet uphold it.' 'Feet of white bronze under it.' 'White bronze, what's that, eh?' asked the practical Mr. Macrae. 'Glittering through beautiful ages! Lovely land through the world's age,
   On which the white blossoms drop.' 'Beautiful!' said Miss Macrae. 'There are twenty-six more quatrains,' said Merton. The bard went on,

   'A beautiful game, most delightful
   They play--'

'Ping-pong?' murmured Merton. 'Hush!' said Lady Bude. Miss Macrae turned to the poet. 'They play, sitting at the luxurious wine,
   Men and gentle women under a bush,
   Without sin, without crime.' 'They are playing still,' Blake added. 'Unbeheld, undisturbed! I verily
believe there is no Gael even now who would not in his heart of hearts
let drift by him the Elysiums of Virgil, Dante, and Milton, to grasp at
the Moy Mell, the Apple Isle, of the unknown Irish pagan! And then to
play sitting at the luxurious wine,

   'Men and gentle women under a bush!' 'It really cannot have been ping-pong that they played at, _sitting_. Bridge, more likely,' said Merton. 'And "good wine needs no bush!"' The bard moved away, accompanied by his young hostess, who resented
Merton's cynicism

'Tell me more of that lovely poem, Mr. Blake,' she said. 'I am jangled and out of tune,' said Blake wildly. 'The Sassenach is my
torture! Let me take your hand, it is cool as the hands of the
foam-footed maidens of--of--what's the name of the place?' 'Was it Clonmell?' asked Miss Macrae, letting him take her hand. He pressed it against his burning brow. 'Though you laugh at me,' said Blake, 'sometimes you are kind! I am
upset--I hardly know myself. What is yonder shape skirting the lawn? Is
it the Daoine Sidh?' 'Why do you call her "the downy she"? She is no more artful than other
people. She is my maid, Elspeth Mackay,' answered Miss Macrae, puzzled. They were alone, separated from the others by the breadth of the roof. 'I said the _Daoine Sidh_,' replied the poet, spelling the words. 'It
means the People of Peace.' 'Quakers?' 'No, the fairies,' groaned the misunderstood bard. 'Do you know nothing
of your ancestral tongue? Do you call yourself a Gael?' 'Of course I call myself a girl,' answered Miss Macrae. 'Do you want me
to call myself a young lady?' The poet sighed. 'I thought _you_ understood me,' he said. 'Ah, how to
escape, how to reach the undiscovered West!' 'But Columbus discovered it,' said Miss Macrae. 'The undiscovered West of the Celtic heart's desire,' explained the bard;
'the West below the waters! Thither could we twain sail in the magic
boat of Bran! Ah see, the sky opens like a flower!' Indeed, there was a sudden glow of summer lightning. 'That looks more like rain,' said Merton, who was standing with the Budes
at an opposite corner of the roof. 'I say, Merton,' asked Bude, 'how can you be so uncivil to that man? He
took it very well.' 'A rotter,' said Merton. 'He has just got that stuff by heart, the verse
and a lot of the prose, out of a book that I brought down myself, and
left in the smoking-room. I can show you the place if you like.' 'Do, Mr. Merton. But how foolish you are! _do_ be civil to the man,'
whispered Lady Bude, who shared his disbelief in Blake; and at that
moment the tinkle of an electric bell in the smoking-room below reached
the expectant ears of Mr. Macrae. 'Come down, all of you,' he said. 'The wireless telegraphy is at work.' He waited till they were all in the smoking-room, and feverishly examined
the tape. 'Escape of De Wet,' he read. 'Disasters to the Imperial Yeomanry. Strike
of Cigarette Makers. Great Fire at Hackney.' 'There!' he exclaimed triumphantly. 'We might have gone to bed in
London, and not known all that till we got the morning papers to-morrow. And here we are fifty miles from a railway station or a telegraph
office--no, we're nearer Inchnadampf.' 'Would that I were in the Isle of Apples, Mell Moy, far, far from
civilisation!' said Blake. "There shall be no grief there or sorrow," so sings the minstrel of _The
Wooing of Etain_. "Fresh flesh of swine, banquets of new milk and ale shalt thou have with
me then, fair lady," Merton read out from the book he had been speaking
of to the Budes. 'Jolly place, the Celtic Paradise! Fresh flesh of swine, banquets of ale
and new milk. _Quel luxe_!' 'Is that the kind of entertainment you were offering me, Mr. Blake?' asked Miss Macrae gaily. 'Mr. Blake,' she went on, 'has been inviting me
to fly to the undiscovered West beneath the waters, in the magic boat of
Bran.' 'Did Bran invent the submarine?' asked Mr. Macrae, and then the company
saw what they had never seen before, the bard blushing. He seemed so
discomposed that Miss Macrae took compassion on him. 'Never mind my father, Mr. Blake,' she said, 'he is a very good
Highlander, and believes in Eachain of the Hairy Arm as much as the
crofters do. Have you heard of Eachain, Mr. Blake? He is a spectre in
full Highland costume, attached to our clan. When we came here first, to
look round, we had only horses hired from Edinburgh, and a Lowlander--mark
you, a _Lowlander_--to drive. He was in the stable one afternoon--the
old stable, we have pulled it down--when suddenly the horses began to
kick and rear. He looked round to the open door, and there stood a huge
Highlander in our tartans, with musket, pistols, claymore, dirk, skian,
and all, and soft brogues of untanned leather on his feet. The coachman,
in a panic, made a blind rush at the figure, but behold, there was
nobody, and a boy outside had seen no man. The horses were trembling and
foaming. Now it was a Lowlander from Teviotdale that saw the man, and
the crofters were delighted. They said the figure was the chief that
fell at Culloden, come to welcome us back. So you must not despair of
us, Mr. Blake, and you, that have "the sight," may see Eachain yourself,
who knows?' This happy turn of the conversation exactly suited Blake. He began to be
very amusing about magic, and brownies, and 'the downy she,' as Miss
Macrae called the People of Peace. The ladies presently declared that
they were afraid to go to bed; so they went, Miss Macrae indicating her
displeasure to Merton by the coldness of her demeanour. The men, who were rather dashed by the pleasant intelligence which the
telegraph had communicated, sat up smoking for a while, and then retired
in a subdued state of mind. Next morning, which was Sunday, Merton appeared rather late at breakfast,
late and pallid. After a snatch of disturbed slumber, he had wakened, or
seemed to waken, fretting a good deal over the rusticity of his bearing
towards Blake, and over his hopeless affair of the heart. He had vexed
his lady. 'If he is good enough for his hosts, he ought to be good
enough for their guests,' thought Merton. 'What a brute, what a fool I
am; I ought to go. I will go! I ought not to take coffee after dinner,
I know I ought not, and I smoke too much,' he added, and finally he went
to breathe the air on the roof. The night was deadly soft and still, a slight mist hid the furthest
verges of the sea's horizon. Behind it, the summer lightning seemed like
portals that opened and shut in the heavens, revealing a glory without
form, and closing again. 'I don't wonder that these Irish poets dreamed of Isles of Paradise out
there:

   'Lands undiscoverable in the unheard-of West,
   Round which the strong stream of a sacred sea
   Runs without wind for ever.' thought Merton. 'Chicago is the realisation of their dream. Hullo,
there are the lights of a big steamer, and a very low one behind it! Queer craft!' Merton watched the lights that crossed the sea, when either the haze
deepened or the fainter light on the smaller vessel vanished, and the
larger ship steamed on in a southerly direction. 'Magic boat of Bran!' thought Merton. He turned and entered the staircase to go back to his
room. There was a lift, of course, but, equally of course, there was
nobody to manage it. Merton, who had a lighted bedroom-candle in his
hand, descended the spiral staircase; at a turning he thought he saw,
'with the tail of his eye,' a plaid, draping a tall figure of a
Highlander, disappear round the corner. Nobody in the castle wore the
kilt except the piper, and he had not rooms in the observatory. Merton
ran down as fast as he could, but he did not catch another view of the
plaid and its wearer, or hear any footsteps. He went to the bottom of
the staircase, opened the outer door, and looked forth. Nobody! The
electric light from the open door of his own room blazed across the
landing on his return. All was perfectly still, and Merton remembered
that he had not heard the footsteps of the appearance. 'Was it Eachain?' he asked himself. 'Do I sleep, do I dream?' He went back to bed and slumbered uneasily. He seemed to be awake in his
room, in broad light, and to hear a slow drip, drip, on the floor. He
looked up; the roof was stained with a great dark splash of a crimson
hue. He got out of bed, and touched the wet spot on the floor under the
blotch on the ceiling. His fingers were reddened with blood! He woke at the horror of it: found
himself in bed in the dark, pressed an electric knob, and looked at the
ceiling. It was dry and white. 'I certainly have been smoking too much
lately,' thought Merton, and, switching off the light, he slumbered
again, so soundly that he did not hear the piper playing round the house,
or the man who brought his clothes and hot water, or the gong for
breakfast. When he did wake, he was surprised at the lateness of the hour, and
dressed as rapidly as possible. 'I wonder if I was dreaming when I
thought that I went out on the roof, and saw mountains and marvels,' said
Merton to himself. 'A queer thing, the human mind,' he reflected sagely. It occurred to him to enter the smoking-room on his way downstairs. He
routed two maids who perhaps had slept too late, and were hurriedly
making the room tidy. The sun was beating in at the window, and Merton
noticed some tiny glittering points of white metallic light on the carpet
near the new telegraphic apparatus. 'I don't believe these lazy Highland
Maries have swept the room properly since the electric machine was put
up,' Merton thought. He hastily seized, and took to his chamber, his
book on old Irish literature, which was too clearly part of Blake's
Celtic inspiration. Merton wanted no more quatrains, but he did mean to
try to be civil. He then joined the party at breakfast; he admitted that
he had slept ill, but, when asked by Blake, disclaimed having seen
Eachain of the Hairy Arm, and did not bore or bewilder the company with
his dreams. Miss Macrae, in sabbatical raiment, was fresher than a rose and gay as a
lark. Merton tried not to look at her; he failed in this endeavour. II. Lost


The day was Sunday, and Merton, who had a holy horror of news, rejoiced
to think that the telegraphic machine would probably not tinkle its bell
for twenty-four hours. This was not the ideal of the millionaire. Things
happen, intelligence arrives from the limits of our vast and desirable
empire, even on the Day of Rest. But the electric bell was silent. Mr.
Macrae, from patriotic motives, employed a Highland engineer and
mechanician, so there was nothing to be got out of him in the way of work
on the sabbath day. The millionaire himself did not quite understand how
to work the thing. He went to the smoking-room where it dwelt and looked
wistfully at it, but was afraid to try to call up his correspondents in
London. As for the usual manipulator, Donald McDonald, he had started
early for the distant Free Kirk. An 'Unionist' minister intended to try
to preach himself in, and the majority of the congregation, being of the
old Free Kirk rock, and averse to union with the United Presbyterians,
intended to try to keep him out. They 'had a lad with the gift who would
do the preaching fine,' and as there was no police-station within forty
miles it seemed fairly long odds on the Free Kirk recalcitrants. However,
there was a resolute minority of crofters on the side of the minister,
and every chance of an ecclesiastical battle royal. Accompanied by the
stalker, two keepers, and all the gardeners, armed with staves, the
engineer had early set out for the scene of brotherly amity, and Mr.
Macrae had reluctantly to admit that he was cut off from his
communications. Merton, who was with him in the smoking-room, mentally absolved the
Highland housemaids. If they had not swept up the tiny glittering
metallic points on the carpet before, they had done so now. Only two or
three caught his eye. Mr. Macrae, avid of news, accommodated himself in an arm-chair with
newspapers of two or three days old, from which he had already sucked the
heart by aid of his infernal machine. The Budes and Blake, with Miss
Macrae (an Anglican), had set off to walk to the Catholic chapel, some
four miles away, for crofting opinion was resolute against driving on the
Lord's Day. Merton, self-denying and resolved, did not accompany his
lady; he read a novel, wrote letters, and felt desolate. All was peace,
all breathed of the Sabbath calm. 'Very odd there's no call from the machine,' said Mr. Macrae anxiously. 'It is Sunday,' said Merton. 'Still, they might send us something.' 'They scarcely favoured us last Sunday,' said Merton. 'No, and now I think of it, not at all on the Sunday before,' said Mr.
Macrae. 'I dare say it is all right.' 'Would a thunder-storm further south derange it?' asked Merton, adding,
'There was a lot of summer lightning last night.' 'That might be it; these things have their tempers. But they are a great
comfort. I can't think how we ever did without them,' said Mr. Macrae,
as if these things were common in every cottage. 'Wonderful thing,
science!' he added, in an original way, and Merton, who privately
detested science, admitted that it was so. 'Shall we go to see the horses?' suggested Mr. Macrae, and they did go
and stare, as is usual on Sunday in the country, at the hind-quarters of
these noble animals. Merton strove to be as much interested as possible
in Mr. Macrae's stories of his fleet American trotters. But his heart
was otherwhere. 'They will soon be an extinct species,' said Mr. Macrae. 'The motor has come to stay.' Merton was not feeling very well, he was afraid of a cigarette, Mr.
Macrae's conversation was not brilliant, and Merton still felt as if he
were under the wrath, so well deserved, of his hostess. She did not
usually go to the Catholic chapel; to be sure, in the conditions
prevailing at the Free Kirk place of worship, she had no alternative if
she would not abstain wholly from religious privileges. But Merton felt
sure that she had really gone to comfort and console the injured feelings
of Blake. Probably she would have had a little court of lordlings,
Merton reflected (not that Mr. Macrae had any taste for them), but
everybody knew that, what with the weather, and the crofters, and the
grouse disease, the sport at Castle Skrae was remarkably bad. So the
party was tiny, though a number of people were expected later, and Merton
and the heiress had been on what, as he ruefully reflected, were very
kind terms--rather more than kind, he had hoped, or feared, now and then. Merton saw that he had annoyed her, and thrown her, metaphorically
speaking, into the arms of the Irish minstrel. All the better, perhaps,
he thought, ruefully. The poet was handsome enough to be one that
'limners loved to paint, and ladies to look upon.' He generally took
chaff well, and could give it, as well as take it, and there were hours
when his sentiment and witchery had a chance with most women. 'But Lady
Bude says there is nothing in it, and women usually know,' he reflected. Well, he must leave the girl, and save his self-respect. When nothing more in the way of pottering could be done at the stables,
when its proprietor had exhausted the pleasure of staring at the balloon
in its hall, and had fed the fowls, he walked with Merton down the
avenue, above the shrunken burn that whispered among its ferns and
alders, to meet the returning church-goers. The Budes came first,
together; they were still, they were always, honeymooning. Mr. Macrae
turned back with Lady Bude; Merton walked with Bude, Blake and Miss
Macrae were not yet in sight. He thought of walking on to meet them--but
no, it must not be. 'Blake owes you a rare candle, Merton,' said Bude, adding, 'A great deal
may be done, or said, in a long walk by a young man with his advantages. And if you had not had your knife in him last night I do not think she
would have accompanied us this morning to attend the ministrations of
Father McColl. He preached in Gaelic.' 'That must have been edifying,' said Merton, wincing. 'The effect, when one does not know the language, and is within six feet
of an energetic Celt in the pulpit, is rather odd,' said Bude. 'But you
have put your foot in it, not a doubt of that.' This appeared only too probable. The laggards arrived late for luncheon,
and after luncheon Miss Macrae allowed Blake to read his manuscript poems
to her in the hall, and to discuss the prospects of the Celtic drama. Afterwards, fearing to hurt the religious sentiments of the Highland
servants by playing ping-pong on Sunday in the hall, she instructed him
elsewhere, and clandestinely, in that pastime till the hour of tea
arrived. Merton did not appear at the tea-table. Tired of this Castle of
Indolence, loathing Blake, afraid of more talk with Lady Bude, eating his
own heart, he had started alone after luncheon for a long walk round the
loch. The day had darkened, and was deadly still; the water was like a
mirror of leaden hue; the air heavy and sulphurous. These atmospheric phenomena did not gladden the heart of Merton. He knew
that rain was coming, but he would not be with _her_ by the foaming
stream, or on the black waves of the loch. Climbing to the top of the
hill, he felt sure that a storm was at hand. On the east, far away,
Clibrig, and Suilvean of the double peak, and the round top of Ben More,
stood shadowy above the plain against the lurid light. Over the sea hung
'the ragged rims of thunder' far away, veiling in thin shadow the
outermost isles, whose mountain crests looked dark as indigo. A few hot
heavy drops of rain were falling as Merton began to descend. He was
soaked to the skin when he reached the door of the observatory, and
rushed up stairs to dress for dinner. A covered way led from the
observatory to the Castle, so that he did not get drenched again on his
return, which he accomplished punctually as the gong for dinner sounded. In the drawing-room were the Budes, and Mr. Macrae was nervously pacing
the length and breadth of the room. 'They must have taken refuge from the rain somewhere,' Lady Bude was
saying, and 'they' were obviously Blake and the daughter of the house. Where were they? Merton's heart sank with a foolish foreboding. 'I know,' the lady went on, 'that they were only going down to the
cove--where you and I were yesterday evening, Mr. Merton. It is no
distance.' 'A mile and a half is a good deal in this weather, said Merton, 'and
there is no cottage on this side of the sea loch. But they must have
taken shelter,' he added; he must not seem anxious. At this moment came a flash of lightning, followed by a crack like that
of a cosmic whip-lash, and a long reverberating roar of thunder. 'It is most foolish to have stayed out so late,' said Mr. Macrae. 'Any
one could see that a storm was coming. I told them so, I am really
annoyed.' Every one was silent, the rain fell straight and steady, the gravel in
front of the window was a series of little lakes, pale and chill in the
wan twilight. 'I really think I must send a couple of men down with cloaks and
umbrellas,' said the nervous father, pressing an electric knob. The butler appeared. 'Are Donald and Sandy and Murdoch about?' asked Mr. Macrae. 'Not returned from church, sir;' said the butler. 'There was likely to be a row at the Free Kirk,' said Mr. Macrae,
absently. 'You must go yourself, Benson, with Archibald and James. Take cloaks and
umbrellas, and hurry down towards the cove. Mr. Blake and Miss Macrae
have probably found shelter on the way somewhere.' The butler answered, 'Yes, sir;' but he cannot have been very well
pleased with his errand. Merton wanted to offer to go, anything to be
occupied; but Bude said nothing, and so Merton did not speak. The four in the drawing-room sat chatting nervously: 'There was nothing
of course to be anxious about,' they told each other. The bolt of heaven
never strikes the daughters of millionaires; Miss Macrae was indifferent
to a wetting, and nobody cared tremulously about Blake. Indeed the words
'confound the fellow' were in the minds of the three men. The evening darkened rapidly, the minutes lagged by, the clock chimed the
half-hour, three-quarters, nine o'clock. Mr. Macrae was manifestly growing more and more nervous, Merton forgot to
grow more and more hungry. His tongue felt dry and hard; he was afraid
of he knew not what, but he bravely tried to make talk with Lady Bude. The door opened, letting the blaze of electric light from the hall into
the darkling room. They all turned eagerly towards the door. It was
only one of the servants. Merton's heart felt like lead. 'Mr. Benson
has returned, sir; he would be glad if he might speak to you for a
moment.' 'Where is he?' asked Mr. Macrae. 'At the outer door, sir, in the porch. He is very wet.' Mr. Macrae went out; the others found little to say to each other. 'Very awkward,' muttered Bude. 'They cannot have been climbing the
cliffs, surely.' 'The bridge is far above the highest water-mark of the burn, in case they
crossed the water,' said Merton. Lady Bude was silent. Mr. Macrae returned. 'Benson has come back,' he said, 'to say that he
can find no trace of them. The other men are still searching.' 'Can they have had themselves ferried across the sea loch to the village
opposite?' asked Merton. 'Emmiline had not the key of our boat,' said Mr. Macrae, 'I have made
sure of that; and not a man in the village would launch a boat on
Sunday.' 'We must go and help to search for them,' said Merton; he only wished to
be doing something, anything. 'I shall not be a minute in changing my dress.' Bude also volunteered, and in a few minutes, having drunk a glass of wine
and eaten a crust of bread, they and Mr. Macrae were hurrying towards the
cove. The storm was passing; by the time when they reached the sea-side
there were rifts of clear light in the sky above them. They had walked
rapidly and silently, the swollen stream roaring beneath them. It had
rained torrents in the hills. There was nothing to be said, but the mind
of each man was busy with the gloomiest conjectures. These had to be far-
fetched, for in a country so thinly peopled, and so honest and friendly,
within a couple of miles at most from home, on a Sunday evening, what
conceivable harm could befall a man and a maid? 'Can we trust the man?' was in Merton's mind. 'If they have been ferried
across to the village, they would have set out to return before now,' he
said aloud; but there was no boat on the faint silver of the sea loch. 'The cliffs are the likeliest place for an accident, if there _was_ an
accident,' he considered, with a pang. The cliffs might have tempted the
light-footed girl. In fancy he saw her huddled, a ghastly heap, the
faint wind fluttering the folds of her dress, at the bottom of the rocks. She had been wearing a long skirt, not her wont in the Highlands; it
would be dangerous to climb in that; she might have forgotten, climbed,
and caught her foot, and fallen. 'Blake may have snatched at her, and been dragged down with her,' Merton
thought. All the horrid fancies of keen anxiety flitted across his
mind's eye. He paused, and made an effort over himself. There _must_ be
some other harmless explanation, an adventure to laugh at--for Blake and
the girl. Poor comfort, that! The men who had been searching were scattered about the sides of the
cove, and, distinguishing the new-comers, gathered towards them. 'No,' they said, 'they had found nothing except a little book that seemed
to belong to Mr. Blake.' It had been discovered near the place where Merton and Lady Bude were
sitting on the previous evening. When found it was lying open, face
downwards. In the faint light Merton could see that the book was full of
manuscript poems, the lines all blotted and run together by the tropical
rain. He thrust it into the pocket of his ulster. Merton took the most intelligent of the gillies aside. 'Show me where
you have searched,' he said. The man pointed to the shores of the cove;
they had also examined the banks of the burn, and under all the trees,
clearly fearing that the lost pair might have been lightning-struck, like
the nymph and swain in Pope's poem. 'You have not searched the cliffs?' asked Merton. 'No, sir,' said the man. Merton then went to Mr. Macrae, and suggested that the boat should be
sent across the sea ferry, to try if anything could be learned in the
village. Mr. Macrae agreed, and himself went in the boat, which was
presently unmoored, and pulled by two gillies across the loch, that ran
like a river with the outgoing tide. Merton and Bude began to search the cliffs; Merton could hear the hoarse
pumping of his own heart. The cliff's base was deep in flags and
bracken, then the rocks began climbing to the foot of the perpendicular
basaltic crag. The sky, fortunately, was now clear in the west, and lent
a wan light to the seekers. Merton had almost reached the base of the
cliff, when, in the deep bracken, he stumbled over something soft. He
stooped and held back the tall fronds of bracken. It was the body of a man; the body did not stir. Merton glanced to see
the face, but the face was bent round, leaning half on the earth. It was
Blake. Merton's guess seemed true. They had fallen from the cliffs! But
where was that other body? Merton yelled to Bude. Blake seemed dead or
insensible. Merton (he was ashamed of it presently) left the body of Blake alone; he
plunged wildly in and out of the bracken, still shouting to Bude, and
looking for that which he feared to find. She could not be far off. He
stumbled over rocks, into rabbit holes, he dived among the soaked
bracken. Below and around he hunted, feverishly panting, then he set his
face to the sheer cliff, to climb; she might be lying on some higher
ledge, the shadow on the rocks was dark. At this moment Bude hailed him. 'Come down!' he cried, 'she cannot be there!' 'Why not?' he gasped, arriving at the side of Bude, who was stooping,
with a lantern in his hand, over the body of Blake, which faintly
stirred. 'Look!' said Bude, lowering the lantern. Then Merton saw that Blake's hands were bound down beside his body, and
that the cords were fastened by pegs to the ground. His feet were
fastened in the same way, and his mouth was stuffed full of wet seaweed. Bude pulled out the improvised gag, cut the ropes, turned the face
upwards, and carefully dropped a little whisky from his flask into the
mouth. Blake opened his eyes. 'Where are my poems?' he asked. 'Where is Miss Macrae?' shrieked Merton in agony. 'Damn the midges,' said Blake (his face was hardly recognisable from
their bites). 'Oh, damn them all!' He had fainted again. 'She has been carried off,' groaned Merton. Bude and he did all that
they knew for poor Blake. They rubbed his ankles and wrists, they
administered more whisky, and finally got him to sit up. He scratched
his hands over his face and moaned, but at last he recovered full
consciousness. No sense could be extracted from him, and, as the boat
was now visible on its homeward track, Bude and Merton carried him down
to the cove, anxiously waiting Mr. Macrae. He leaped ashore. 'Have you heard anything?' asked Bude. 'They saw a boat on the loch about seven o'clock,' said Mr. Macrae,
'coming from the head of it, touching here, and then pulling west, round
the cliff. They thought the crew Sabbath-breakers from the lodge at Alt
Garbh. What's that,' he cried, at last seeing Blake, who lay supported
against a rock, his eyes shut. Merton rapidly explained. 'It is as I thought,' said Mr. Macrae resolutely. 'I knew it from the
first. They have kidnapped her for a ransom. Let us go home.' Merton and Bude were silent; they, too, had guessed, as soon as they
discovered Blake. The girl was her father's very life, and they admired
his resolution, his silence.