You
have no longer the right of Pit and Gallows. Before what magistrate can
you take him, and where? The sheriff-substitute may be at Golspie, or
Tongue, or Dingwall, or I don't know where. What can we do? What have
we against the man? "Loitering with intent"? And here Logan and I have
knocked him down, and tied him up, and Logan wanted to torture him.' 'Dear Mr. Merton,' replied Mr. Macrae, with paternal tenderness, 'you are
overwrought. You have not slept all night. I must insist that you go to
bed, and do not rise till you are called. The man is certainly guilty of
conspiracy, that will be proved when the real Gianesi comes to hand. If
not, I do not doubt that I can secure his silence. You forget the power
of money. Make yourself easy, go to sleep; meanwhile I must re-establish
communications. Good-night, golden slumbers!' He wrung Merton's hand, and left him admiring the calm resolution of one
whose conversation, 'in the mad pride of intellectuality,' he had
recently despised. The millionaire, Merton felt, was worthy to be his
daughter's father. 'The power of money!' mused Mr. Macrae; 'what is it in circumstances like
mine? Surrounded by all the resources of science, I am baffled by a
clever rogue and in a civilised country the aid of the law and the police
is as remote and inaccessible as in the Great Sahara! But to business!' He sent for Benson, bade him, with some gillies, carry the prisoner into
the dungeon of the old castle, loose his bonds, place food before him,
and leave him in charge of the stalker. He informed Bude that breakfast
would be ready at eight, and then retired to his study, where he matured
his plans. The yacht he would send to Lochinver to await the real Gianesi there, and
to send telegrams descriptive of Blake in all directions. Giambresi must
be telegraphed to again, and entreated to come in person, with yet
another electric machine, for that brought by the false Gianesi had been,
by the same envoy, rendered useless. A mounted man must be despatched to
Lairg to collect vehicles and transport there, and to meet the real
Gianesi if he came that way. Thus Mr. Macrae, with cool patience and
forethought, endeavoured to recover his position, happy in the reflection
that treachery had at last been eliminated. He did not forget to write
telegrams to remote sheriff-substitutes and procurators fiscal. As to the kidnappers, he determined to amuse them with protracted
negotiations on the subject of his daughter's ransom. These would be
despatched, of course, by the wireless engine which was in tune and touch
with their own. During the parleyings the wretches might make some
blunder, and Mr. Macrae could perhaps think out some plan for their
detection and capture, without risk to his daughter. If not, he must pay
ransom. Having written out his orders and telegrams, Mr. Macrae went downstairs
to visit the stables. He gave his commands to his servants, and, as he
returned, he met Logan, who had been on the watch for him. 'I am myself again, Mr. Macrae,' said Logan, smiling. 'After all, we are
living in the twentieth century, not the sixteenth, worse luck! And now
can you give me your attention for a few minutes?' 'Willingly,' said Mr. Macrae, and they walked together to a point in the
garden where they were secure from being overheard. 'I must ask you to lend me a horse to ride to Lairg and the railway at
once,' said Logan. 'Must you leave us? You cannot, I fear, catch the 12.50 train south.' 'I shall take a special train if I cannot catch the one I want,' said
Logan, adding, 'I have a scheme for baffling these miscreants and
rescuing Miss Macrae, while disappointing them of the monstrous ransom
which they are certain to claim. If you can trust me, you will enter
into protracted negotiations with them on the matter through the wireless
machine.' 'That I had already determined to do,' said the millionaire. 'But may I
inquire what is your scheme?' 'Would it be asking too much to request you to let me keep it concealed,
even from you? Everything depends on the most absolute secrecy. It must
not appear that you are concerned--must not be suspected. My plan has
been suggested to me by trifling indications which no one else has
remarked. It is a plan which, I confess, appears wild, but what is _not_
wild in this unhappy affair? Science, as a rule beneficent, has given
birth to potentialities of crime which exceed the dreams of oriental
romance. But science, like the spear of Achilles, can cure the wounds
which herself inflicts.' Logan spoke calmly, but eloquently, as every reader must observe. He was
no longer the fierce Border baron of an hour agone, but the polished
modern gentleman. The millionaire marked the change. 'Any further mystery cannot but be distasteful, Lord Fastcastle,' said
Mr. Macrae. 'The truth is,' said Logan, 'that if my plan takes shape important
persons and interests will be involved. I myself will be involved, and,
for reasons both public and private, it seems to me to the last degree
essential that you should in no way appear; that you should be able,
honestly, to profess entire ignorance. If I fail, I give you my word of
honour that your position will be in no respect modified by my action. If
I succeed--'

'Then you will, indeed, be my preserver,' said the millionaire. 'Not I, but my friend, Mr. Merton,' said Logan, 'who, by the way, ought
to accompany me. In Mr. Merton's genius for success in adventures
entailing a mystery more dark, and personal dangers far greater, than
those involved by my scheme (which is really quite safe), I have
confidence based on large experience. To Merton alone I owe it that I am
a married, a happy, and, speaking to any one but yourself, I might say an
affluent man. This adventure must be achieved, if at all, _auspice
Merton_.' 'I also have much confidence in him, and I sincerely love him,' said Mr.
Macrae, to the delight of Logan. He then paced silently up and down in
deep thought. 'You say that your scheme involves you in no personal
danger?' he asked. 'In none, or only in such as men encounter daily in several professions. Merton and I like it.' 'And you will not suffer in character if you fail?' 'Certainly not in character; no gentleman of my coat ever entered on
enterprise so free from moral blame,' said Logan, 'since my ancestor and
namesake, Sir Robert, fell at the side of the good Lord James of Douglas,
above the Heart of Bruce.' He thrilled and changed colour as he spoke. 'Yet it would not do for _me_ to be known to be connected with the
enterprise?' asked Mr. Macrae. 'Indeed it would not! Your notorious opulence would arouse ideas in the
public mind, ideas false, indeed, but fatally compromising.' 'I may not even subsidise the affair--put a million to Mr. Merton's
account?' 'In no sort! Afterwards, _after_ he succeeds, then I don't say, if
Merton will consent; but that is highly improbable. I know my friend.' Mr. Macrae sighed deeply and remained pensive. 'Well,' he answered at
last, 'I accept your very gallant and generous proposal.' 'I am overjoyed!' said Logan. He had never been in such a big thing
before. 'I shall order my two best horses to be saddled after breakfast,' said
Mr. Macrae. 'You will bait at Inchnadampf.' 'Here is my address; this will always find me,' said Logan, writing
rapidly on a leaf of his note-book. 'You will wire all news of your negotiations with the pirates to me, by
the new wireless machine, when Giambresi brings it, and his firm in town
will telegraph it on to me, at the address I gave you, _in cypher_. To
save time, we must use a book cypher, we can settle it in the house in
ten minutes,' said Logan, now entirely in his element. They chose _The Bonnie Brier Bush_, by Mr. Ian Maclaren--a work too
popular to excite suspicion; and arranged the method of secret
correspondence with great rapidity. Logan then rushed up to Merton's
room, hastily communicated the scheme to him, and overcame his
objections, nay, awoke in him, by his report of Mr. Macrae's words, the
hopes of a lover. They came down to breakfast, and arranged that their
baggage should be sent after them as soon as communications were
restored. Merton contrived to have a brief interview with Lady Bude. Her joyous
spirit shone in her eyes. 'I do not know what Lord Fastcastle's plan is,' she said, 'but I wish you
good fortune. You have won the _father's_ heart, and now I am about to
be false to my sex'--she whispered--'the daughter's is all but your own! I can help you a little,' she added, and, after warmly clasping both her
hands in his, Merton hurried to the front of the house, where the horses
stood, and sprang into the saddle. No motors, no bicycles, no scientific
vehicles to-day; the clean wind piped to him from the mountains; a good
steed was between his thighs! Logan mounted, after entrusting Bouncer to
Lady Bude, and they galloped eastwards. V.  The Adventure of the Flora Macdonald


'This is the point indicated, latitude so and so, longitude so and so,'
said Mr Macrae. 'But I do not see a sail or a funnel on the western
horizon. Nothing since we left the Fleet behind us, far to the East. Yet
it is the hour. It is strange!' Mr. Macrae was addressing Bude. They stood together on the deck of the
_Flora Macdonald_, the vast yacht of the millionaire. She was lying to
on a sea as glassy and radiant, under a blazing August sun, as the
Atlantic can show in her mildest moods. On the quarter-deck of the yacht
were piled great iron boxes containing the millions in gold with which
the millionaire had at last consented to ransom his daughter. He had
been negotiating with her captors through the wireless machine, and, as
Logan could not promise any certain release, Mr. Macrae had finally
surrendered, while informing Logan of the circumstances and details of
his rendezvous with the kidnappers. The amassing of the gold had shaken
the exchanges of two worlds. Banks trembled, rates were enormous, but
the precious metal had been accumulated. The pirates would not take Mr.
Macrae's cheque; bank notes they laughed at, the millions must be paid in
gold. Now at last the gold was on the spot of ocean indicated by the
kidnappers, but there was no sign of sail or ship, no promise of their
coming. Men with telescopes in the rigging of the _Flora_ were on the
outlook in vain. They could pick up one of the floating giants of our
fleet, far off to the East, but North, West and South were empty wastes
of water. 'Three o'clock has come and gone. I hope there has been no accident,'
said Mr. Macrae nervously. 'But where are those thieves?' He absently
pressed his repeater, it tingled out the half-hour. 'It _is_ odd,' said Bude. 'Hullo, look there, what's _that_?' _That_ was a slim spar, which suddenly shot from the plain of ocean, at a
distance of a hundred yards. On its apex a small black hood twisted
itself this way and that like a living thing; so tranquil was the hour
that the spar with its dull hood was distinctly reflected in the mirror-
like waters of the ocean. 'By gad, it is the periscope of a submarine!' said Bude. There could not be a doubt of it. The invention of Napier of Merchistoun
and of M. Jules Verne, now at last an actual engine of human warfare, had
been employed by the kidnappers of the daughter of the millionaire! A light flashed on the mind, steady and serviceable, but not brilliantly
ingenious, of Mr. Macrae. 'This,' he exclaimed rather superfluously,
'accounts for the fiendish skill with which these miscreants took cover
when pursued by the Marine Police. _This_ explains the subtle art with
which they dodged observation. Doubtless they had always, somewhere, a
well-found normal yacht containing their supplies. Do you not agree with
me, my lord?' 'In my opinion,' said Bude, 'you have satisfactorily explained what has
so long puzzled us. But look! The periscope, having reconnoitred us, is
sinking again!' It was true. The slim spar gracefully descended to the abyss. Again
ocean smiled with innumerable laughters (as the Athenian sings), smiled,
empty, azure, effulgent! The _Flora Macdonald_ was once more alone on a
wide, wide sea! Two slight jars were now just felt by the owner, skipper, and crew of the
_Flora Macdonald_. 'What's that?' asked Mr. Macrae sharply. 'A reef?' 'In my opinion,' said the captain, 'the beggars in the submarine have
torpedoed us. Attached torpedoes to our keel, sir,' he explained,
respectfully touching his cap and shifting the quid in his cheek. He was
a bluff tar of the good old school. 'Merciful heavens!' exclaimed Mr. Macrae, his face paling. 'What can
this new outrage mean? Here on our deck is the gold; if they explode
their torpedoes the bullion sinks to join the exhaustless treasures of
the main!' 'A bit of bluff and blackmail on their part I fancy,' said Bude, lighting
a cigarette. 'No doubt! No doubt!' said Mr. Macrae, rather unsteadily. 'They would
never be such fools as to blow up the millions. Still, an accident might
have awful results.' 'Look there, sir, if you please,' said the captain of the _Flora
Macdonald_, 'there's that spar of theirs up again.' It was so. The spar, the periscope, shot up on the larboard side of the
yacht. After it had reconnoitred, the mirror of ocean was stirred into
dazzling circling waves, and the deck of a submarine slowly emerged. The
deck was long and flat, and of a much larger area than submarines in
general have. It would seem to indicate the presence below the water of
a body or hull of noble proportions. A voice hailed the yacht from the
submarine, though no speaker was visible. 'You have no consort?' the voice yelled. 'For ten years I have been a widower,' replied Mr. Macrae, his voice
trembling with emotion. 'Most sorry to have unintentionally awakened unavailing regrets,' came
the voice. 'But I mean, honour bright, you have no attendant armed
vessel?' 'None, I promised you so,' said Mr. Macrae; 'I am a man of my word. Come
on deck if you doubt me and look for yourself.' 'Not me, and get shot by a rifleman,' said the voice. 'It is very distressing to be distrusted in this manner,' replied Mr.
Macrae. 'Captain McClosky,' he said to the skipper, 'pray request all
hands to oblige me by going below.' The captain issued this order, which the yacht's crew rather reluctantly
obeyed. Their interest and curiosity were strongly excited by a scene
without precedent in the experience of the oldest mariner. When they had disappeared Mr. Macrae again addressed the invisible owner
of the voice. 'All my crew are below. Nobody is on deck but Captain
McClosky, the Earl of Bude, and myself. We are entirely unarmed. You
can see for yourself.' {406}

The owner of the voice replied: 'You have no torpedoes?' 'We have only the armament agreed upon by you to protect this immense
mass of bullion from the attacks of the unscrupulous,' said Mr. Macrae. 'I take heaven to witness that I am honourably observing every article of
our agreement, as _per_ yours of August 21.' 'All right,' answered the voice. 'I dare say you are honest. But I may
as well tell you _this_, that while passing under your yacht we attached
two slabs of gun-cotton to her keel. The knob connected with them is
under my hand. We placed them where they are, not necessarily for
publication--explosion, I mean--but merely as a guarantee of good faith. You understand?' 'Perfectly,' said Mr. Macrae, 'though I regard your proceeding as a fresh
and unmerited insult.' 'Merely a precaution usual in business,' said the voice. 'And now,' it
went on, 'for the main transaction. You will lower your gold into boats,
row it across, and land it here on my deck. When it is all there, _and_
has been inspected by me, you will send one boat rowed by _two men only_,
into which Miss Macrae shall be placed and sent back to you. When that
has been done we shall part, I hope, on friendly terms and with mutual
respect.' 'Captain McClosky,' said Mr. Macrae, 'will you kindly pipe all hands on
board to discharge cargo?' The captain obeyed. Mr. Macrae turned to Bude. 'This is a moment,' he said, 'which tries a
father's heart! Presently I must see Emmeline, hear her voice, clasp her
to my breast.' Bude mutely wrung the hand of the millionaire, and turned
away to conceal his emotion. Seldom, perhaps never, has a father
purchased back an only and beloved child at such a cost as Mr. Macrae was
now paying without a murmur. The boats of the _Flora Macdonald_ were lowered and manned, the winches
slowly swung each huge box of the precious metal aboard the boats. Mr.
Macrae entrusted the keys of the gold-chests to his officers. 'Remember,' cried the voice from the submarine, 'we must have the gold on
board, inspected, and weighed, before we return Miss Macrae.' 'Mean to the last,' whispered the millionaire to the earl; but aloud he
only said, 'Very well; I regret, for your own sake, your suspicious
character, but, in the circumstances, I have no choice.' To Bude he added: 'This is terrible! When he has secured the bullion he
may submerge his submarine and go off without returning my daughter.' This was so manifestly true that Bude could only shake his head and
mutter something about 'honour among thieves.' The crew got the gold on board the boats, and, after several journeys,
had the boxes piled on the deck of the submarine. When they had placed the boxes on board they again retired, and one of
the men of the submarine, who seemed to be in command, and wore a mask,
coolly weighed the glittering metal on the deck, returning each package,
after weighing and inspection, to its coffer. The process was long and
tedious; at length it was completed. Then at last the form of Miss Macrae, in an elegant and tasteful yachting
costume, appeared on the deck of the submarine. The boat's crew of the
_Flora Macdonald_ (to whom she was endeared) lifted their oars and
cheered. The masked pirate in command handed her into a boat of the
_Flora's_ with stately courtesy, placing in her hand a bouquet of the
rarest orchids. He then placed his hand on his heart, and bowed with a
grace remarkable in one of his trade. This man was no common desperado. The crew pulled off, and at that moment, to the horror of all who were on
the _Flora's_ deck, two slight jars again thrilled through her from stem
to stern. Mr. Macrae and Bude gazed on each other with ashen faces. What had
occurred? But still the boat's crew pulled gallantly towards the
_Flora_, and, in a few moments, Miss Macrae stepped on deck, and was in
her father's arms. It was a scene over which art cannot linger. Self-
restraint was thrown to the winds; the father and child acted as if no
eyes were regarding them. Miss Macrae sobbed convulsively, her sire was
shaken by long-pent emotion. Bude had averted his gaze, he looked
towards the submarine, on the deck of which the crew were busy, beginning
to lower the bullion into the interior. To Bude's extreme and speechless amazement, another periscope arose from
ocean at about fifty yards from the further side of the submarine! Bude
spoke no word; the father and daughter were absorbed in each other; the
crew had no eyes but for them. Presently, unmarked by the busy seamen of the hostile submarine, the
platform and look-out hood of _another_ submarine appeared. The new boat
seemed to be pointing directly for the middle of the hostile submarine
and at right angles to it. '_Hands up_!' pealed a voice from the second submarine. It was the voice of Merton! At the well-known sound Miss Macrae tore herself from her father's
embrace and hurried below. She deemed that a fond illusion of the senses
had beguiled her. Mr. Macrae looked wildly towards the two submarines. The masked captain of the hostile vessel, leaping up, shook his fist at
the _Flora Macdonald_ and yelled, 'Damn your foolish treachery, you money-
grubbing hunks! You _have_ a consort.' 'I assure you that nobody is more surprised than myself,' cried Mr.
Macrae. 'One minute more and you, your ship, and your crew will be sent to your
own place!' yelled the masked captain. He vanished below, doubtless to explode the mines under the _Flora_. Bude crossed himself; Mr. Macrae, folding his arms, stood calm and
defiant on his deck. One sailor (the cook) leaped overboard in terror,
the others hastily drew themselves up in a double line, to die like
Britons. A minute passed, a minute charged with terror. Mr. Macrae took out his
watch to mark the time. Another minute passed, and no explosion. The captain of the pirate vessel reappeared on her deck. He cast his
hands desperately abroad; his curses, happily, were unheard by Miss
Macrae, who was below. 'Hands up!' again rang out the voice of Merton, adding, 'if you begin to
submerge your craft, if she stirs an inch, I send you skyward at least as
a preliminary measure. My diver has detached your mines from the keel of
the _Flora Macdonald_ and has cut the wires leading to them; my bow-tube
is pointing directly for you, if I press the switch the torpedo must go
home, and then heaven have mercy on your souls!' A crow of laughter arose from the yachtsmen of the _Flora Macdonald_, who
freely launched terms of maritime contempt at the crew of the pirate
submarine, with comments on the probable future of the souls to which
Merton had alluded. On his desk the masked captain stood silent. 'We have women on board!' he answered Merton at last. 'You may lower them in a collapsible boat, if you have one,' answered
Merton. 'But, on the faintest suspicion of treachery--the faintest
surmise, mark you, I switch on my torpedo.' 'What are your terms?' asked the pirate captain. 'The return of the bullion, that is all,' replied the voice of Merton. 'I
give you two minutes to decide.' Before a minute and a half had passed the masked captain had capitulated. 'I climb down,' he said. 'The boats of the _Flora_ will come for it,' said Merton; 'your men will
help load it in the boats. Look sharp, and be civil, or I blow you out
of the water!' The pirates had no choice; rapidly, if sullenly, they effected the
transfer. When all was done, when the coffers had been hoisted aboard the _Flora
Macdonald_, Merton, for the first time, hailed the yacht. 'Will you kindly send a boat round here for me, Mr. Macrae, if you do not
object to my joining you on the return voyage?' Mr. Macrae shouted a welcome, the yacht's crew cheered as only Britons
can. Mr. Macrae's piper struck up the march of the clan, '_A' the wild
McCraws are coming_!' 'If any of you scoundrels shoot,' cried Merton to his enemies, 'up you
will all go. You shall stay here, after we depart, in front of that
torpedo, just as long as the skipper of my vessel pleases.' Meanwhile the boat of the _Flora_ approached the friendly submarine;
Merton stepped aboard, and soon was on the deck of the _Flora Macdonald_. Mr. Macrae welcomed him with all the joy of a father re-united to his
daughter, of a capitalist restored to his millions. Bude shook Merton's hand warmly, exclaiming, 'Well played, old boy!' Merton's eyes eagerly searched the deck for one beloved form. Mr. Macrae
drew him aside. 'Emmeline is below,' he whispered; 'you will find her in
the saloon.' Merton looked steadfastly at the millionaire, who smiled
with unmistakable meaning. The lover hurried down the companion, while
the _Flora_, which had rapidly got up steam, sped eastward. Merton entered the saloon, his heart beating as hard as when he had
sought his beloved among the bracken beneath the cliffs at Castle Skrae. She rose at his entrance; their eyes met, Merton's dim with a supreme
doubt, Emmeline's frank and clear. A blush rose divinely over the white
rose of her face, her lips curved in the resistless AEginetan smile, and,
without a word spoken, the twain were in each other's arms. * * * * * *

Half an hour later Mr. Macrae, heralding his arrival with a sonorous hem! entered the saloon. Smiling, he embraced his daughter, who hid her head
on his ample shoulder, while with his right hand the father grasped that
of Merton. 'My daughter is restored to me--and my son,' said the millionaire softly. There was silence. Mr. Macrae was the first to recover his
self-possession. 'Sit down, dear,' he said, gently disengaging Emmeline,
'and tell me all about it. Who were the wretches? I can forgive them
now.' Miss Macrae's eyes were bent on the carpet; she seemed reluctant to
speak. At last, in timid and faltering accents, she whispered, 'It was
the Van Huytens boy.' 'Rudolph Van Huytens! I might have guessed it,' cried the millionaire. 'His motive is too plain! His wealth did not equal mine by several
millions. The ransom which he demanded, and but for Tom here' (he
indicated Merton) 'would now possess, exactly reversed our relative
positions. Carrying on his father's ambition, he would, but for Tom,
have held the world's record for opulence. The villain!' 'You do not flatter _me_, father,' said Miss Macrae, 'and you are unjust
to Mr. Van Huytens. He had another, _he_ said a stronger, motive. Me!' she murmured, blushing like a red rose, and adding, 'he really was rather
nice. The submarine was comfy; the yacht delightful. His sisters and
his aunt were very kind. But--' and the beautiful girl looked up archly
and shyly at Merton. 'In fact if it had not been for Tom,' Mr. Macrae was exclaiming, when
Emmeline laid her lily hand on his lips, and again hid her burning
blushes on his shoulder. 'So Rudolph had no chance?' asked Mr. Macrae gaily. 'I used rather to like him, long ago--before--' murmured Emmeline. A thrill of happy pride passed through Merton. He also, he remembered of
old, had thought that he loved. But now he privately registered an oath
that he would never make any confessions as to the buried past (a course
which the chronicler earnestly recommends to young readers). 'Now tell us all about your adventures, Emmie,' said Mr. Macrae, sitting
down and taking his daughter's hand in his own. The narrative may have been anticipated. After Blake was felled, Miss
Macrae, screaming and struggling, had been carried to the boat. The crew
had rapidly pulled round the cliff, the submarine had risen, to the
captive's horrified amazement, from the deep, she had been taken on
board, and, yet more to her surprise, had been welcomed by the Misses Van
Huytens and their aunt. The brother had always behaved with respect,
till, finding that his suit was hopeless, he had avoided her presence as
much as possible, and--

'Had gone for the dollars,' said Macrae. They had wandered from rocky desert isle to desert isle, in the
archipelago of the Hebrides, meeting at night with a swift attendant
yacht. Usually they had slept on shore under canvas; the corrugated iron
houses had been left behind at 'The Seven Hunters,' with the champagne,
to alleviate the anxiety of Mr. Macrae. Ample supplies of costume and
other necessaries for Miss Macrae had always been at hand. 'They really did me very well,' she said, smiling, 'but I was miserable
about _you_,' and she embraced her father. 'Only about _me_?' asked Mr. Macrae. 'I did not know, I was not sure,' said Emmeline, crying a little, and
laughing rather hysterically. 'You go and lie down, my dear,' said Mr. Macrae. 'Your maid is in your
cabin,' and thither he conducted the overwrought girl, Merton anxiously
following her with his eyes. 'We are neglecting Lord Bude,' said Mr. Macrae. 'Come on deck, Tom, and
tell us how you managed that delightful surprise.' 'Oh, pardon me, sir,' said Merton, 'I am under oath, I am solemnly bound
to Logan and others never to reveal the circumstances. It was necessary
to keep you uninformed, that you might honourably make your arrangement
to meet Mr. Van Huytens without being aware that you had a submarine
consort. Logan takes any dishonour on himself, and he wished to offer
Mr. Van Huytens--as that is his name--every satisfaction, but I dissuaded
him. His connection with the affair cannot be kept too secret. Though
Logan put me forward, you really owe all to _him_.' 'But without _you_, I should never have had his aid,' said Mr. Macrae:
'Where _is_ Lord Fastcastle?' he asked. 'In the friendly submarine,' said Merton. 'Oh, I think I can guess!' said Mr. Macrae, smiling. 'I shall ask no
more questions. Let us join Lord Bude.' If the reader is curious as to how the rescue was managed, it is enough
to say that Logan was the cousin and intimate friend of Admiral
Chirnside, that the Admiral was commanding a fleet engaged in naval
manoeuvres around the North coast, that he had a flotilla of submarines,
and that the point of ocean where the pirates met the _Flora Macdonald_
was not far west of the Orkneys. On deck Bude asked Merton how Logan (for he knew that Logan was the
guiding spirit) had guessed the secret of the submarine. 'Do you remember,' said Merton, 'that when you came back from "The Seven
Hunters," you reported that the fishermen had a silly story of seeing a
dragon flying above the empty sea?' 'I remember, _un dragon volant_,' said Bude. 'And Logan asked you not to tell Mr. Macrae?' 'Yes, but I don't understand.' 'A dragon is the Scotch word for a kite--not the bird--a boy's kite. You
did not know; _I_ did not know, but Mr. Macrae would have known, being a
Scot, and Logan wanted to keep his plan dark, and the kite had let him
into the secret of the submarine.' 'I still don't see how.' 'Why the submarine must have been flying a kite, with a pendent wire, to
catch messages from Blake and the wireless machine at Castle Skrae. How
else could a kite--"a dragon," the sailor said--have been flying above
the empty sea?' 'Logan is rather sharp,' said Bude. 'But, Mr. Macrae,' asked Merton, 'how about the false Gianesi?' 'Oh, when Gianesi came of course we settled _his_ business. We had him
tight, as a conspirator. He had been met, when expelled for misdeeds
from Gianesi's and Giambresi's, by a beautiful young man, to whom he sold
himself. He believed the beautiful young man to be the devil, but, of
course, it was our friend Blake. _He_, in turn, must have been purchased
by Van Huytens while he was lecturing in America as a poet-Fenian. In
fact, he really had a singular genius for electric engineering; he had
done very well at some German university. But he was a fellow of no
principle! We are well quit of a rogue. I turned his unlucky victim,
the false Gianesi, loose, with money enough for life to keep him honest
if he chooses. His pension stops if ever a word of the method of rescue
comes out. The same with my crew. They shall all be rich men, for their
station, _till_ the tale is whispered and reaches my ears. In that
case--all pensions stop. I think we can trust the crew of the friendly
submarine to keep their own counsel.' 'Certainly!' said Merton. 'Wealth has its uses after all,' he thought in
his heart. * * * * * *

Merton and Logan gave a farewell dinner in autumn to the Disentanglers--to
such of them as were still unmarried. In her napkin each lady of the
Society found a cheque on Coutts for 25,000_l_. signed with the magic
name Ronald Macrae. The millionaire had insisted on being allowed to perform this act of
munificence, the salvage for the recovered millions, he said. Miss Martin, after dinner, carried Mr. Macrae's health in a toast. In a
humorous speech she announced her own approaching nuptials, and intimated
that she had the permission of the other ladies present to make the same
general confession for all of them. 'Like every novel of my own,' said Miss Martin, smiling, 'this enterprise
of the Disentanglers has a HAPPY ENDING.' Footnotes:


{232}  Part III. No. I, 1896. Baptist Mission Press.