said Mrs. Malory. 'I am _so_ sure that it has cost me many
a wakeful hour. You will earn my warmest gratitude if you can do
anything.' 'Almost everything will depend on your own energy, and tolerance of our
measures.' 'But we must not do evil that good may come,' said Mrs. Malory nervously. 'No evil is contemplated,' said Merton. But Mrs. Malory, while
consenting, so far, did not seem quite certain that her estimate of
'evil' and Merton's would be identical. She had suffered poignantly, as may be supposed, before she set the
training of a lifetime aside, and consulted a professional expert. But
the urbanity and patience of Merton, with the high and unblemished
reputation of his Association, consoled her. 'We must yield where we
innocently may,' she assured herself, 'to the changes of the times. Lest
one good order' (and ah, how good the Early Victorian order had been!) 'should corrupt the world.' Mrs. Malory knew that line of poetry. Then
she remembered that Mrs. Brown-Smith was on the list of Merton's
references, and that reassured her, more or less. As for Merton, he evolved a plan in his mind, and consulted Bradshaw's
invaluable Railway Guide. On the following night Merton was fortunate or adroit enough to find
himself seated beside Mrs. Brown-Smith in a conservatory at a party given
by the Montenegrin Ambassador. Other occupants of the fairy-like bower
of blossoms, musical with all the singing of the innumerable fountains,
could not but know (however preoccupied) that Mrs. Brown-Smith was being
amused. Her laughter 'rang merry and loud,' as the poet says, though not
a word of her whispered conversation was audible. Conservatories (in
novels) are dangerous places for confidences, but the pale and angry face
of Miss Malory did _not_ suddenly emerge from behind a grove of
gardenias, and startle the conspirators. Indeed, Miss Malory was not
present; she and her sister had no great share in the elegant frivolities
of the metropolis. 'It all fits in beautifully,' said Mrs. Brown-Smith. 'Just let me look
at the page of Bradshaw again.' Merton handed to her a page of closely
printed matter. '9.17 P.M., 9.50 P.M.' read Mrs. Brown-Smith aloud; 'it
gives plenty of time in case of delays. Oh, this is too delicious! You
are sure that these trains won't be altered. It might be awkward.' 'I consulted Anson,' said Merton. Anson was famous for his mastery of
time-tables, and his prescience as to railway arrangements. 'Of course it depends on the widow,' said Mrs. Brown-Smith, 'I shall see
that Johnnie is up to time. He hopes to undersell the opposition soap'
(Mr. Brown-Smith was absent in America, in the interests of that soap of
his which is familiar to all), 'and he is in the best of humours. Then
their grouse! We have disease on our moors in Perthshire; I was in
despair. But the widow needs delicate handling.' 'You won't forget--I know how busy you are--her cards for your party?' 'They shall be posted before I sleep the sleep of conscious innocence.' 'And real benevolence,' said Merton. 'And revenge,' added Mrs. Brown-Smith. 'I have heard of his bragging,
the monster. He has talked about _me_. And I remember how he treated
Violet Lebas.' At this moment the Vidame de la Lain, a tall, fair young man, vastly too
elegant, appeared, and claimed Mrs. Brown-Smith for a dance. With a look
at Merton, and a sound which, from less perfect lips, might have been
described as a suppressed giggle, Mrs. Brown-Smith rose, then turning,
'Post the page to me, Mr. Merton,' she said. Merton bowed, and, folding
up the page of the time-table, he consigned it to his cigarette case. * * * * * *

Mrs. Malory received, with a blending of emotions, the invitation to the
party of Mrs. Brown-Smith. The social popularity and the wealth of the
hostess made such invitations acceptable. But the wealth arose from
trade, in soap, not in coal, and coal (like the colza bean) is 'a product
of the soil,' the result of creative forces which, in the geological
past, have worked together for the good of landed families. Soap, on the
other hand, is the result of human artifice, and is certainly advertised
with more of emphasis and of ingenuity than of delicacy. But, by her own
line of descent, Mrs. Brown-Smith came from a Scottish house of ancient
standing, historically renowned for its assassins, traitors, and time-
servers. This partly washed out the stain of soap. Again, Mrs. Malory
had heard the name of Mrs. Brown-Smith taken in vain, and that in a
matter nearly affecting her Matilda's happiness. On the other side,
Merton had given the lady a valuable testimonial to character. Moreover,
the Vidame would be at her party, and Mrs. Malory told herself that she
could study the ground. Above all, the girls were so anxious to go: they
seldom had such a chance. Therefore, while the Early Victorian moralist
hesitated, the mother accepted. They were all glad that they went. Susan, the younger Miss Malory,
enjoyed herself extremely. Matilda danced with the Vidame as often as
her mother approved. The conduct of Mrs. Brown-Smith was correctness
itself. She endeared herself to the girls: invited them to her place in
Perthshire, and warmly congratulated Mrs. Malory on the event approaching
in her family. The eye of maternal suspicion could detect nothing amiss. Thanks mainly to Mrs. Brown-Smith, the girls found the season an earthly
Paradise: and Mrs. Malory saw much more of the world than she had ever
done before. But she remained vigilant, and on the alert. Before the
end of July she had even conceived the idea of inviting Mrs. Brown-Smith,
fatigued by her toils, to inhale the bracing air of Upwold in the moors. But she first consulted Merton, who expressed his warm approval. 'It is dangerous, though she has been so kind,' sighed Mrs. Malory. 'I
have observed nothing to justify the talk which I have heard, but I am in
doubt.' 'Dangerous! it is safety,' said Merton. 'How?' Merton braced himself for the most delicate and perilous part of his
enterprise. 'The Vidame de la Lain will be staying with you?' 'Naturally,' said Mrs. Malory. 'And if there _is_ any truth in what was
whispered--'

'He will be subject to temptation,' said Merton. 'Mrs. Brown-Smith is so pretty and so amusing, and dear Matilda; she
takes after my dear husband's family, though the best of girls, Matilda
has not that flashing manner.' 'But surely no such thing as temptation should exist for a man so
fortunate as de la Lain! And if it did, would his conduct not confirm
what you have heard, and open the eyes of Miss Malory?' 'It seems so odd to be discussing such things with--so young a man as
you--not even a relation,' sighed Mrs. Malory. 'I can withdraw at once,' said Merton. 'Oh no, please don't speak of that! I am not really at all happy yet
about my daughter's future.' 'Well, suppose the worst by way of argument; suppose that you saw, that
Miss Malory saw--'

'Matilda has always refused to see or to listen, and has spoken of the
reforming effects of a pure affection. She would be hard, indeed, to
convince that anything was wrong, but, once certain--I know Matilda's
character--she would never forgive the insult, never.' 'And you would rather that she suffered some present distress?' 'Than that she was tied for life to a man who could cause it? Certainly
I would.' 'Then, Mrs. Malory, as it _is_ awkward to discuss these intimate matters
with me, might I suggest that you should have an interview with Mrs.
Brown-Smith herself? I assure you that you can trust her, and I happen
to know that her view of the man about whom we are talking is exactly
your own. More I could say as to her reasons and motives, but we
entirely decline to touch on the past or to offer any opinion about the
characters of our patients--the persons about whose engagements we are
consulted. He might have murdered his grandmother or robbed a church,
but my lips would be sealed.' 'Do you not think that Mrs. Brown-Smith would be very much surprised if I
consulted her?' 'I know that she takes a sincere interest in Miss Malory, and that her
advice would be excellent--though perhaps rather startling,' said Merton. 'I dislike it very much. The world has altered terribly since I was
Matilda's age,' said Mrs. Malory; 'but I should never forgive myself if I
neglected any precaution, and I shall take your advice. I shall consult
Mrs. Brown-Smith.' Merton thus retreated from what even he regarded as a difficult and
delicate affair. He fell back on his reserves; and Mrs. Brown-Smith
later gave an account of what passed between herself and the
representative of an earlier age:

'She first, when she had invited me to her dreary place, explained that
we ought not, she feared, to lead others into temptation. "If you think
that man, de la Lain's temptation is to drag my father's name, and my
husband's, in the dust," I answered, "let me tell you that _I_ have a
temptation also." '"Dear Mrs. Brown-Smith," she answered, "this is indeed honourable
candour. Not for the world would I be the occasion--"

'I interrupted her, "_My_ temptation is to make him the laughing stock of
his acquaintance, and, if he has the impudence to give me the
opportunity, I _will_!" And then I told her, without names, of course,
that story about this Vidame Potter and Violet Lebas.' 'I did _not_,' said Merton. 'But why Vidame Potter?' 'His father was a Mr. Potter; his grandfather married a Miss Lalain--I
know all about it--and this creature has wormed out, or invented, some
story of a Vidameship, or whatever it is, hereditary in the female line,
and has taken the title. And this is the man who has had the
impertinence to talk about _me_, a Ker of Graden.' 'But did not the story you speak of make her see that she must break off
her daughter's engagement?' 'No. She was very much distressed, but said that her daughter Matilda
would never believe it.' 'And so you are to go to Upwold?' 'Yes, it is a mournful place; I never did anything so good-natured. And,
with the widow's knowledge, I am to do as I please till the girl's eyes
are opened. I think it will need that stratagem we spoke of to open
them.' 'You are sure that you will be in no danger from evil tongues?' 'They say, What say they? Let them say,' answered Mrs. Brown-Smith,
quoting the motto of the Keiths. The end of July found Mrs. Brown-Smith at Upwold, where it is to be hoped
that the bracing qualities of the atmosphere made up for the want of
congenial society. Susan Malory had been discreetly sent away on a
visit. None of the men of the family had arrived. There was a party of
local neighbours, who did not feel the want of anything to do, but lived
in dread of flushing the Vidame and Matilda out of a window seat whenever
they entered a room. As for the Vidame, being destitute of all other entertainment, he made
love in a devoted manner. But at dinner, after Mrs. Brown-Smith's arrival, though he sat next
Matilda, Mrs. Malory saw that his eyes were mainly bent on the lady
opposite. The ping-pong of conversation, even, was played between him
and Mrs. Brown-Smith across the table: the county neighbours were quite
lost in their endeavours to follow the flight of the ball. Though the
drawing-room window, after dinner, was open on the fragrant lawn, though
Matilda sat close by it, in her wonted place, the Vidame was hanging over
the chair of the visitor, and later, played billiards with her, a game at
which Matilda did not excel. At family prayers next morning (the service
was conducted by Mrs. Malory) the Vidame appeared with a white rosebud in
his buttonhole, Mrs. Brown-Smith wearing its twin sister. He took her to
the stream in the park where she fished, Matilda following in a drooping
manner. The Vidame was much occupied in extracting the flies from the
hair of Mrs. Brown-Smith, in which they were frequently entangled. After
luncheon he drove with the two ladies and Mrs. Malory to the country
town, the usual resource of ladies in the country, and though he sat next
Matilda, Mrs. Brown-Smith was beaming opposite, and the pair did most of
the talking. While Mrs. Malory and her daughter shopped, it was the
Vidame who took Mrs. Brown-Smith to inspect the ruins of the Abbey. The
county neighbours had left in the morning, a new set arrived, and while
Matilda had to entertain them, it was Mrs Brown-Smith whom the Vidame
entertained. This kind of thing went on; when Matilda was visiting her cottagers it
was the Vidame and Mrs. Brown-Smith whom visitors flushed in window
seats. They wondered that Mrs. Malory had asked so dangerous a woman to
the house: they marvelled that she seemed quite radiant and devoted to
her lively visitor. There was a school feast: it was the Vidame who
arranged hurdle-races for children of both sexes (so improper! ), and who
started the competitors. Meanwhile Mrs. Malory, so unusually genial in public, held frequent
conventicles with Matilda in private. But Matilda declined to be
jealous; they were only old friends, she said, these flagitious two; Dear
Anne (that was the Vidame's Christian name) was all that she could wish. 'You know the place is _so_ dull, mother,' the brave girl said. 'Even
grandmamma, who was a saint, says so in her _Domestic Outpourings_'
(religious memoirs privately printed in 1838). 'We cannot amuse Mrs.
Brown-Smith, and it is so kind and chivalrous of Anne.' 'To neglect you?' 'No, to do duty for Tom and Dick,' who were her brothers, and who would
not greatly have entertained the fair visitor had they been present. Matilda was the kind of woman whom we all adore as represented in the
characters of Fielding's Amelia and Sophia. Such she was, so gracious
and yielding, in her overt demeanour, but, alas, poor Matilda's pillow
was often wet with her tears. She was loyal; she would not believe evil:
she crushed her natural jealousy 'as a vice of blood, upon the threshold
of the mind.' Mrs. Brown-Smith was nearly as unhappy as the girl. The more she hated
the Vidame--and she detested him more deeply every day--the more her
heart bled for Matilda. Mrs. Brown-Smith also had her secret conferences
with Mrs. Malory. 'Nothing will shake her belief in that man,' said Mrs. Malory. 'Your daughter is the best girl I ever met,' said Mrs. Brown-Smith. 'The
best tempered, the least suspicious, the most loyal. And I am doing my
worst to make her hate me. Oh, I can't go on!' Here Mrs. Brown-Smith
very greatly surprised her hostess by bursting into tears. 'You must not desert us now,' said the elder lady. 'The better you think
of poor Matilda--and she _is_ a good girl--the more you ought to help
her.' It was the 8th of August, no other visitors were at the house, a shooting
party was expected to arrive on the 11th. Mrs. Brown-Smith dried her
tears. 'It must be done,' she said, 'though it makes me sick to think of
it.' Next day she met the Vidame in the park, and afterwards held a long
conversation with Mrs. Malory. As for the Vidame, he was in feverish
high spirits, he devoted himself to Matilda, in fact Mrs. Brown-Smith had
insisted on such dissimulation, as absolutely necessary at this juncture
of affairs. So Matilda bloomed again, like a rose that had been 'washed,
just washed, in a shower.' The Vidame went about humming the airs of the
country which he had honoured by adopting it as the cradle of his
ancestry. On the morning of the following day, while the Vidame strayed with
Matilda in the park, Mrs. Brown-Smith was closeted with Mrs. Malory in
her boudoir. 'Everything is arranged,' said Mrs. Brown-Smith. 'I, guilty and reckless
that I am, have only to sacrifice my character, and all my things. But I
am to retain Methven, my maid. That concession I have won from his
chivalry.' 'How do you mean?' asked Mrs. Malory. 'At seven he will get a telegram summoning him to Paris on urgent
business. He will leave in your station brougham in time to catch the
9.50 up train at Wilkington. Or, rather, so impatient is he, he will
leave half an hour too early, for fear of accidental delays. I and my
maid will accompany him. I have thought honesty the best policy, and
told the truth, like Bismarck, "and the same,"' said Mrs. Brown-Smith
hysterically, '"with intent to deceive." I have pointed out to him that
my best plan is to pretend to you that I am going to meet my husband, who
really arrives at Wilkington from Liverpool by the 9.17, though the
Vidame thinks that is an invention of mine. So, you see, I leave without
any secrecy, or fuss, or luggage, and, when my husband comes here, he
will find me flown, and will have to console himself with my luggage and
jewels. He--this Frenchified beast, I mean--has written a note for your
daughter, which he will give to her maid, and, of course, the maid will
hand it to _you_. So he will have burned his boats. And then you can
show it to Matilda, and so,' said Mrs. Brown-Smith, 'the miracle of
opening her eyes will be worked. Johnnie, my husband, and I will be
hungry when we return about half-past ten. And I think you had better
telegraph that there is whooping cough, or bubonic plague, or something
in the house, and put off your shooting party.' 'But that would be an untruth,' said Mrs. Malory. 'And what have I been acting for the last ten days?' asked Mrs. Brown-
Smith, rather tartly. 'You must settle your excuse with your
conscience.' 'The cook's mother really is ill,' said Mrs. Malory, 'and she wants
dreadfully to go and see her. That would do.' 'All things work together for good. The cook must have a telegram also,'
said Mrs. Brown-Smith. The day, which had been extremely hot, clouded over. By five it was
raining: by six there was a deluge. At seven, Matilda and the Vidame
were evicted from their dusky window seat by the butler with a damp
telegraph envelope. The Vidame opened it, and handed it to Matilda. His
presence at Paris was instantly demanded. The Vidame was desolated, but
his absence could not be for more than five days. Bradshaw was hunted
for, and found: the 9.50 train was opportune. The Vidame's man packed
his clothes. Mrs. Brown-Smith was apprised of these occurrences in the
drawing-room before dinner. 'I am very sorry for dear Matilda,' she cried. 'But it is an ill wind
that blows nobody good. I will drive over with the Vidame and astonish
my Johnnie by greeting him at the station. I must run and change my
dress.' She ran, she returned in morning costume, she heard from Mrs. Malory of
the summons by telegram calling the cook to her moribund mother. 'I must
send her over to the station in a dog-cart,' said Mrs. Malory. 'Oh no,' cried Mrs. Brown-Smith, with impetuous kindness, 'not on a night
like this; it is a cataclysm. There will be plenty of room for the cook
as well as for Methven and me, and the Vidame, in the brougham. Or _he_
can sit on the box.' The Vidame really behaved very well. The introduction of the cook, to
quote an old novelist, 'had formed no part of his profligate scheme of
pleasure.' To elope from a hospitable roof, with a married lady,
accompanied by her maid, might be an act not without precedent. But that
a cook should come to form _une partie carree_, on such an occasion, that
a lover should be squeezed with three women in a brougham, was a trying
novelty. The Vidame smiled, 'An artist so excellent,' he said, 'deserves a far
greater sacrifice.' So it was arranged. After a tender and solitary five minutes with
Matilda, the Vidame stepped, last, into the brougham. The coachman
whipped up the horses, Matilda waved her kerchief from the porch, the
guilty lovers drove away. Presently Mrs. Malory received, from her
daughter's maid, the letter destined by the Vidame for Matilda. Mrs.
Malory locked it up in her despatch box. The runaways, after a warm and uncomfortable drive of three-quarters of
an hour, during which the cook wept bitterly and was very unwell, reached
the station. Contrary to the Vidame's wish, Mrs. Brown-Smith, in an
ulster and a veil, insisted on perambulating the platform, buying the
whole of Mr. Hall Caine's works as far as they exist in sixpenny
editions. Bells rang, porters stationed themselves in a line, like
fielders, a train arrived, the 9.17 from Liverpool, twenty minutes late. A short stout gentleman emerged from a smoking carriage, Mrs.
Brown-Smith, starting from the Vidame's side, raised her veil, and threw
her arms round the neck of the traveller. 'You didn't expect _me_ to meet you on such a night, did you, Johnnie?' she cried with a break in her voice. 'Awfully glad to see you, Tiny,' said the short gentleman. 'On such a
night!' After thus unconsciously quoting the _Merchant of Venice_, Mr.
Brown-Smith turned to his valet. 'Don't forget the fishing-rods,' he
said. 'I took the opportunity of driving over with a gentleman from Upwold,'
said Mrs. Brown-Smith. 'Let me introduce him. Methven,' to her maid,
'where is the Vidame de la Lain?' 'I heard him say that he must help Mrs. Andrews, the cook, to find a
seat, Ma'am,' said the maid. 'He really _is_ kind,' said Mrs. Brown-Smith, 'but I fear we can't wait
to say good-bye to him.' Three-quarters of an hour later, Mr. Brown-Smith and his wife were at
supper at Upwold. Next day, as the cook's departure had postponed the shooting party, they
took leave of their hostess, and returned to their moors in Perthshire. Weeks passed, with no message from the Vidame. He did not answer a
letter which Mrs. Malory allowed Matilda to write. The mother never
showed to the girl the note which he had left with her maid. The absence
and the silence of the lover were enough. Matilda never knew that among
the four packed in the brougham on that night of rain, one had been
eloping with a married lady--who returned to supper. The papers were 'requested to state that the marriage announced between
the Vidame de la Lain and Miss Malory will not take place.' Why it did
not take place was known only to Mrs. Malory, Mrs. Brown-Smith, and
Merton. Matilda thought that her lover had been kidnapped and arrested, by the
Secret Police of France, for his part in a scheme to restore the Royal
House, the White Flag, the Lilies, the children of St. Louis. At Mrs.
Brown-Smith's place in Perthshire, in the following autumn, Matilda met
Sir Aylmer Jardine. Then she knew that what she had taken for love (in
the previous year) had been,

   'Not love, but love's first flush in youth.' They always do make that discovery, bless them! Lady Jardine is now
wrapped up in her baby boy. The mother of the cook recovered her health. IX. ADVENTURE OF THE LADY NOVELIST AND THE VACCINATIONIST


'Mr. Frederick Warren'--so Merton read the card presented to him on a
salver of Limoges enamel by the office-boy. 'Show the gentleman in.' Mr. Warren entered. He was a tall and portly person, with a red face,
red whiskers, and a tightly buttoned frock-coat, which more expressed
than hid his goodly and prominent proportions. He bowed, and Merton
invited him to be seated. It struck Merton as a singular circumstance
that his visitor wore on each arm the crimson badge of the newly
vaccinated. Mr. Warren sat down, and, taking a red silk handkerchief out of the crown
of his hat, he wiped his countenance. The day was torrid, and Mr. Merton
hospitably offered an effervescent draught. 'Without the whisky, if you please, sir,' said Mr. Warren, in a
provincial accent. He pointed to a blue ribbon in the buttonhole of his
coat, indicating that he was conscientiously opposed to the use of
alcoholic refreshment in all its forms. 'Two glasses of Apollinaris water,' said Merton to the office-boy; and
the innocent fluid was brought, while Merton silently admired his
client's arrangement in blue and crimson. When the thirst of that
gentleman had been assuaged, he entered upon business thus:

'Sir, I am a man of principle!' Merton congratulated him; the age was lax, he said, and principle was
needed. He wondered internally what he was going to be asked to
subscribe to, or whether his vote only was required. 'Sir, have you been vaccinated?' asked the client earnestly. 'Really,' said Merton, 'I do not quite understand your interest in a
matter so purely personal.' 'Personal, sir? Not at all. It is the first of public duties--the debt
that every man, woman, and child owes to his or her country. Have you
been vaccinated, sir?' 'Why, if you insist on knowing,' said Merton, 'I have, though I do not
see--'

'Recently?' asked the visitor. 'Yes, last month; but I cannot conjecture why--'

'Enough, sir,' said Mr. Warren. 'I am a man of principle. Had you not
done your duty in this matter by your country, I should have been
compelled to seek some other practitioner in your line.' 'I was not aware that my firm had any competitors in our line of
business,' said Merton. 'But perhaps you have come here under some
misapprehension. There is a firm of family solicitors on the floor
above, and next them are the offices of a company interested in a patent
explosive. If your affairs, or your political ideas, demand a legal
opinion, or an outlet in an explosive which is widely recommended by the
Continental Press--'

'For what do you take me, sir?' asked Mr. Warren. 'For a Temperance Anarchist,' Merton would have liked to reply, 'judging
by your colours'; but he repressed this retort, and mildly answered,
'Perhaps it would be as much to the purpose to ask, for what do you take
_me_?' 'For the representative of Messrs. Gray & Graham, the specialists in
matrimonial affairs,' answered the client; and Merton said that he would
be happy if Mr. Warren would enter into the details of his business. 'I am the ex-Mayor of Bulcester,' said Mr. Warren, 'and, as I told you, a
man of principle. My attachment to the Temperance cause'--and he
fingered his blue ribbon--'procured for me the honour of a defeat at the
last general election, but endeared me to the consciences of the
Nonconformist element in the constituency. Yet, sir, I am at this moment
the most unpopular man in Bulcester; but I shall fight it out--I shall
fight it to my latest breath.' 'Is Bulcester, then, such an intemperate constituency? I had understood
that the Nonconformist interest was strong there,' said Merton. 'So it is, sir, so it is; but the interest is now bound to the chariot
wheels of the truckling Toryism of our time--to the sycophants who basely
made vaccination permissive, and paltered with the Conscientious
Objector. These badges, sir'--the client pointed to his own crimson
decorations--'proclaim that I have been vaccinated on _both_ arms, as a
testimony to the immortal though, in Bulcester, maligned discovery of the
great Jenner. Sir, I am hooted in the public streets of my native town,
where Anti-vaccinationism is a frenzy. Mr. Rider Haggard, the author of
_Dr. Therne_, has been burned in effigy for his thrilling and manly
protest to which I owe my own conversion.' 'Then the conversion is relatively recent?' asked Merton. 'It dates since my reading of that powerful argument, sir; that appeal to
reason which overcame my prejudice, for I was a prominent A. V.'

'_Ave_?' asked Merton. 'A. V., sir--Anti-Vaccinationist. A. C. D. A. too, and always,' he added
proudly; but Merton did not think it prudent to ask for further
explanations. 'An A. V.  I was, an A. V.  I am no longer; and I defy popular clamour,
accompanied by brickbats, to shake my principles.' '_Justum et tinacem propositi virum_,' murmured Merton, adding, 'All that
is very interesting, but, my dear sir, while I admire the tenacity of
your principles, will you permit me to ask, what has vaccination to do
with the special business of our firm?' 'Why, sir, I have a family, and my eldest son--'

'Does he decline to be vaccinated?' asked Merton, in a sympathetic voice. 'No, sir, or he would never darken my doorway,' exclaimed this more than
Roman father. 'But he is engaged, and I can never give my consent; and
if he marries that girl, the firm ceases to be "Warren & Son, wax-cloth
manufacturers." That's all, sir--that's all.' Mr. Warren again applied his red handkerchief to his glowing features. 'And what, may I ask, are the grounds of your objection to this
engagement? Social inequality?' asked Merton. 'No, the young lady is the daughter of one of our leading ministers, Mr.
Truman--author of _The Bishops to the Block_--but principles are
concerned.' 'You cannot mean that the young lady is excessively addicted to the--wine
cup?' asked Merton gravely. 'In melancholy cases of that kind Mr. Hall
Caine, in a romance, has recommended hypnotic treatment, but we do not
venture to interfere.' 'You misunderstand me, sir,' replied Mr. Warren, frowning. 'The young
woman, on principle, as they call it, has never been vaccinated. Like
most of our prominent citizens, her father (otherwise an excellent man)
objects to what he calls "The Worship of the Calf" on grounds of
conscience.' 'Conscience! It is a hard thing to constrain the conscience,' murmured
Merton, quoting a remark of Queen Mary to John Knox. 'What is conscience without knowledge, sir?' asked the client,
using--without knowing it--the very argument of Mr. Knox to the Queen. 'You have no other objections to the alliance?' asked Merton. 'None whatever, sir. She is a good and good-looking girl. On most
important points we are thoroughly agreed. She won a prize essay on
Bacon's authorship of Shakespeare's plays. Of course Shakespeare could
not have written them--a thoroughly uneducated man, who never could have
passed the fourth standard. But look at the plays! There are things in
them that, with all our modern advantages, are beyond me. I admit they
are beyond me. "To be, and to do, and to suffer,"' declaimed Mr. Warren,
apparently under the impression that this is part of Hamlet's
soliloquy--'Shakespeare could never have written _that_. Where did _he_
learn grammar?' 'Where, indeed?' replied Merton. 'But as the lady is in all other
respects so suitable a match, cannot this one difficulty be got over?' 'Impossible, sir; my son could not slice the sleeve in her dress and
inflict this priceless boon on her with affectionate violence. Even the
hero of _Dr. Therne_ failed there--'

'And rather irritated his pretty Jane,' added Merton, who remembered this
heroic adventure. 'It is a very hard case,' he went on, 'but I fear that
our methods are powerless. The only chance would be to divert young Mr.
Warren's affections into some other more enlightened channel. That
expedient has often been found efficacious. Is he very deeply enamoured? Would not the society of another pretty and intelligent girl perhaps work
wonders?' 'Perhaps it might, sir, but I don't know where to find any one that would
attract my James. Except for political meetings, and a literary lecture
or two, with a magic-lantern and a piano, we have not much social
relaxation at Bulcester. We object to promiscuous dancing, on grounds of
conscience. Also, of course, to the stage.' 'Ah, so you _do_ allow for the claims of conscience, do you?' 'For what do you take me, sir? Only, of course the conscience must be
enlightened,' said Mr. Warren, as other earnest people usually do. 'Certainly, certainly,' said Merton; 'nothing so dangerous as the
unenlightened conscience. Why, in this very matter of marriage the
conscience of the Mormons leads them to singular aberrations, while that
of the Arunta tribe--but I should only pain you if I pursued the subject. You said that your Society indulged in literary lectures: is your
programme for the season filled up?' 'I am President of the Bulcester Literary Society,' said Mr. Warren, 'and
I ought to know. We have a vacancy for Friday week; but why do you
inquire? In fact I want a lecturer on "The Use and Abuse of Novels," now
you ask. Our people, somehow, always want their literary lectures to be
about novels. I try to make the lecturers take a lofty moral tone, and
usually entertain them at my house, where I probe their ideas, and warn
them that we must have nothing loose. Once, sir, we had a lecturer on
"The Oldest Novel in the World." He gave us a terrible shock, sir! I
never saw so many red cheeks in a Bulcester audience. And the man seemed
quite unaware of the effect he was producing.' 'Short-sighted, perhaps?' said Merton. 'Ever since we have been very careful. But, sir, we seem to have got
away from the subject.' 'It is only seeming,' said Merton. 'I have an idea which may be of
service to you.' 'Thank you, most kindly,' said Mr. Warren. 'But as how?' 'Does your Society ever employ lady lecturers?' 'We prefer them; we are all for enlarging the sphere of woman's
activity--virtuous activity, I mean.' 'That is fortunate,' remarked Merton. 'You said just now that to try the
plan of a counter-attraction was difficult, because there was little of
social relaxation in your Society, and you knew no lady who had the
opportunities necessary for presenting an agreeable alternative to the
charms of Miss Truman. A young man's fancy is often caught merely by the
juxtaposition of a single member of the opposite sex, with whom he
contracts a custom of walking home from chapel.' 'That's mostly the way at Bulcester,' said Mr. Warren. 'Well,' Merton went on, 'you are in the habit of entertaining the
lecturers at your house. Now, I know a young lady--one of our staff, in
fact--who is very well qualified to lecture on "The Use and Abuse of
Novels." She is a novelist herself; one of the most serious and
improving of our younger writers. In her works virtue (after struggles)
is always rewarded, and vice (especially if gilded) is held up to
execration, though never allowed to display itself in colours which would
bring a blush to the cheek of--a white rabbit. Here is her portrait,'
said Merton, taking up a family periodical, _The Young Girl_. This
blameless journal was publishing a serial story by Miss Martin, one of
the ladies who had been enlisted at the dinner given by Logan and Merton
when they founded their Society. A photograph of Miss Martin, in white
and in a large shadowy hat, was published in _The Young Girl_, and
certainly no one could have recognised in this conscientiously innocent
and domestic portrait the fair author of romances of social adventure and
unimagined crime. 'There you see our young friend,' said Merton; 'and
the magazine, to which she is a regular contributor, is a voucher for her
character as an author.' Mr. Warren closely scrutinised the portrait, which displayed loveliness
and candour in a very agreeable way, and arranged in the extreme of
modest simplicity.