Renfield." As he heard the voice his face brightened, through its mutilation, and
he said, "That is Dr. Van Helsing. How good it is of you to be here. Give me some water, my lips are dry, and I shall try to tell you. I
dreamed . . ." He stopped and seemed fainting. I called quietly to Quincey, "The
brandy, it is in my study, quick!" He flew and returned with a glass,
the decanter of brandy and a carafe of water. We moistened the
parched lips, and the patient quickly revived. It seemed, however, that his poor injured brain had been working in
the interval, for when he was quite conscious, he looked at me
piercingly with an agonized confusion which I shall never forget, and
said, "I must not deceive myself. It was no dream, but all a grim
reality." Then his eyes roved round the room. As they caught sight
of the two figures sitting patiently on the edge of the bed he went
on, "If I were not sure already, I would know from them." For an instant his eyes closed, not with pain or sleep but
voluntarily, as though he were bringing all his faculties to bear. When he opened them he said, hurriedly, and with more energy than he
had yet displayed, "Quick, Doctor, quick, I am dying! I feel that I
have but a few minutes, and then I must go back to death, or worse! Wet my lips with brandy again. I have something that I must say
before I die. Or before my poor crushed brain dies anyhow. Thank
you! It was that night after you left me, when I implored you to let
me go away. I couldn't speak then, for I felt my tongue was tied. But I was as sane then, except in that way, as I am now. I was in an
agony of despair for a long time after you left me, it seemed hours. Then there came a sudden peace to me. My brain seemed to become cool
again, and I realized where I was. I heard the dogs bark behind our
house, but not where He was!" As he spoke, Van Helsing's eyes never blinked, but his hand came out
and met mine and gripped it hard. He did not, however, betray
himself. He nodded slightly and said, "Go on," in a low voice. Renfield proceeded. "He came up to the window in the mist, as I had
seen him often before, but he was solid then, not a ghost, and his
eyes were fierce like a man's when angry. He was laughing with his
red mouth, the sharp white teeth glinted in the moonlight when he
turned to look back over the belt of trees, to where the dogs were
barking. I wouldn't ask him to come in at first, though I knew he
wanted to, just as he had wanted all along. Then he began promising
me things, not in words but by doing them." He was interrupted by a word from the Professor, "How?" "By making them happen. Just as he used to send in the flies when the
sun was shining. Great big fat ones with steel and sapphire on their
wings. And big moths, in the night, with skull and cross-bones on
their backs." Van Helsing nodded to him as he whispered to me unconsciously, "The
Acherontia Atropos of the Sphinges, what you call the 'Death's-head
Moth'?" The patient went on without stopping, "Then he began to whisper. 'Rats,
rats, rats! Hundreds, thousands, millions of them, and every one a
life. And dogs to eat them, and cats too. All lives! All red blood,
with years of life in it, and not merely buzzing flies!' I laughed at
him, for I wanted to see what he could do. Then the dogs howled, away
beyond the dark trees in His house. He beckoned me to the window. I
got up and looked out, and He raised his hands, and seemed to call out
without using any words. A dark mass spread over the grass, coming on
like the shape of a flame of fire. And then He moved the mist to the
right and left, and I could see that there were thousands of rats with
their eyes blazing red, like His only smaller. He held up his hand,
and they all stopped, and I thought he seemed to be saying, 'All these
lives will I give you, ay, and many more and greater, through
countless ages, if you will fall down and worship me!' And then a red
cloud, like the colour of blood, seemed to close over my eyes, and
before I knew what I was doing, I found myself opening the sash and
saying to Him, 'Come in, Lord and Master!' The rats were all gone, but
He slid into the room through the sash, though it was only open an
inch wide, just as the Moon herself has often come in through the
tiniest crack and has stood before me in all her size and splendour." His voice was weaker, so I moistened his lips with the brandy again,
and he continued, but it seemed as though his memory had gone on
working in the interval for his story was further advanced. I was
about to call him back to the point, but Van Helsing whispered to me,
"Let him go on. Do not interrupt him. He cannot go back, and maybe
could not proceed at all if once he lost the thread of his thought." He proceeded, "All day I waited to hear from him, but he did not send
me anything, not even a blowfly, and when the moon got up I was pretty
angry with him. When he did slide in through the window, though it
was shut, and did not even knock, I got mad with him. He sneered at
me, and his white face looked out of the mist with his red eyes
gleaming, and he went on as though he owned the whole place, and I was
no one. He didn't even smell the same as he went by me. I couldn't
hold him. I thought that, somehow, Mrs. Harker had come into the
room." The two men sitting on the bed stood up and came over, standing behind
him so that he could not see them, but where they could hear better. They were both silent, but the Professor started and quivered. His
face, however, grew grimmer and sterner still. Renfield went on
without noticing, "When Mrs. Harker came in to see me this afternoon
she wasn't the same. It was like tea after the teapot has been
watered." Here we all moved, but no one said a word. He went on, "I didn't know that she was here till she spoke, and she
didn't look the same. I don't care for the pale people. I like them
with lots of blood in them, and hers all seemed to have run out. I
didn't think of it at the time, but when she went away I began to
think, and it made me mad to know that He had been taking the life out
of her." I could feel that the rest quivered, as I did; but we
remained otherwise still. "So when He came tonight I was ready for
Him. I saw the mist stealing in, and I grabbed it tight. I had heard
that madmen have unnatural strength. And as I knew I was a madman, at
times anyhow, I resolved to use my power. Ay, and He felt it too, for
He had to come out of the mist to struggle with me. I held tight, and
I thought I was going to win, for I didn't mean Him to take any more
of her life, till I saw His eyes. They burned into me, and my
strength became like water. He slipped through it, and when I tried
to cling to Him, He raised me up and flung me down. There was a red
cloud before me, and a noise like thunder, and the mist seemed to
steal away under the door." His voice was becoming fainter and his breath more stertorous. Van
Helsing stood up instinctively. "We know the worst now," he said. "He is here, and we know his
purpose. It may not be too late. Let us be armed, the same as we
were the other night, but lose no time, there is not an instant to
spare." There was no need to put our fear, nay our conviction, into words, we
shared them in common. We all hurried and took from our rooms the
same things that we had when we entered the Count's house. The
Professor had his ready, and as we met in the corridor he pointed to
them significantly as he said, "They never leave me, and they shall
not till this unhappy business is over. Be wise also, my friends. It
is no common enemy that we deal with Alas! Alas! That dear Madam
Mina should suffer!" He stopped, his voice was breaking, and I do not
know if rage or terror predominated in my own heart. Outside the Harkers' door we paused. Art and Quincey held back, and
the latter said, "Should we disturb her?" "We must," said Van Helsing grimly. "If the door be locked, I shall
break it in." "May it not frighten her terribly? It is unusual to break into a
lady's room!" Van Helsing said solemnly, "You are always right. But this is life
and death. All chambers are alike to the doctor. And even were they
not they are all as one to me tonight. Friend John, when I turn the
handle, if the door does not open, do you put your shoulder down and
shove; and you too, my friends. Now!" He turned the handle as he spoke, but the door did not yield. We
threw ourselves against it. With a crash it burst open, and we almost
fell headlong into the room. The Professor did actually fall, and I
saw across him as he gathered himself up from hands and knees. What I
saw appalled me. I felt my hair rise like bristles on the back of my
neck, and my heart seemed to stand still. The moonlight was so bright that through the thick yellow blind the
room was light enough to see. On the bed beside the window lay
Jonathan Harker, his face flushed and breathing heavily as though in a
stupor. Kneeling on the near edge of the bed facing outwards was the
white-clad figure of his wife. By her side stood a tall, thin man,
clad in black. His face was turned from us, but the instant we saw we
all recognized the Count, in every way, even to the scar on his
forehead. With his left hand he held both Mrs. Harker's hands,
keeping them away with her arms at full tension. His right hand
gripped her by the back of the neck, forcing her face down on his
bosom. Her white nightdress was smeared with blood, and a thin stream
trickled down the man's bare chest which was shown by his torn-open
dress. The attitude of the two had a terrible resemblance to a child
forcing a kitten's nose into a saucer of milk to compel it to drink. As we burst into the room, the Count turned his face, and the hellish
look that I had heard described seemed to leap into it. His eyes
flamed red with devilish passion. The great nostrils of the white
aquiline nose opened wide and quivered at the edge, and the white
sharp teeth, behind the full lips of the blood dripping mouth, clamped
together like those of a wild beast. With a wrench, which threw his
victim back upon the bed as though hurled from a height, he turned and
sprang at us. But by this time the Professor had gained his feet, and
was holding towards him the envelope which contained the Sacred Wafer. The Count suddenly stopped, just as poor Lucy had done outside the
tomb, and cowered back. Further and further back he cowered, as we,
lifting our crucifixes, advanced. The moonlight suddenly failed, as a
great black cloud sailed across the sky. And when the gaslight sprang
up under Quincey's match, we saw nothing but a faint vapour. This, as
we looked, trailed under the door, which with the recoil from its
bursting open, had swung back to its old position. Van Helsing, Art,
and I moved forward to Mrs. Harker, who by this time had drawn her
breath and with it had given a scream so wild, so ear-piercing, so
despairing that it seems to me now that it will ring in my ears till
my dying day. For a few seconds she lay in her helpless attitude and
disarray. Her face was ghastly, with a pallor which was accentuated
by the blood which smeared her lips and cheeks and chin. From her
throat trickled a thin stream of blood. Her eyes were mad with
terror. Then she put before her face her poor crushed hands, which
bore on their whiteness the red mark of the Count's terrible grip, and
from behind them came a low desolate wail which made the terrible
scream seem only the quick expression of an endless grief. Van
Helsing stepped forward and drew the coverlet gently over her body,
whilst Art, after looking at her face for an instant despairingly, ran
out of the room. Van Helsing whispered to me, "Jonathan is in a stupor such as we know
the Vampire can produce. We can do nothing with poor Madam Mina for a
few moments till she recovers herself. I must wake him!" He dipped the end of a towel in cold water and with it began to flick
him on the face, his wife all the while holding her face between her
hands and sobbing in a way that was heart breaking to hear. I raised
the blind, and looked out of the window. There was much moonshine,
and as I looked I could see Quincey Morris run across the lawn and
hide himself in the shadow of a great yew tree. It puzzled me to
think why he was doing this. But at the instant I heard Harker's
quick exclamation as he woke to partial consciousness, and turned to
the bed. On his face, as there might well be, was a look of wild
amazement. He seemed dazed for a few seconds, and then full
consciousness seemed to burst upon him all at once, and he started up. His wife was aroused by the quick movement, and turned to him with her
arms stretched out, as though to embrace him. Instantly, however, she
drew them in again, and putting her elbows together, held her hands
before her face, and shuddered till the bed beneath her shook. "In God's name what does this mean?" Harker cried out. "Dr. Seward,
Dr. Van Helsing, what is it? What has happened? What is wrong? Mina,
dear what is it? What does that blood mean? My God, my God! Has it
come to this!" And, raising himself to his knees, he beat his hands
wildly together. "Good God help us! Help her! Oh, help her!" With a quick movement he jumped from bed, and began to pull on his
clothes, all the man in him awake at the need for instant exertion. "What has happened? Tell me all about it!" he cried without pausing. "Dr. Van Helsing, you love Mina, I know. Oh, do something to save her. It cannot have gone too far yet. Guard her while I look for him!" His wife, through her terror and horror and distress, saw some sure
danger to him. Instantly forgetting her own grief, she seized hold of
him and cried out. "No! No! Jonathan, you must not leave me. I have suffered enough
tonight, God knows, without the dread of his harming you. You must
stay with me. Stay with these friends who will watch over you!" Her
expression became frantic as she spoke. And, he yielding to her, she
pulled him down sitting on the bedside, and clung to him fiercely. Van Helsing and I tried to calm them both. The Professor held up his
golden crucifix, and said with wonderful calmness, "Do not fear, my
dear. We are here, and whilst this is close to you no foul thing can
approach. You are safe for tonight, and we must be calm and take
counsel together." She shuddered and was silent, holding down her head on her husband's
breast. When she raised it, his white nightrobe was stained with
blood where her lips had touched, and where the thin open wound in the
neck had sent forth drops. The instant she saw it she drew back, with
a low wail, and whispered, amidst choking sobs. "Unclean, unclean! I must touch him or kiss him no more. Oh, that it
should be that it is I who am now his worst enemy, and whom he may
have most cause to fear." To this he spoke out resolutely, "Nonsense, Mina. It is a shame to me
to hear such a word. I would not hear it of you. And I shall not
hear it from you. May God judge me by my deserts, and punish me with
more bitter suffering than even this hour, if by any act or will of
mine anything ever come between us!" He put out his arms and folded her to his breast. And for a while she
lay there sobbing. He looked at us over her bowed head, with eyes
that blinked damply above his quivering nostrils. His mouth was set
as steel. After a while her sobs became less frequent and more faint, and then
he said to me, speaking with a studied calmness which I felt tried his
nervous power to the utmost. "And now, Dr. Seward, tell me all about it. Too well I know the broad
fact. Tell me all that has been." I told him exactly what had happened and he listened with seeming
impassiveness, but his nostrils twitched and his eyes blazed as I told
how the ruthless hands of the Count had held his wife in that terrible
and horrid position, with her mouth to the open wound in his breast. It interested me, even at that moment, to see that whilst the face of
white set passion worked convulsively over the bowed head, the hands
tenderly and lovingly stroked the ruffled hair. Just as I had
finished, Quincey and Godalming knocked at the door. They entered in
obedience to our summons. Van Helsing looked at me questioningly. I
understood him to mean if we were to take advantage of their coming to
divert if possible the thoughts of the unhappy husband and wife from
each other and from themselves. So on nodding acquiescence to him he
asked them what they had seen or done. To which Lord Godalming
answered. "I could not see him anywhere in the passage, or in any of our rooms. I looked in the study but, though he had been there, he had gone. He
had, however . . ." He stopped suddenly, looking at the poor drooping
figure on the bed. Van Helsing said gravely, "Go on, friend Arthur. We want here no more
concealments. Our hope now is in knowing all. Tell freely!" So Art went on, "He had been there, and though it could only have been
for a few seconds, he made rare hay of the place. All the manuscript
had been burned, and the blue flames were flickering amongst the white
ashes. The cylinders of your phonograph too were thrown on the fire,
and the wax had helped the flames." Here I interrupted. "Thank God there is the other copy in the safe!" His face lit for a moment, but fell again as he went on. "I ran
downstairs then, but could see no sign of him. I looked into
Renfield's room, but there was no trace there except . . ." Again he
paused. "Go on," said Harker hoarsely. So he bowed his head and moistening his
lips with his tongue, added, "except that the poor fellow is dead." Mrs. Harker raised her head, looking from one to the other of us she
said solemnly, "God's will be done!" I could not but feel that Art was keeping back something. But, as I
took it that it was with a purpose, I said nothing. Van Helsing turned to Morris and asked, "And you, friend Quincey, have
you any to tell?" "A little," he answered. "It may be much eventually, but at present I
can't say. I thought it well to know if possible where the Count
would go when he left the house. I did not see him, but I saw a bat
rise from Renfield's window, and flap westward. I expected to see him
in some shape go back to Carfax, but he evidently sought some other
lair. He will not be back tonight, for the sky is reddening in the
east, and the dawn is close. We must work tomorrow!" He said the latter words through his shut teeth. For a space of
perhaps a couple of minutes there was silence, and I could fancy that
I could hear the sound of our hearts beating. Then Van Helsing said, placing his hand tenderly on Mrs. Harker's
head, "And now, Madam Mina, poor dear, dear, Madam Mina, tell us
exactly what happened. God knows that I do not want that you be
pained, but it is need that we know all. For now more than ever has
all work to be done quick and sharp, and in deadly earnest. The day
is close to us that must end all, if it may be so, and now is the
chance that we may live and learn." The poor dear lady shivered, and I could see the tension of her nerves
as she clasped her husband closer to her and bent her head lower and
lower still on his breast. Then she raised her head proudly, and held
out one hand to Van Helsing who took it in his, and after stooping and
kissing it reverently, held it fast. The other hand was locked in
that of her husband, who held his other arm thrown round her
protectingly. After a pause in which she was evidently ordering her
thoughts, she began. "I took the sleeping draught which you had so kindly given me, but for
a long time it did not act. I seemed to become more wakeful, and
myriads of horrible fancies began to crowd in upon my mind. All of
them connected with death, and vampires, with blood, and pain, and
trouble." Her husband involuntarily groaned as she turned to him and
said lovingly, "Do not fret, dear. You must be brave and strong, and
help me through the horrible task. If you only knew what an effort it
is to me to tell of this fearful thing at all, you would understand
how much I need your help. Well, I saw I must try to help the
medicine to its work with my will, if it was to do me any good, so I
resolutely set myself to sleep. Sure enough sleep must soon have come
to me, for I remember no more. Jonathan coming in had not waked me,
for he lay by my side when next I remember. There was in the room the
same thin white mist that I had before noticed. But I forget now if
you know of this. You will find it in my diary which I shall show you
later. I felt the same vague terror which had come to me before and
the same sense of some presence. I turned to wake Jonathan, but found
that he slept so soundly that it seemed as if it was he who had taken
the sleeping draught, and not I.  I tried, but I could not wake him. This caused me a great fear, and I looked around terrified. Then
indeed, my heart sank within me. Beside the bed, as if he had stepped
out of the mist, or rather as if the mist had turned into his figure,
for it had entirely disappeared, stood a tall, thin man, all in
black. I knew him at once from the description of the others. The
waxen face, the high aquiline nose, on which the light fell in a thin
white line, the parted red lips, with the sharp white teeth showing
between, and the red eyes that I had seemed to see in the sunset on
the windows of St. Mary's Church at Whitby. I knew, too, the red scar
on his forehead where Jonathan had struck him. For an instant my
heart stood still, and I would have screamed out, only that I was
paralyzed. In the pause he spoke in a sort of keen, cutting whisper,
pointing as he spoke to Jonathan. "'Silence! If you make a sound I shall take him and dash his brains
out before your very eyes.' I was appalled and was too bewildered to
do or say anything. With a mocking smile, he placed one hand upon my
shoulder and, holding me tight, bared my throat with the other, saying
as he did so, 'First, a little refreshment to reward my exertions. You may as well be quiet. It is not the first time, or the second,
that your veins have appeased my thirst!' I was bewildered, and
strangely enough, I did not want to hinder him. I suppose it is a
part of the horrible curse that such is, when his touch is on his
victim. And oh, my God, my God, pity me! He placed his reeking lips
upon my throat!" Her husband groaned again. She clasped his hand
harder, and looked at him pityingly, as if he were the injured one,
and went on. "I felt my strength fading away, and I was in a half swoon. How long
this horrible thing lasted I know not, but it seemed that a long time
must have passed before he took his foul, awful, sneering mouth away. I saw it drip with the fresh blood!" The remembrance seemed for a while
to overpower her, and she drooped and would have sunk down but for her
husband's sustaining arm. With a great effort she recovered herself
and went on. "Then he spoke to me mockingly, 'And so you, like the others, would
play your brains against mine. You would help these men to hunt me
and frustrate me in my design! You know now, and they know in part
already, and will know in full before long, what it is to cross my
path. They should have kept their energies for use closer to home. Whilst they played wits against me, against me who commanded nations,
and intrigued for them, and fought for them, hundreds of years before
they were born, I was countermining them. And you, their best beloved
one, are now to me, flesh of my flesh, blood of my blood, kin of my
kin, my bountiful wine-press for a while, and shall be later on my
companion and my helper. You shall be avenged in turn, for not one of
them but shall minister to your needs. But as yet you are to be
punished for what you have done. You have aided in thwarting me. Now
you shall come to my call. When my brain says "Come!" to you, you
shall cross land or sea to do my bidding. And to that end this!' "With that he pulled open his shirt, and with his long sharp nails
opened a vein in his breast. When the blood began to spurt out, he
took my hands in one of his, holding them tight, and with the other
seized my neck and pressed my mouth to the wound, so that I must
either suffocate or swallow some to the . . . Oh, my God! My God! What have I done? What have I done to deserve such a fate, I who have
tried to walk in meekness and righteousness all my days. God pity
me! Look down on a poor soul in worse than mortal peril. And in
mercy pity those to whom she is dear!" Then she began to rub her lips
as though to cleanse them from pollution. As she was telling her terrible story, the eastern sky began to
quicken, and everything became more and more clear. Harker was still
and quiet; but over his face, as the awful narrative went on, came a
grey look which deepened and deepened in the morning light, till when
the first red streak of the coming dawn shot up, the flesh stood
darkly out against the whitening hair. We have arranged that one of us is to stay within call of the unhappy
pair till we can meet together and arrange about taking action. Of this I am sure. The sun rises today on no more miserable house in
all the great round of its daily course. CHAPTER 22


JONATHAN HARKER'S JOURNAL

3 October.--As I must do something or go mad, I write this diary. It
is now six o'clock, and we are to meet in the study in half an hour
and take something to eat, for Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward are
agreed that if we do not eat we cannot work our best. Our best will
be, God knows, required today. I must keep writing at every chance,
for I dare not stop to think. All, big and little, must go down. Perhaps at the end the little things may teach us most. The teaching,
big or little, could not have landed Mina or me anywhere worse than we
are today. However, we must trust and hope. Poor Mina told me just
now, with the tears running down her dear cheeks, that it is in
trouble and trial that our faith is tested. That we must keep on
trusting, and that God will aid us up to the end. The end! Oh my
God! What end? . . . To work! To work! When Dr. Van Helsing and Dr. Seward had come back from seeing poor
Renfield, we went gravely into what was to be done. First, Dr. Seward
told us that when he and Dr. Van Helsing had gone down to the room
below they had found Renfield lying on the floor, all in a heap. His
face was all bruised and crushed in, and the bones of the neck were
broken. Dr. Seward asked the attendant who was on duty in the passage if he
had heard anything. He said that he had been sitting down, he
confessed to half dozing, when he heard loud voices in the room, and
then Renfield had called out loudly several times, "God! God! God!" After that there was a sound of falling, and when he entered the room
he found him lying on the floor, face down, just as the doctors had
seen him. Van Helsing asked if he had heard "voices" or "a voice,"
and he said he could not say. That at first it had seemed to him as
if there were two, but as there was no one in the room it could have
been only one. He could swear to it, if required, that the word "God"
was spoken by the patient. Dr. Seward said to us, when we were alone, that he did not wish to go
into the matter. The question of an inquest had to be considered, and
it would never do to put forward the truth, as no one would believe
it. As it was, he thought that on the attendant's evidence he could
give a certificate of death by misadventure in falling from bed. In
case the coroner should demand it, there would be a formal inquest,
necessarily to the same result. When the question began to be discussed as to what should be our next
step, the very first thing we decided was that Mina should be in full
confidence. That nothing of any sort, no matter how painful, should
be kept from her. She herself agreed as to its wisdom, and it was
pitiful to see her so brave and yet so sorrowful, and in such a depth
of despair. "There must be no concealment," she said. "Alas! We have had too
much already. And besides there is nothing in all the world that can
give me more pain than I have already endured, than I suffer now! Whatever may happen, it must be of new hope or of new courage to me!" Van Helsing was looking at her fixedly as she spoke, and said,
suddenly but quietly, "But dear Madam Mina, are you not afraid. Not
for yourself, but for others from yourself, after what has happened?" Her face grew set in its lines, but her eyes shone with the devotion
of a martyr as she answered, "Ah no! For my mind is made up!" "To what?" he asked gently, whilst we were all very still, for each in
our own way we had a sort of vague idea of what she meant. Her answer came with direct simplicity, as though she was simply
stating a fact, "Because if I find in myself, and I shall watch keenly
for it, a sign of harm to any that I love, I shall die!" "You would not kill yourself?" he asked, hoarsely. "I would. If there were no friend who loved me, who would save me
such a pain, and so desperate an effort!" She looked at him meaningly
as she spoke. He was sitting down, but now he rose and came close to her and put his
hand on her head as he said solemnly. "My child, there is such an one
if it were for your good. For myself I could hold it in my account
with God to find such an euthanasia for you, even at this moment if it
were best. Nay, were it safe! But my child . . ." For a moment he seemed choked, and a great sob rose in his throat. He
gulped it down and went on, "There are here some who would stand
between you and death. You must not die. You must not die by any
hand, but least of all your own. Until the other, who has fouled your
sweet life, is true dead you must not die. For if he is still with
the quick Undead, your death would make you even as he is. No, you
must live! You must struggle and strive to live, though death would
seem a boon unspeakable. You must fight Death himself, though he come
to you in pain or in joy. By the day, or the night, in safety or in
peril! On your living soul I charge you that you do not die. Nay,
nor think of death, till this great evil be past." The poor dear grew white as death, and shook and shivered, as I have
seen a quicksand shake and shiver at the incoming of the tide. We
were all silent. We could do nothing. At length she grew more calm
and turning to him said sweetly, but oh so sorrowfully, as she held
out her hand, "I promise you, my dear friend, that if God will let me
live, I shall strive to do so. Till, if it may be in His good time,
this horror may have passed away from me." She was so good and brave that we all felt that our hearts were
strengthened to work and endure for her, and we began to discuss what
we were to do. I told her that she was to have all the papers in the
safe, and all the papers or diaries and phonographs we might hereafter
use, and was to keep the record as she had done before. She was
pleased with the prospect of anything to do, if "pleased" could be
used in connection with so grim an interest. As usual Van Helsing had thought ahead of everyone else, and was
prepared with an exact ordering of our work. "It is perhaps well," he said, "that at our meeting after our visit to
Carfax we decided not to do anything with the earth boxes that lay
there. Had we done so, the Count must have guessed our purpose, and
would doubtless have taken measures in advance to frustrate such an
effort with regard to the others. But now he does not know our
intentions. Nay, more, in all probability, he does not know that such
a power exists to us as can sterilize his lairs, so that he cannot use
them as of old. "We are now so much further advanced in our knowledge as to their
disposition that, when we have examined the house in Piccadilly, we may
track the very last of them. Today then, is ours, and in it rests our
hope. The sun that rose on our sorrow this morning guards us in its
course. Until it sets tonight, that monster must retain whatever form
he now has. He is confined within the limitations of his earthly
envelope. He cannot melt into thin air nor disappear through cracks
or chinks or crannies. If he go through a doorway, he must open the
door like a mortal. And so we have this day to hunt out all his lairs
and sterilize them. So we shall, if we have not yet catch him and
destroy him, drive him to bay in some place where the catching and the
destroying shall be, in time, sure." Here I started up for I could not contain myself at the thought that
the minutes and seconds so preciously laden with Mina's life and
happiness were flying from us, since whilst we talked action was
impossible. But Van Helsing held up his hand warningly. "Nay, friend Jonathan," he said, "in this, the quickest way home is
the longest way, so your proverb say. We shall all act and act with
desperate quick, when the time has come. But think, in all probable
the key of the situation is in that house in Piccadilly. The Count
may have many houses which he has bought. Of them he will have deeds
of purchase, keys and other things. He will have paper that he write
on. He will have his book of cheques. There are many belongings that
he must have somewhere. Why not in this place so central, so quiet,
where he come and go by the front or the back at all hours, when in
the very vast of the traffic there is none to notice. We shall go
there and search that house. And when we learn what it holds, then we
do what our friend Arthur call, in his phrases of hunt 'stop the
earths' and so we run down our old fox, so? Is it not?" "Then let us come at once," I cried, "we are wasting the precious,
precious time!" The Professor did not move, but simply said, "And how are we to get
into that house in Piccadilly?" "Any way!" I cried. "We shall break in if need be." "And your police? Where will they be, and what will they say?" I was staggered, but I knew that if he wished to delay he had a good
reason for it. So I said, as quietly as I could, "Don't wait more
than need be. You know, I am sure, what torture I am in." "Ah, my child, that I do. And indeed there is no wish of me to add to
your anguish. But just think, what can we do, until all the world be
at movement. Then will come our time. I have thought and thought,
and it seems to me that the simplest way is the best of all. Now we
wish to get into the house, but we have no key. Is it not so?" I
nodded. "Now suppose that you were, in truth, the owner of that house, and
could not still get in. And think there was to you no conscience of
the housebreaker, what would you do?" "I should get a respectable locksmith, and set him to work to pick the
lock for me." "And your police, they would interfere, would they not?" "Oh no! Not if they knew the man was properly employed." "Then," he looked at me as keenly as he spoke, "all that is in doubt
is the conscience of the employer, and the belief of your policemen as
to whether or not that employer has a good conscience or a bad one. Your police must indeed be zealous men and clever, oh so clever, in
reading the heart, that they trouble themselves in such matter. No,
no, my friend Jonathan, you go take the lock off a hundred empty
houses in this your London, or of any city in the world, and if you do
it as such things are rightly done, and at the time such things are
rightly done, no one will interfere. I have read of a gentleman who
owned a so fine house in London, and when he went for months of summer
to Switzerland and lock up his house, some burglar come and broke
window at back and got in. Then he went and made open the shutters in
front and walk out and in through the door, before the very eyes of
the police. Then he have an auction in that house, and advertise it,
and put up big notice. And when the day come he sell off by a great
auctioneer all the goods of that other man who own them. Then he go
to a builder, and he sell him that house, making an agreement that he
pull it down and take all away within a certain time. And your police
and other authority help him all they can. And when that owner come
back from his holiday in Switzerland he find only an empty hole where
his house had been. This was all done en regle, and in our work we
shall be en regle too. We shall not go so early that the policemen
who have then little to think of, shall deem it strange. But we shall
go after ten o'clock, when there are many about, and such things would
be done were we indeed owners of the house." I could not but see how right he was and the terrible despair of
Mina's face became relaxed in thought. There was hope in such good
counsel. Van Helsing went on, "When once within that house we may find more
clues. At any rate some of us can remain there whilst the rest find
the other places where there be more earth boxes, at Bermondsey and
Mile End." Lord Godalming stood up. "I can be of some use here," he said. "I
shall wire to my people to have horses and carriages where they will
be most convenient." "Look here, old fellow," said Morris, "it is a capital idea to have
all ready in case we want to go horse backing, but don't you think
that one of your snappy carriages with its heraldic adornments in a
byway of Walworth or Mile End would attract too much attention for our
purpose? It seems to me that we ought to take cabs when we go south
or east.