Siegmund followed her with the bags. He swung these on the rack, and
then quickly received the rugs, umbrellas, and packages from the other
two. These he put on the seats or anywhere, while Helena stowed them. She was very busy for a moment or two; the racks were full. Other people
entered; their luggage was troublesome to bestow. When she turned round again she found Louisa and Olive seated, but
Siegmund was outside on the platform, and the door was closed. He saw
her face move as if she would cry to him. She restrained herself, and
immediately called:

'You are coming? Oh, you are coming to Waterloo?' He shook his head. 'I cannot come,' he said. She stood looking blankly at him for some moments, unable to reach the
door because of the portmanteau thrust through with umbrellas and
sticks, which stood on the floor between the knees of the passengers. She was helpless. Siegmund was repeating deliriously in his mind:

'Oh--go--go--go--when will she go?' He could not bear her piteousness. Her presence made him feel insane. 'Would you like to come to the window?' a man asked of Helena kindly. She smiled suddenly in his direction, without perceiving him. He pulled
the portmanteau under his legs, and Helena edged past. She stood by the
door, leaning forward with some of her old protective grace, her 'Hawwa'
spirit evident. Benign and shielding, she bent forward, looking at
Siegmund. But her face was blank with helplessness, with misery of
helplessness. She stood looking at Siegmund, saying nothing. His
forehead was scorched and swollen, she noticed sorrowfully, and beneath
one eye the skin was blistered. His eyes were bloodshot and glazed in a
kind of apathy; they filled her with terror. He looked up at her because
she wished it. For himself, he could not see her; he could only recoil
from her. All he wished was to hide himself in the dark, alone. Yet she
wanted him, and so far he yielded. But to go to Waterloo he could
not yield. The people in the carriage, made uneasy by this strange farewell, did
not speak. There were a few taut moments of silence. No one seems to
have strength to interrupt these spaces of irresolute anguish. Finally,
the guard's whistle went. Siegmund and Helena clasped hands. A warm
flush of love and healthy grief came over Siegmund for the last time. The train began to move, drawing Helena's hand from his. 'Monday,' she whispered--'Monday,' meaning that on Monday she should
receive a letter from him. He nodded, turned, hesitated, looked at her,
turned and walked away. She remained at the window watching him depart. 'Now, dear, we are manless,' said Olive in a whisper. But her attempt at
a joke fell dead. Everybody was silent and uneasy. _Chapter 27_


He hurried down the platform, wincing at every stride, from the memory
of Helena's last look of mute, heavy yearning. He gripped his fists till
they trembled; his thumbs were again closed under his fingers. Like a
picture on a cloth before him he still saw Helena's face, white,
rounded, in feature quite mute and expressionless, just made terrible by
the heavy eyes, pleading dumbly. He thought of her going on and on,
still at the carriage window looking out; all through the night rushing
west and west to the land of Isolde. Things began to haunt Siegmund like
a delirium. He knew not where he was hurrying. Always in front of him,
as on a cloth, was the face of Helena, while somewhere behind the cloth
was Cornwall, a far-off lonely place where darkness came on intensely. Sometimes he saw a dim, small phantom in the darkness of Cornwall, very
far off. Then the face of Helena, white, inanimate as a mask, with heavy
eyes, came between again. He was almost startled to find himself at home, in the porch of his
house. The door opened. He remembered to have heard the quick thud of
feet. It was Vera. She glanced at him, but said nothing. Instinctively
she shrank from him. He passed without noticing her. She stood on the
door-mat, fastening the door, striving to find something to say to him. 'You have been over an hour,' she said, still more troubled when she
found her voice shaking. She had no idea what alarmed her. 'Ay,' returned Siegmund. He went into the dining-room and dropped into his chair, with his head
between his hands. Vera followed him nervously. 'Will you have anything to eat?' she asked. He looked up at the table, as if the supper laid there were curious and
incomprehensible. The delirious lifting of his eyelids showed the whole
of the dark pupils and the bloodshot white of his eyes. Vera held her
breath with fear. He sank his head again and said nothing. Vera sat down
and waited. The minutes ticked slowly off. Siegmund neither moved nor
spoke. At last the clock struck midnight. She was weary with sleep,
querulous with trouble. 'Aren't you going to bed?' she asked. Siegmund heard her without paying any attention. He seemed only to half
hear. Vera waited awhile, then repeated plaintively:

'Aren't you going to bed, Father?' Siegmund lifted his head and looked at her. He loathed the idea of
having to move. He looked at her confusedly. 'Yes, I'm going,' he said, and his head dropped again. Vera knew he was
not asleep. She dared not leave him till he was in his bedroom. Again
she sat waiting. 'Father!' she cried at last. He started up, gripping the arms of his chair, trembling. 'Yes, I'm going,' he said. He rose, and went unevenly upstairs. Vera followed him close behind. 'If he reels and falls backwards he will kill me,' she thought, but he
did not fall. From habit he went into the bathroom. While trying to
brush his teeth he dropped the tooth-brush on to the floor. 'I'll pick it up in the morning,' he said, continuing deliriously: 'I
must go to bed--I must go to bed--I am very tired.' He stumbled over the
door mat into his own room. Vera was standing behind the unclosed door of her room. She heard the
sneck of his lock. She heard the water still running in the bathroom,
trickling with the mysterious sound of water at dead of night. Screwing
up her courage, she went and turned off the tap. Then she stood again in
her own room, to be near the companionable breathing of her sleeping
sister, listening. Siegmund undressed quickly. His one thought was to
get into bed. 'One must sleep,' he said as he dropped his clothes on the floor. He
could not find the way to put on his sleeping-jacket, and that made him
pant. Any little thing that roused or thwarted his mechanical action
aggravated his sickness till his brain seemed to be bursting. He got
things right at last, and was in bed. Immediately he lapsed into a kind of unconsciousness. He would have
called it sleep, but such it was not. All the time he could feel his
brain working ceaselessly, like a machine running with unslackening
rapidity. This went on, interrupted by little flickerings of
consciousness, for three or four hours. Each time he had a glimmer of
consciousness he wondered if he made any noise. 'What am I doing? What is the matter? Am I unconscious? Do I make any
noise? Do I disturb them?' he wondered, and he tried to cast back to
find the record of mechanical sense impression. He believed he could
remember the sound of inarticulate murmuring in his throat. Immediately
he remembered, he could feel his throat producing the sounds. This
frightened him. Above all things, he was afraid of disturbing the
family. He roused himself to listen. Everything was breathing in
silence. As he listened to this silence he relapsed into his sort
of sleep. He was awakened finally by his own perspiration. He was terribly hot. The pillow, the bedclothes, his hair, all seemed to be steaming with hot
vapour, whilst his body was bathed in sweat. It was coming light. Immediately he shut his eyes again and lay still. He was now conscious,
and his brain was irritably active, but his body was a separate thing, a
terrible, heavy, hot thing over which he had slight control. Siegmund lay still, with his eyes closed, enduring the exquisite torture
of the trickling of drops of sweat. First it would be one gathering and
running its irregular, hesitating way into the hollow of his neck. His
every nerve thrilled to it, yet he felt he could not move more than to
stiffen his throat slightly. While yet the nerves in the track of this
drop were quivering, raw with sensitiveness, another drop would start
from off the side of his chest, and trickle downwards among the little
muscles of his side, to drip on to the bed. It was like the running of a
spider over his sensitive, moveless body. Why he did not wipe himself he
did not know. He lay still and endured this horrible tickling, which
seemed to bite deep into him, rather than make the effort to move, which
he loathed to do. The drops ran off his forehead down his temples. Those
he did not mind: he was blunt there. But they started again, in tiny,
vicious spurts, down the sides of his chest, from under his armpits,
down the inner sides of his thighs, till he seemed to have a myriad
quivering tracks of a myriad running insects over his hot, wet,
highly-sensitized body. His nerves were trembling, one and all, with
outrage and vivid suspense. It became unbearable. He felt that, if he
endured it another moment, he would cry out, or suffocate and burst. He sat up suddenly, threw away the bedclothes, from which came a puff of
hot steam, and began to rub his pyjamas against his sides and his legs. He rubbed madly for a few moments. Then he sighed with relief. He sat on
the side of the bed, moving from the hot dampness of the place where he
had lain. For a moment he thought he would go to sleep. Then, in an
instant his brain seemed to click awake. He was still as loath as ever
to move, but his brain was no longer clouded in hot vapour: it was
clear. He sat, bowing forward on the side of the bed, his
sleeping-jacket open, the dawn stealing into the room, the morning air
entering fresh through the wide-flung window-door. He felt a peculiar
sense of guilt, of wrongness, in thus having jumped out of bed. It
seemed to him as if he ought to have endured the heat of his body, and
the infernal trickling of the drops of sweat. But at the thought of it
he moved his hands gratefully over his sides, which now were dry, and
soft, and smooth; slightly chilled on the surface perhaps, for he felt a
sudden tremor of shivering from the warm contact of his hands. Siegmund sat up straight: his body was re-animated. He felt the pillow
and the groove where he had lain. It was quite wet and clammy. There was
a scent of sweat on the bed, not really unpleasant, but he wanted
something fresh and cool. Siegmund sat in the doorway that gave on to the small veranda. The air
was beautifully cool. He felt his chest again to make sure it was not
clammy. It was smooth as silk. This pleased him very much. He looked out
on the night again, and was startled. Somewhere the moon was shining
duskily, in a hidden quarter of sky; but straight in front of him, in
the northwest, silent lightning was fluttering. He waited breathlessly
to see if it were true. Then, again, the pale lightning jumped up into
the dome of the fading night. It was like a white bird stirring
restlessly on its nest. The night was drenching thinner, greyer. The
lightning, like a bird that should have flown before the arm of day,
moved on its nest in the boughs of darkness, raised itself, flickered
its pale wings rapidly, then sank again, loath to fly. Siegmund watched
it with wonder and delight. The day was pushing aside the boughs of darkness, hunting. The poor moon
would be caught when the net was flung. Siegmund went out on the balcony
to look at it. There it was, like a poor white mouse, a half-moon,
crouching on the mound of its course. It would run nimbly over to the
western slope, then it would be caught in the net, and the sun would
laugh, like a great yellow cat, as it stalked behind playing with its
prey, flashing out its bright paws. The moon, before making its last
run, lay crouched, palpitating. The sun crept forth, laughing to itself
as it saw its prey could not escape. The lightning, however, leaped low
off the nest like a bird decided to go, and flew away. Siegmund no
longer saw it opening and shutting its wings in hesitation amid the
disturbance of the dawn. Instead there came a flush, the white lightning
gone. The brief pink butterflies of sunrise and sunset rose up from the
mown fields of darkness, and fluttered low in a cloud. Even in the west
they flew in a narrow, rosy swarm. They separated, thinned, rising
higher. Some, flying up, became golden. Some flew rosy gold across the
moon, the mouse-moon motionless with fear. Soon the pink butterflies had
gone, leaving a scarlet stretch like a field of poppies in the fens. As
a wind, the light of day blew in from the east, puff after puff filling
with whiteness the space which had been the night. Siegmund sat watching
the last morning blowing in across the mown darkness, till the whole
field of the world was exposed, till the moon was like a dead mouse
which floats on water. When the few birds had called in the August morning, when the cocks had
finished their crowing, when the minute sounds of the early day were
astir, Siegmund shivered disconsolate. He felt tired again, yet he knew
he could not sleep. The bed was repulsive to him. He sat in his chair at
the open door, moving uneasily. What should have been sleep was an ache
and a restlessness. He turned and twisted in his chair. 'Where is Helena?' he asked himself, and he looked out on the morning. Everything out of doors was unreal, like a show, like a peepshow. Helena
was an actress somewhere in the brightness of this view. He alone was
out of the piece. He sighed petulantly, pressing back his shoulders as
if they ached. His arms, too, ached with irritation, while his head
seemed to be hissing with angry irritability. For a long time he sat
with clenched teeth, merely holding himself in check. In his present
state of irritability everything that occurred to his mind stirred him
with dislike or disgust. Helena, music, the pleasant company of friends,
the sunshine of the country, each, as it offered itself to his thoughts,
was met by an angry contempt, was rejected scornfully. As nothing could
please or distract him, the only thing that remained was to support the
discord. He felt as if he were a limb out of joint from the body of
life: there occurred to his imagination a disjointed finger, swollen and
discoloured, racked with pains. The question was, How should he reset
himself into joint? The body of life for him meant Beatrice, his
children, Helena, the Comic Opera, his friends of the orchestra. How
could he set himself again into joint with these? It was impossible. Towards his family he would henceforward have to bear himself with
humility. That was a cynicism. He would have to leave Helena, which he
could not do. He would have to play strenuously, night after night, the
music of _The Saucy Little Switzer_ which was absurd. In fine, it was
all absurd and impossible. Very well, then, that being so, what remained
possible? Why, to depart. 'If thine hand offend thee, cut it off.' He
could cut himself off from life. It was plain and straightforward. But Beatrice, his young children, without him! He was bound by an
agreement which there was no discrediting to provide for them. Very
well, he must provide for them. And then what? Humiliation at home,
Helena forsaken, musical comedy night after night. That was
insufferable--impossible! Like a man tangled up in a rope, he was not
strong enough to free himself. He could not break with Helena and return
to a degrading life at home; he could not leave his children and go
to Helena. Very well, it was impossible! Then there remained only one door which he
could open in this prison corridor of life. Siegmund looked round the
room. He could get his razor, or he could hang himself. He had thought
of the two ways before. Yet now he was unprovided. His portmanteau stood
at the foot of the bed, its straps flung loose. A portmanteau strap
would do. Then it should be a portmanteau strap! 'Very well!' said Siegmund, 'it is finally settled. I had better write
to Helena, and tell her, and say to her she must go on. I'd better
tell her.' He sat for a long time with his notebook and a pencil, but he wrote
nothing. At last he gave up. 'Perhaps it is just as well,' he said to himself. 'She said she would
come with me--perhaps that is just as well. She will go to the sea. When
she knows, the sea will take her. She must know.' He took a card, bearing her name and her Cornwall address, from his
pocket-book, and laid it on the dressing-table. 'She will come with me,' he said to himself, and his heart rose with
elation. 'That is a cowardice,' he added, looking doubtfully at the card, as if
wondering whether to destroy it. 'It is in the hands of God. Beatrice may or may not send word to her at
Tintagel. It is in the hands of God,' he concluded. Then he sat down again. '"But for that fear of something after-death,"' he quoted to himself. 'It is not fear,' he said. 'The act itself will be horrible and
fearsome, but the after-death--it's no more than struggling awake when
you're sick with a fright of dreams. "We are such stuff as dreams are
made on."' Siegmund sat thinking of the after-death, which to him seemed so
wonderfully comforting, full of rest, and reassurance, and renewal. He
experienced no mystical ecstasies. He was sure of a wonderful kindness
in death, a kindness which really reached right through life, though
here he could not avail himself of it. Siegmund had always inwardly held
faith that the heart of life beat kindly towards him. When he was
cynical and sulky he knew that in reality it was only a waywardness
of his. The heart of life is implacable in its kindness. It may not be moved to
fluttering of pity; it swings on uninterrupted by cries of anguish or
of hate. Siegmund was thankful for this unfaltering sternness of life. There was
no futile hesitation between doom and pity. Therefore, he could submit
and have faith. If each man by his crying could swerve the slow, sheer
universe, what a doom of guilt he might gain. If Life could swerve from
its orbit for pity, what terror of vacillation; and who would wish to
bear the responsibility of the deflection? Siegmund thanked God that life was pitiless, strong enough to take his
treasures out of his hands, and to thrust him out of the room;
otherwise, how could he go with any faith to death; otherwise, he would
have felt the helpless disillusion of a youth who finds his infallible
parents weaker than himself. 'I know the heart of life is kind,' said Siegmund, 'because I feel it. Otherwise I would live in defiance. But Life is greater than me or
anybody. We suffer, and we don't know why, often. Life doesn't explain. But I can keep faith in it, as a dog has faith in his master. After all,
Life is as kind to me as I am to my dog. I have, proportionally, as much
zest. And my purpose towards my dog is good. I need not despair
of Life.' It occurred to Siegmund that he was meriting the old gibe of the
atheists. He was shirking the responsibility of himself, turning it over
to an imaginary god. 'Well,' he said, 'I can't help it. I do not feel altogether
self-responsible.' The morning had waxed during these investigations. Siegmund had been
vaguely aware of the rousing of the house. He was finally startled into
a consciousness of the immediate present by the calling of Vera at
his door. 'There are two letters for you. Father.' He looked about him in bewilderment; the hours had passed in a trance,
and he had no idea of his time or place. 'Oh, all right,' he said, too much dazed to know what it meant. He heard
his daughter going downstairs. Then swiftly returned over him the
throbbing ache of his head and his arms, the discordant jarring of
his body. 'What made her bring me the letters?' he asked himself. It was a very
unusual attention. His heart replied, very sullen and shameful: 'She
wanted to know; she wanted to make sure I was all right.' Siegmund forgot all his speculations on a divine benevolence. The
discord of his immediate situation overcame every harmony.