'And I?' he asked. 'You--what of you?' she cried. Then she became sad. 'I have little
perverse feelings,' she lamented. 'And I can't bear to compel anything, for fear of hurting it. So I'm
always pushed this way and that, like a fool.' 'You don't know how you hurt me, talking so,' she said. He kissed her. After a moment he said:

'You are not like other folk. "_Ihr Lascheks seid ein anderes
Geschlecht_." I thought of you when we read it.' 'Would you rather have me more like the rest, or more unlike, Siegmund? Which is it?' 'Neither,' he said. 'You are _you_.' They were quiet for a space. The only movement in the night was the
faint gambolling of starlight on the water. The last person had passed
in black silhouette between them and the sea. He was thinking bitterly. She seemed to goad him deeper and deeper into
life. He had a sense of despair, a preference of death. The German she
read with him--she loved its loose and violent romance--came back to his
mind: '_Der Tod geht einem zur Seite, fast sichtbarlich, und jagt einem
immer tiefer ins Leben._'

Well, the next place he would be hunted to, like a hare run down, was
home. It seemed impossible the morrow would take him back to Beatrice. 'This time tomorrow night,' he said. 'Siegmund!' she implored. 'Why not?' he laughed. 'Don't, dear,' she pleaded. 'All right, I won't.' Some large steamer crossing the mouth of the bay made the water dash a
little as it broke in accentuated waves. A warm puff of air wandered in
on them now and again. 'You won't be tired when you go back?' Helena asked. 'Tired!' he echoed. 'You know how you were when you came,' she reminded him, in tones full
of pity. He laughed. 'Oh, that is gone,' he said. With a slow, mechanical rhythm she stroked his cheek. 'And will you be sad?' she said, hesitating. 'Sad!' he repeated. 'But will you be able to fake the old life up, happier, when you go
back?' 'The old life will take me up, I suppose,' he said. There was a pause. 'I think, dear,' she said, 'I have done wrong.' 'Good Lord--you have not!' he replied sharply, pressing back his head to
look at her, for the first time. 'I shall have to send you back to Beatrice and the babies--tomorrow--as
you are now....'

'"Take no thought for the morrow." Be quiet, Helena!' he exclaimed as
the reality bit him. He sat up suddenly. 'Why?' she asked, afraid. 'Why!' he repeated. He remained sitting, leaning forward on the sand,
staring intently at Helena. She looked back in fear at him. The moment
terrified her, and she lost courage. With a fluttered motion she put her hand on his, which was pressed hard
on the sand as he leaned forward. At once he relaxed his intensity,
laughed, then became tender. Helena yielded herself like a forlorn child to his arms, and there lay,
half crying, while he smoothed her brow with his fingers, and grains of
sand fell from his palm on her cheek. She shook with dry, withered sobs,
as a child does when it snatches itself away from the lancet of the
doctor and hides in the mother's bosom, refusing to be touched. But she knew the morrow was coming, whether or not, and she cowered down
on his breast. She was wild with fear of the parting and the subsequent
days. They must drink, after tomorrow, separate cups. She was filled
with vague terror of what it would be. The sense of the oneness and
unity of their fates was gone. Siegmund also was cowed by the threat of separation. He had more
definite knowledge of the next move than had Helena. His heart was
certain of calamity, which would overtake him directly. He shrank away. Wildly he beat about to find a means of escape from the next day and its
consequences. He did not want to go. Anything rather than go back. In the midst of their passion of fear the moon rose. Siegmund started to
see the rim appear ruddily beyond the sea. His struggling suddenly
ceased, and he watched, spellbound, the oval horn of fiery gold come up,
resolve itself. Some golden liquor dripped and spilled upon the far
waves, where it shook in ruddy splashes. The gold-red cup rose higher,
looming before him very large, yet still not all discovered. By degrees
the horn of gold detached itself from the darkness at back of the waves. It was immense and terrible. When would the tip be placed upon the table
of the sea? It stood at last, whole and calm, before him; then the night took up
this drinking-cup of fiery gold, lifting it with majestic movement
overhead, letting stream forth the wonderful unwasted liquor of gold
over the sea--a libation. Siegmund looked at the shaking flood of gold and paling gold spread
wider as the night upraised the blanching crystal, poured out farther
and farther the immense libation from the whitening cup, till at last
the moon looked frail and empty. And there, exhaustless in the night, the white light shook on the floor
of the sea. He wondered how it would be gathered up. 'I gather it up
into myself,' he said. And the stars and the cliffs and a few trees were
watching, too. 'If I have spilled my life,' he thought, 'the unfamiliar
eyes of the land and sky will gather it up again.' Turning to Helena, he found her face white and shining as the empty
moon. _Chapter 17_


Towards morning, Siegmund went to sleep. For four hours, until seven
o'clock, the womb of sleep received him and nourished him again. 'But it is finest of all to wake,' he said, as the bright sunshine of
the window, and the lumining green sunshine coming through the lifted
hands of the leaves, challenged him into the open. The morning was exceedingly fair, and it looked at him so gently that
his blue eyes trembled with self-pity. A fragment of scarlet geranium
glanced up at him as he passed, so that amid the vermilion tyranny of
the uniform it wore he could see the eyes of the flower, wistful,
offering him love, as one sometimes see the eyes of a man beneath the
brass helmet of a soldier, and is startled. Everything looked at him
with the same eyes of tenderness, offering him, timidly, a little love. 'They are all extraordinarily sweet,' said Siegmund to the full-mouthed
scabious and the awkward, downcast ragwort. Three or four butterflies
fluttered up and down in agitated little leaps, around him. Instinctively Siegmund put his hand forward to touch them. 'The careless little beggars!' he said. When he came to the cliff tops there was the morning, very bravely
dressed, rustling forward with a silken sound and much silken shining to
meet him. The battleships had gone; the sea was blue with a _panier_ of
diamonds; the sky was full with a misty tenderness like love. Siegmund
had never recognized before the affection that existed between him and
everything. We do not realize how tremendously dear and indispensable to
us are the hosts of common things, till we must leave them, and we break
our hearts. 'We have been very happy together,' everything seemed to say. Siegmund looked up into the eyes of the morning with a laugh. 'It is very lovely,' he said, 'whatever happens.' So he went down to the beach; his dark blue eyes, darker from last
night's experience, smiled always with the pride of love. He undressed
by his usual altar-stone. 'How closely familiar everything is,' he thought. 'It seems almost as if
the curves of this stone were rounded to fit in my soul.' He touched the smooth white slope of the stone gently with discovering
fingers, in the same way as he touched the cheek of Helena, or of his
own babies. He found great pleasure in this feeling of intimacy with
things. A very soft wind, shy as a girl, put his arms round him, and
seemed to lay its cheek against his chest. He placed his hands beneath
his arms, where the wind was caressing him, and his eyes opened with
wondering pleasure. 'They find no fault with me,' he said. 'I suppose they are as fallible
as I, and so don't judge,' he added, as he waded thigh-deep into the
water, thrusting it to hear the mock-angry remonstrance. 'Once more,' he said, and he took the sea in his arms. He swam very
quietly. The water buoyed him up, holding him closely clasped. He swam
towards the white rocks of the headlands; they rose before him like
beautiful buttressed gates, so glistening that he half expected to see
fantail pigeons puffing like white irises in the niches, and white
peacocks with dark green feet stepping down the terraces, trailing a
sheen of silver. 'Helena is right,' he said to himself as he swam, scarcely swimming, but
moving upon the bosom of the tide; 'she is right, it is all enchanted. I
have got into her magic at last. Let us see what it is like.' He determined to visit again his little bay. He swam carefully round the
terraces, whose pale shadows through the swift-spinning emerald facets
of the water seemed merest fancy. Siegmund touched them with his foot;
they were hard, cold, dangerous. He swam carefully. As he made for the
archway, the shadows of the headland chilled the water. There under
water, clamouring in a throng at the base of the submerged walls, were
sea-women with dark locks, and young sea-girls, with soft hair, vividly
green, striving to climb up out of the darkness into the morning, their
hair swirling in abandon. Siegmund was half afraid of their
frantic efforts. But the tide carried him swiftly through the high gate into the porch. There was exultance in this sweeping entry. The skin-white, full-fleshed
walls of the archway were dappled with green lights that danced in and
out among themselves. Siegmund was carried along in an invisible
chariot, beneath the jewel-stained walls. The tide swerved, threw him as
he swam against the inward-curving white rock; his elbow met the rock,
and he was sick with pain. He held his breath, trying to get back the
joy and magic. He could not believe that the lovely, smooth side of the
rock, fair as his own side with its ripple of muscles, could have hurt
him thus. He let the water carry him till he might climb out on to the
shingle. There he sat upon a warm boulder, and twisted to look at his
arm. The skin was grazed, not very badly, merely a ragged scarlet patch
no bigger than a carnation petal. The bruise, however, was painful,
especially when, a minute or two later, he bent his arm. 'No,' said he pitiably to himself, 'it is impossible it should have hurt
me. I suppose I was careless.' Nevertheless, the aspect of the morning changed. He sat on the boulder
looking out on the sea. The azure sky and the sea laughed on, holding a
bright conversation one with another. The two headlands of the tiny bay
gossiped across the street of water. All the boulders and pebbles of the
sea-shore played together. 'Surely,' said Siegmund, 'they take no notice of me; they do not care a
jot or a tittle for me. I am a fool to think myself one with them.' He contrasted this with the kindness of the morning as he had stood on
the cliffs. 'I was mistaken,' he said. 'It was an illusion.' He looked wistfully out again. Like neighbours leaning from opposite
windows of an overhanging street, the headlands were occupied one with
another. White rocks strayed out to sea, followed closely by other white
rocks. Everything was busy, interested, occupied with its own pursuit
and with its own comrades. Siegmund alone was without pursuit
or comrade. 'They will all go on the same; they will be just as gay. Even Helena,
after a while, will laugh and take interest in others. What do
I matter?' Siegmund thought of the futility of death:

    We are not long for music and laughter,
      Love and desire and hate;
    I think we have no portion in them after
      We pass the gate. 'Why should I be turned out of the game?' he asked himself, rebelling. He frowned, and answered: 'Oh, Lord!--the old argument!' But the thought of his own expunging from the picture was very bitter. 'Like the puff from the steamer's funnel, I should be gone.' He looked at himself, at his limbs and his body in the pride of his
maturity. He was very beautiful to himself. 'Nothing, in the place where I am,' he said. 'Gone, like a puff of steam
that melts on the sunshine.' Again Siegmund looked at the sea. It was glittering with laughter as at
a joke. 'And I,' he said, lying down in the warm sand, 'I am nothing. I do not
count; I am inconsiderable.' He set his teeth with pain. There were no tears, there was no relief. A
convulsive gasping shook him as he lay on the sands. All the while he
was arguing with himself. 'Well,' he said, 'if I am nothing dead I am nothing alive.' But the vulgar proverb arose--'Better a live dog than a dead lion,' to
answer him. It seemed an ignominy to be dead. It meant, to be
overlooked, even by the smallest creature of God's earth. Surely that
was a great ignominy. Helena, meanwhile, was bathing, for the last time, by the same sea-shore
with him. She was no swimmer. Her endless delight was to explore, to
discover small treasures. For her the world was still a great wonder-box
which hid innumerable sweet toys for surprises in all its crevices. She
had bathed in many rock-pools' tepid baths, trying first one, then
another. She had lain on the sand where the cold arms of the ocean
lifted her and smothered her impetuously, like an awful lover. 'The sea is a great deal like Siegmund,' she said, as she rose panting,
trying to dash her nostrils free from water. It was true; the sea as it
flung over her filled her with the same uncontrollable terror as did
Siegmund when he sometimes grew silent and strange in a tide of passion. She wandered back to her rock-pools; they were bright and docile; they
did not fling her about in a game of terror. She bent over watching the
anemone's fleshy petals shrink from the touch of her shadow, and she
laughed to think they should be so needlessly fearful. The flowing tide
trickled noiselessly among the rocks, widening and deepening insidiously
her little pools. Helena retreated towards a large cave round the bend. There the water gurgled under the bladder-wrack of the large stones; the
air was cool and clammy. She pursued her way into the gloom, bending,
though there was no need, shivering at the coarse feel of the seaweed
beneath her naked feet. The water came rustling up beneath the fucus as
she crept along on the big stones; it returned with a quiet gurgle which
made her shudder, though even that was not disagreeable. It needed, for
all that, more courage than was easy to summon before she could step off
her stone into the black pool that confronted her. It was festooned
thick with weeds that slid under her feet like snakes. She scrambled
hastily upwards towards the outlet. Turning, the ragged arch was before heir, brighter than the brightest
window. It was easy to believe the light-fairies stood outside in a
throng, excited with fine fear, throwing handfuls of light into the
dragon's hole. 'How surprised they will be to see me!' said Helena, scrambling forward,
laughing. She stood still in the archway, astounded. The sea was blazing with
white fire, and glowing with azure as coals glow red with heat below the
flames. The sea was transfused with white burning, while over it hung
the blue sky in a glory, like the blue smoke of the fire of God. Helena
stood still and worshipped. It was a moment of astonishment, when she
stood breathless and blinded, involuntarily offering herself for a
thank-offering. She felt herself confronting God at home in His white
incandescence, His fire settling on her like the Holy Spirit. Her lips
were parted in a woman's joy of adoration. The moment passed, and her thoughts hurried forward in confusion. 'It is good,' said Helena; 'it is very good.' She looked again, and saw
the waves like a line of children racing hand in hand, the sunlight
pursuing, catching hold of them from behind, as they ran wildly till
they fell, caught, with the sunshine dancing upon them like a white dog. 'It is really wonderful here!' said she; but the moment had gone, she
could not see again the grand burning of God among the waves. After a
while she turned away. As she stood dabbling her bathing-dress in a pool, Siegmund came over
the beach to her. 'You are not gone, then?' he said. 'Siegmund!' she exclaimed, looking up at him with radiant eyes, as if it
could not be possible that he had joined her in this rare place. His
face was glowing with the sun's inflaming, but Helena did not notice
that his eyes were full of misery. 'I, actually,' he said, smiling. 'I did not expect you,' she said, still looking at him in radiant
wonder. 'I could easier have expected'--she hesitated, struggled, and
continued--'Eros walking by the sea. But you are like him,' she said,
looking radiantly up into Siegmund's face. 'Isn't it beautiful this
morning?' she added. Siegmund endured her wide, glad look for a moment, then he stooped and
kissed her. He remained moving his hand in the pool, ashamed, and full
of contradiction. He was at the bitter point of farewell; could see,
beyond the glamour around him, the ugly building of his real life. 'Isn't the sea wonderful this morning?' asked Helena, as she wrung the
water from her costume. 'It is very fine,' he answered. He refrained from saying what his heart
said: 'It is my last morning; it is not yours. It is my last morning,
and the sea is enjoying the joke, and you are full of delight.' 'Yes,' said Siegmund, 'the morning is perfect.' 'It is,' assented Helena warmly. 'Have you noticed the waves? They are
like a line of children chased by a white dog.' 'Ay!' said Siegmund. 'Didn't you have a good time?' she asked, touching with her finger-tips
the nape of his neck as he stooped beside her. 'I swam to my little bay again,' he replied. 'Did you?' she exclaimed, pleased. She sat down by the pool, in which she washed her feet free from sand,
holding them to Siegmund to dry. 'I am very hungry,' she said. 'And I,' he agreed. 'I feel quite established here,' she said gaily, something in his
position having reminded her of their departure. He laughed. 'It seems another eternity before the three-forty-five train, doesn't
it?' she insisted. 'I wish we might never go back,' he said. Helena sighed. 'It would be too much for life to give. We have had something,
Siegmund,' she said. He bowed his head, and did not answer. 'It has been something, dear,' she repeated. He rose and took her in his arms. 'Everything,' he said, his face muffled in the shoulder of her dress. He
could smell her fresh and fine from the sea. 'Everything!' he said. She pressed her two hands on his head. 'I did well, didn't I, Siegmund?' she asked. Helena felt the
responsibility of this holiday. She had proposed it; when he had
withdrawn, she had insisted, refusing to allow him to take back his
word, declaring that she should pay the cost. He permitted her at last. 'Wonderfully well, Helena,' he replied. She kissed his forehead. 'You are everything,' he said. She pressed his head on her bosom. _Chapter 18_


Siegmund had shaved and dressed, and come down to breakfast. Mrs Curtiss
brought in the coffee. She was a fragile little woman, of delicate,
gentle manner. 'The water would be warm this morning,' she said, addressing no one in
particular. Siegmund stood on the hearth-rug with his hands behind him, swaying from
one leg to the other. He was embarrassed always by the presence of the
amiable little woman; he could not feel at ease before strangers, in his
capacity of accepted swain of Helena. 'It was,' assented Helena. 'It was as warm as new milk.' 'Ay, it would be,' said the old lady, looking in admiration upon the
experience of Siegmund and his beloved. 'And did ye see the ships of
war?' she asked. 'No, they had gone,' replied Helena. Siegmund swayed from foot to foot, rhythmically. 'You'll be coming in to dinner today?' asked the old lady. Helena arranged the matter. 'I think ye both look better,' Mrs. Curtiss said. She glanced at
Siegmund. He smiled constrainedly. 'I thought ye looked so worn when you came,' she said sympathetically. 'He had been working hard,' said Helena, also glancing at him. He bent his head, and was whistling without making any sound.