He did not
fetch in the letters. 'Is it so late?' he said. 'Is there no more time for me?' He went to look at his watch. It was a quarter to nine. As he walked
across the room he trembled, and a sickness made his bones feel rotten. He sat down on the bed. 'What am I going to do?' he asked himself. By this time he was shuddering rapidly. A peculiar feeling, as if his
belly were turned into nothingness, made him want to press his fists
into his abdomen. He remained shuddering drunkenly, like a drunken man
who is sick, incapable of thought or action. A second knock came at the door. He started with a jolt. 'Here is your shaving-water,' said Beatrice in cold tones. 'It's half
past nine.' 'All right,' said Siegmund, rising from the bed, bewildered. 'And what time shall you expect dinner?' asked Beatrice. She was still
contemptuous. 'Any time. I'm not going out,' he answered. He was surprised to hear the ordinary cool tone of his own voice, for he
was shuddering uncontrollably, and was almost sobbing. In a shaking,
bewildered, disordered condition he set about fulfilling his purpose. He
was hardly conscious of anything he did; try as he would, he could not
keep his hands steady in the violent spasms of shuddering, nor could he
call his mind to think. He was one shuddering turmoil. Yet he performed
his purpose methodically and exactly. In every particular he was
thorough, as if he were the servant of some stern will. It was a
mesmeric performance, in which the agent trembled with
convulsive sickness. _Chapter 28_


Siegmund's lying late in bed made Beatrice very angry. The later it
became, the more wrathful she grew. At half past nine she had taken up
his shaving-water. Then she proceeded to tidy the dining-room, leaving
the breakfast spread in the kitchen. Vera and Frank were gone up to town; they would both be home for dinner
at two o'clock. Marjory was despatched on an errand, taking Gwen with
her. The children had no need to return home immediately, therefore it
was highly probable they would play in the field or in the lane for an
hour or two. Beatrice was alone downstairs. It was a hot, still morning,
when everything outdoors shone brightly, and all indoors was dusked with
coolness and colour. But Beatrice was angry. She moved rapidly and
determinedly about the dining-room, thrusting old newspapers and
magazines between the cupboard and the wall, throwing the litter in the
grate, which was clear, Friday having been charwoman's day, passing
swiftly, lightly over the front of the furniture with the duster. It was
Saturday, when she did not spend much time over the work. In the
afternoon she was going out with Vera. That was not, however, what
occupied her mind as she brushed aside her work. She had determined to
have a settlement with Siegmund, as to how matters should continue. She
was going to have no more of the past three years' life; things had come
to a crisis, and there must be an alteration. Beatrice was going to do
battle, therefore she flew at her work, thus stirring herself up to a
proper heat of blood. All the time, as she thrust things out of sight,
or straightened a cover, she listened for Siegmund to come downstairs. He did not come, so her anger waxed. 'He can lie skulking in bed!' she said to herself. 'Here I've been up
since seven, broiling at it. I should think he's pitying himself. He
ought to have something else to do. He ought to have to go out to work
every morning, like another man, as his son has to do. He has had too
little work. He has had too much his own way. But it's come to a stop
now. I'll servant-housekeeper him no longer.' Beatrice went to clean the step of the front door. She clanged the
bucket loudly, every minute becoming more and more angry. That piece of
work finished, she went into the kitchen. It was twenty past ten. Her
wrath was at ignition point. She cleared all the things from the table
and washed them up. As she was so doing, her anger, having reached full
intensity without bursting into flame, began to dissipate in uneasiness. She tried to imagine what Siegmund would do and say to her. As she was
wiping a cup, she dropped it, and the smash so unnerved her that her
hands trembled almost too much to finish drying the things and putting
them away. At last it was done. Her next piece of work was to make the
beds. She took her pail and went upstairs. Her heart was beating so
heavily in her throat that she had to stop on the landing to recover
breath. She dreaded the combat with him. Suddenly controlling herself,
she said loudly at Siegmund's door, her voice coldly hostile:

'Aren't you going to get up?' There was not the faintest sound in the house. Beatrice stood in the
gloom of the landing, her heart thudding in her ears. 'It's after half past ten--aren't you going to get up?' she called. She waited again. Two letters lay unopened on a small table. Suddenly
she put down her pail and went into the bathroom. The pot of
shaving-water stood untouched on the shelf, just as she had left it. She
returned and knocked swiftly at her husband's door, not speaking. She
waited, then she knocked again, loudly, a long time. Something in the
sound of her knocking made her afraid to try again. The noise was dull
and thudding: it did not resound through the house with a natural ring,
so she thought. She ran downstairs in terror, fled out into the front
garden, and there looked up at his room. The window-door was
open--everything seemed quiet. Beatrice stood vacillating. She picked up a few tiny pebbles and flung
them in a handful at his door. Some spattered on the panes sharply; some
dropped dully in the room. One clinked on the wash-hand bowl. There was
no response. Beatrice was terribly excited. She ran, with her black eyes
blazing, and wisps of her black hair flying about her thin temples, out
on to the road. By a mercy she saw the window-cleaner just pushing his
ladder out of the passage of a house a little farther down the road. She
hurried to him. 'Will you come and see if there's anything wrong with my husband?' she
asked wildly. 'Why, mum?' answered the window-cleaner, who knew her, and was humbly
familiar. 'Is he taken bad or something? Yes, I'll come.' He was a tall thin man with a brown beard. His clothes were all so
loose, his trousers so baggy, that he gave one the impression his limbs
must be bone, and his body a skeleton. He pushed at his ladders with
a will. 'Where is he, Mum?' he asked officiously, as they slowed down at the
side passage. 'He's in his bedroom, and I can't get an answer from him.' 'Then I s'll want a ladder,' said the window-cleaner, proceeding to lift
one off his trolley. He was in a very great bustle. He knew which was
Siegmund's room: he had often seen Siegmund rise from some music he was
studying and leave the drawing-room when the window-cleaning began, and
afterwards he had found him in the small front bedroom. He also knew
there were matrimonial troubles: Beatrice was not reserved. 'Is it the least of the front rooms he's in?' asked the window-cleaner. 'Yes, over the porch,' replied Beatrice. The man bustled with his ladder. 'It's easy enough,' he said. 'The door's open, and we're soon on the
balcony.' He set the ladder securely. Beatrice cursed him for a slow, officious
fool. He tested the ladder, to see it was safe, then he cautiously
clambered up. At the top he stood leaning sideways, bending over the
ladder to peer into the room. He could see all sorts of things, for he
was frightened. 'I say there!' he called loudly. Beatrice stood below in horrible suspense. 'Go in!' she cried. 'Go in! Is he there?' The man stepped very cautiously with one foot on to the balcony, and
peered forward. But the glass door reflected into his eyes. He followed
slowly with the other foot, and crept forward, ready at any moment to
take flight. 'Hie, hie!' he suddenly cried in terror, and he drew back. Beatrice was opening her mouth to scream, when the window-cleaner
exclaimed weakly, as if dubious:

'I believe 'e's 'anged 'imself from the door-'ooks!' 'No!' cried Beatrice. 'No, no, no!' 'I believe 'e 'as!' repeated the man. 'Go in and see if he's dead!' cried Beatrice. The man remained in the doorway, peering fixedly. 'I believe he is,' he said doubtfully. 'No--go and see!' screamed Beatrice. The man went into the room, trembling, hesitating. He approached the
body as if fascinated. Shivering, he took it round the loins and tried
to lift it down. It was too heavy. 'I know!' he said to himself, once more bustling now he had something to
do. He took his clasp-knife from his pocket, jammed the body between
himself and the door so that it should not drop, and began to saw his
way through the leathern strap. It gave. He started, and clutched the
body, dropping his knife. Beatrice, below in the garden, hearing the
scuffle and the clatter, began to scream in hysteria. The man hauled the
body of Siegmund, with much difficulty, on to the bed, and with
trembling fingers tried to unloose the buckle in which the strap ran. It
was bedded in Siegmund's neck. The window-cleaner tugged at it
frantically, till he got it loose. Then he looked at Siegmund. The dead
man lay on the bed with swollen, discoloured face, with his
sleeping-jacket pushed up in a bunch under his armpits, leaving his side
naked. Beatrice was screaming below. The window-cleaner, quite unnerved,
ran from the room and scrambled down the ladder. Siegmund lay heaped on
the bed, his sleeping-suit twisted and bunched up about him, his face
hardly recognizable. _Chapter 29_


Helena was dozing down in the cove at Tintagel. She and Louisa and Olive
lay on the cool sands in the shadow, and steeped themselves in rest, in
a cool, sea-fragrant tranquillity. The journey down had been very tedious. After waiting for half an hour
in the midnight turmoil of an August Friday in Waterloo station, they
had seized an empty carriage, only to be followed by five
north-countrymen, all of whom were affected by whisky. Olive, Helena,
Louisa, occupied three corners of the carriage. The men were distributed
between them. The three women were not alarmed. Their tipsy travelling
companions promised to be tiresome, but they had a frank honesty of
manner that placed them beyond suspicion. The train drew out westward. Helena began to count the miles that separated her from Siegmund. The
north-countrymen began to be jolly: they talked loudly in their uncouth
English; they sang the music-hall songs of the day; they furtively drank
whisky. Through all this they were polite to the girls. As much could
hardly be said in return of Olive and Louisa. They leaned forward
whispering one to another. They sat back in their seats laughing, hiding
their laughter by turning their backs on the men, who were a trifle
disconcerted by this amusement. The train spun on and on. Little homely clusters of lamps, suggesting
the quiet of country life, turned slowly round through the darkness. The
men dropped into a doze. Olive put a handkerchief over her face and went
to sleep. Louisa gradually nodded and jerked into slumber. Helena sat
weariedly and watched the rolling of the sleeping travellers and the
dull blank of the night sheering off outside. Neither the men nor the
women looked well asleep. They lurched and nodded stupidly. She thought
of Bazarof in _Fathers and Sons_, endorsing his opinion on the
appearance of sleepers: all but Siegmund. Was Siegmund asleep? She
imagined him breathing regularly on the pillows; she could see the under
arch of his eyebrows, the fine shape of his nostrils, the curve of his
lips, as she bent in fancy over his face. The dawn came slowly. It was rather cold. Olive wrapped herself in rugs
and went to sleep again. Helena shivered, and stared out of the window. There appeared a wanness in the night, and Helena felt inexpressibly
dreary. A rosiness spread out far away. It was like a flock of
flamingoes hovering over a dark lake. The world vibrated as the sun
came up. Helena waked the tipsy men at Exeter, having heard them say that there
they must change. Then she walked the platform, very jaded. The train
rushed on again. It was a most, most wearisome journey. The fields were
very flowery, the morning was very bright, but what were these to her? She wanted dimness, sleep, forgetfulness. At eight o'clock,
breakfast-time, the 'dauntless three' were driving in a waggonette amid
blazing, breathless sunshine, over country naked of shelter, ungracious
and harsh. 'Why am I doing this?' Helena asked herself. The three friends, washed, dressed, and breakfasted. It was too hot to
rest in the house, so they trudged to the coast, silently, each feeling
in an ill humour. When Helena was really rested, she took great pleasure in Tintagel. In
the first place, she found that the cove was exactly, almost identically
the same as the Walhalla scene in _Walküre_; in the second place,
_Tristan_ was here, in the tragic country filled with the flowers of a
late Cornish summer, an everlasting reality; in the third place, it was
a sea of marvellous, portentous sunsets, of sweet morning baths, of
pools blossomed with life, of terrible suave swishing of foam which
suggested the Anadyomene. In sun it was the enchanted land of divided
lovers. Helena for ever hummed fragments of _Tristan_. As she stood on
the rocks she sang, in her little, half-articulate way, bits of Isolde's
love, bits of Tristan's anguish, to Siegmund. She had not received her letter on Sunday. That had not very much
disquieted her, though she was disappointed. On Monday she was miserable
because of Siegmund's silence, but there was so much of enchantment in
Tintagel, and Olive and Louisa were in such high spirits, that she
forgot most whiles. On Monday night, towards two o'clock, there came a violent storm of
thunder and lightning. Louisa started up in bed at the first clap,
waking Helena. The room palpitated with white light for two seconds; the
mirror on the dressing-table glared supernaturally. Louisa clutched her
friend. All was dark again, the thunder clapping directly. 'There, wasn't that lovely!' cried Louisa, speaking of the lightning. 'Oo, wasn't it magnificent!--glorious!' The door clicked and opened: Olive entered in her long white nightgown. She hurried to the bed. 'I say, dear!' she exclaimed, 'may I come into the fold? I prefer the
shelter of your company, dear, during this little lot.' 'Don't you like it?' cried Louisa. 'I think it's _lovely_--lovely!' There came another slash of lightning. The night seemed to open and
shut. It was a pallid vision of a ghost-world between the clanging
shutters of darkness. Louisa and Olive clung to each other
spasmodically. 'There!' exclaimed the former, breathless. 'That was fine! Helena, did
you see that?' She clasped ecstatically the hand of her friend, who was lying down. Helena's answer was extinguished by the burst of thunder. 'There's no accounting for tastes,' said Olive, taking a place in the
bed. 'I can't say I'm struck on lightning. What about you, Helena?' 'I'm not struck yet,' replied Helena, with a sarcastic attempt at a
jest. 'Thank you, dear,' said Olive; 'you do me the honour of catching hold.' Helena laughed ironically. 'Catching what?' asked Louisa, mystified. 'Why, dear,' answered Olive, heavily condescending to explain, 'I
offered Helena the handle of a pun, and she took it. What a flash! You
know, it's not that I'm afraid....'

The rest of her speech was overwhelmed in thunder. Helena lay on the edge of the bed, listening to the ecstatics of one
friend and to the impertinences of the other. In spite of her ironical
feeling, the thunder impressed her with a sense of fatality. The night
opened, revealing a ghostly landscape, instantly to shut again with
blackness. Then the thunder crashed. Helena felt as if some secret were
being disclosed too swiftly and violently for her to understand. The
thunder exclaimed horribly on the matter. She was sure something
had happened. Gradually the storm, drew away. The rain came down with a rush,
persisted with a bruising sound upon the earth and the leaves. 'What a deluge!' exclaimed Louisa. No one answered her. Olive was falling asleep, and Helena was in no mood
to reply. Louisa, disconsolate, lay looking at the black window, nursing
a grievance, until she, too, drifted into sleep. Helena was awake; the
storm had left her with a settled sense of calamity. She felt bruised. The sound of the heavy rain bruising the ground outside represented her
feeling; she could not get rid of the bruised sense of disaster. She lay wondering what it was, why Siegmund had not written, what could
have happened to him. She imagined all of them terrible, and endued with
grandeur, for she had kinship with Hedda Gabler. 'But no,' she said to herself, 'it is impossible anything should have
happened to him--I should have known. I should have known the moment his
spirit left his body; he would have come to me. But I slept without
dreams last night, and today I am sure there has been no crisis. It is
impossible it should have happened to him: I should have known.' She was very certain that in event of Siegmund's death, she would have
received intelligence. She began to consider all the causes which might
arise to prevent his writing immediately to her. 'Nevertheless,' she said at last, 'if I don't hear tomorrow I will go
and see.' She had written to him on Monday. If she should receive no answer by
Wednesday morning she would return to London. As she was deciding this
she went to sleep. The next day passed without news. Helena was in a state of distress. Her
wistfulness touched the other two women very keenly. Louisa waited upon
her, was very tender and solicitous. Olive, who was becoming painful by
reason of her unsatisfied curiosity, had to be told in part of the state
of affairs. Helena looked up a train. She was quite sure by this time that something
fatal awaited her. The next morning she bade her friends a temporary good-bye, saying she
would return in the evening. Immediately the train had gone, Louisa
rushed into the little waiting-room of the station and wept. Olive shed
tears for sympathy and self-pity. She pitied herself that she should be
let in for so dismal a holiday. Louisa suddenly stopped crying and
sat up:

'Oh, I know I'm a pig, dear, am I not?' she exclaimed. 'Spoiling your
holiday. But I couldn't help it, dear, indeed I could not.' 'My dear Lou!' cried Olive in tragic contralto. 'Don't refrain for my
sake. The bargain's made; we can't help what's in the bundle.' The two unhappy women trudged the long miles back from the station to
their lodging. Helena sat in the swinging express revolving the same
thought like a prayer-wheel. It would be difficult to think of anything
more trying than thus sitting motionless in the train, which itself is
throbbing and bursting its heart with anxiety, while one waits hour
after hour for the blow which falls nearer as the distance lessens.