She put down a cup of coffee, a
plate with boiled ham, pink and thin, such as is bought from a grocer,
and some bread-and-butter. Then she sat down, noisily turning over the
leaves of her magazine. Frank glanced at the table; it was laid solely
for his father. He looked at the bread and the meat, but restrained
himself, and went on reading, or pretended to do so. Beatrice came in
with the small cruet; it was conspicuously bright. Everything was correct: knife and fork, spoon, cruet, all perfectly
clean, the crockery fine, the bread and butter thin--in fact, it was
just as it would have been for a perfect stranger. This scrupulous
neatness, in a household so slovenly and easy-going, where it was an
established tradition that something should be forgotten or wrong,
impressed Siegmund. Beatrice put the serving knife and fork by the
little dish of ham, saw that all was proper, then went and sat down. Her
face showed no emotion; it was calm and proud. She began to sew. 'What do you say, Mother?' said Vera, as if resuming a conversation. 'Shall it be Hampton Court or Richmond on Sunday?' 'I say, as I said before,' replied Beatrice: 'I cannot afford to go
out.' 'But you must begin, my dear, and Sunday shall see the beginning. _Dîtes
donc_!' 'There are other things to think of,' said Beatrice. 'Now, _maman, nous avons changé tout cela_! We are going out--a jolly
little razzle!' Vera, who was rather handsome, lifted up her face and
smiled at her mother gaily. 'I am afraid there will be no _razzle_'--Beatrice accented the word,
smiling slightly--'for me. You are slangy, Vera.' '_Un doux argot, ma mère_. You look tired.' Beatrice glanced at the clock. 'I will go to bed when I have cleared the table,' she said. Siegmund winced. He was still sitting with his head bent down, looking
in the grate. Vera went on to say something more. Presently Frank looked
up at the table, and remarked in his grating voice:

'There's your supper, Father.' The women stopped and looked round at this. Siegmund bent his head
lower. Vera resumed her talk. It died out, and there was silence. Siegmund was hungry. 'Oh, good Lord, good Lord! bread of humiliation tonight!' he said to
himself before he could muster courage to rise and go to the table. He
seemed to be shrinking inwards. The women glanced swiftly at him and
away from him as his chair creaked and he got up. Frank was watching
from under his eyebrows. Siegmund went through the ordeal of eating and drinking in presence of
his family. If he had not been hungry, he could not have done it,
despite the fact that he was content to receive humiliation this night. He swallowed the coffee with effort. When he had finished he sat
irresolute for some time; then he arose and went to the door. 'Good night!' he said. Nobody made any reply. Frank merely stirred in his chair. Siegmund shut
the door and went. There was absolute silence in the room till they heard him turn on the
tap in the bathroom; then Beatrice began to breathe spasmodically,
catching her breath as if she would sob. But she restrained herself. The
faces of the two children set hard with hate. 'He is not worth the flicking of your little finger, Mother,' said Vera. Beatrice moved about with pitiful, groping hands, collecting her sewing
and her cottons. 'At any rate, he's come back red enough,' said Frank, in his grating
tone of contempt. 'He's like boiled salmon.' Beatrice did not answer anything. Frank rose, and stood with his back to
the grate, in his father's characteristic attitude. 'He _would_ come slinking back in a funk!' he said, with a young man's
sneer. Stretching forward, he put a piece of ham between two pieces of bread,
and began to eat the sandwich in large bites. Vera came to the table at
this, and began to make herself a more dainty sandwich. Frank watched
her with jealous eyes. 'There is a little more ham, if you'd like it,' said Beatrice to him. 'I
kept you some.' 'All right, Ma,' he replied. Fetch it in.' Beatrice went out to the kitchen. 'And bring the bread and butter, too, will you?' called Vera after her. 'The damned coward! Ain't he a rotten funker?' said Frank, _sotto voce_,
while his mother was out of the room. Vera did not reply, but she seemed tacitly to agree. They petted their mother, while she waited on them. At length Frank
yawned. He fidgeted a moment or two, then he went over to his mother,
and, putting his hand on her arm--the feel of his mother's round arm
under the black silk sleeve made his tears rise--he said, more gratingly
than ever:

'Ne'er mind, Ma; we'll be all right to you.' Then he bent and kissed
her. 'Good night, Mother,' he said awkwardly, and he went out of
the room. Beatrice was crying. _Chapter 23_


'I shall never re-establish myself,' said Siegmund as he closed behind
him the dining-room door and went upstairs in the dark. 'I am a family
criminal. Beatrice might come round, but the children's insolent
judgement is too much. And I am like a dog that creeps round the house
from which it escaped with joy. I have nowhere else to go. Why did I
come back? But I am sleepy. I will not bother tonight.' He went into the bathroom and washed himself. Everything he did gave him
a grateful sense of pleasure, notwithstanding the misery of his
position. He dipped his arms deeper into the cold water, that he might
feel the delight of it a little farther. His neck he swilled time after
time, and it seemed to him he laughed with pleasure as the water caught
him and fell away. The towel reminded him how sore were his forehead and
his neck, blistered both to a state of rawness by the sun. He touched
them very cautiously to dry them, wincing, and smiling at his own
childish touch-and-shrink. Though his bedroom was very dark, he did not light the gas. Instead, he
stepped out into the small balcony. His shirt was open at the neck and
wrists. He pulled it farther apart, baring his chest to the deliciously
soft night. He stood looking out at the darkness for some time. The
night was as yet moonless, but luminous with a certain atmosphere of
light. The stars were small. Near at hand, large shapes of trees rose
up. Farther, lamps like little mushroom groups shone amid an undergrowth
of darkness. There was a vague hoarse noise filling the sky, like the
whispering in a shell, and this breathing of the summer night
occasionally swelled into a restless sigh as a train roared across
the distance. 'What a big night!' thought Siegmund. 'The night gathers everything into
a oneness. I wonder what is in it.' He leaned forward over the balcony, trying to catch something out of the
night. He felt his soul like tendrils stretched out anxiously to grasp a
hold. What could he hold to in this great, hoarse breathing night? A
star fell. It seemed to burst into sight just across his eyes with a
yellow flash. He looked up, unable to make up his mind whether he had
seen it or not. There was no gap in the sky. 'It is a good sign--a shooting star,' he said to himself. 'It is a good
sign for me. I know I am right. That was my sign.' Having assured himself, he stepped indoors, unpacked his bag, and was
soon in bed. 'This is a good bed,' he said. 'And the sheets are very fresh.' He lay for a little while with his head bending forwards, looking from
his pillow out at the stars, then he went to sleep. At half past six in the morning he suddenly opened his eyes. 'What is it?' he asked, and almost without interruption answered: 'Well,
I've got to go through it.' His sleep had shaped him perfect premonition, which, like a dream, he
forgot when he awoke. Only this naïve question and answer betrayed what
had taken place in his sleep. Immediately he awoke this subordinate
knowledge vanished. Another fine day was striding in triumphant. The first thing Siegmund
did was to salute the morning, because of its brightness. The second
thing was to call to mind the aspect of that bay in the Isle of Wight. 'What would it just be like now?' said he to himself. He had to give his
heart some justification for the peculiar pain left in it from his sleep
activity, so he began poignantly to long for the place which had been
his during the last mornings. He pictured the garden with roses and
nasturtiums; he remembered the sunny way down the shore, and all the
expanse of sea hung softly between the tall white cliffs. 'It is impossible it is gone!' he cried to himself. 'It can't be gone. I
looked forward to it as if it never would come. It can't be gone now. Helena is not lost to me, surely.' Then he began a long pining for the
departed beauty of his life. He turned the jewel of memory, and facet by
facet it wounded him with its brilliant loveliness. This pain, though it
was keen, was half pleasure. Presently he heard his wife stirring. She opened the door of the room
next to his, and he heard her:

'Frank, it's a quarter to eight. You _will_ be late.' 'All right, Mother. Why didn't you call me sooner?' grumbled the lad. 'I didn't wake myself. I didn't go to sleep till morning, and then I
slept.' She went downstairs. Siegmund listened for his son to get out of bed. The minutes passed. 'The young donkey, why doesn't he get out?' said Siegmund angrily to
himself. He turned over, pressing himself upon the bed in anger and
humiliation, because now he had no authority to call to his son and keep
him to his duty. Siegmund waited, writhing with anger, shame, and
anxiety. When the suave, velvety 'Pan-n-n! pan-n-n-n!' of the clock was
heard striking, Frank stepped with a thud on to the floor. He could be
heard dressing in clumsy haste. Beatrice called from the bottom of
the stairs:

'Do you want any hot water?' 'You know there isn't time for me to shave now,' answered her son,
lifting his voice to a kind of broken falsetto. The scent of the cooking of bacon filled the house. Siegmund heard his
second daughter, Marjory, aged nine, talking to Vera, who occupied the
same room with her. The child was evidently questioning, and the elder
girl answered briefly. There was a lull in the household noises, broken
suddenly by Marjory, shouting from the top of the stairs:

'Mam!' She wailed. 'Mam!' Still Beatrice did not hear her. 'Mam! Mamma!' Beatrice was in the scullery. 'Mamma-a!' The child was getting
impatient. She lifted her voice and shouted: 'Mam? Mamma!' Still no
answer. 'Mam-mee-e!' she squealed. Siegmund could hardly contain himself. 'Why don't you go down and ask?' Vera called crossly from the bedroom. And at the same moment Beatrice answered, also crossly: 'What do you
want?' 'Where's my stockings?' cried the child at the top of her voice. 'Why do you ask me? Are they down here?' replied her mother. 'What are
you shouting for?' The child plodded downstairs. Directly she returned, and as she passed
into Vera's room, she grumbled: 'And now they're not mended.' Siegmund heard a sound that made his heart beat. It was the crackling of
the sides of the crib, as Gwen, his little girl of five, climbed out. She was silent for a space. He imagined her sitting on the white rug and
pulling on her stockings. Then there came the quick little thud of her
feet as she went downstairs. 'Mam,' Siegmund heard her say as she went down the hall, 'has dad come?' The answer and the child's further talk were lost in the distance of the
kitchen. The small, anxious question, and the quick thudding of Gwen's
feet, made Siegmund lie still with torture. He wanted to hear no more. He lay shrinking within himself. It seemed that his soul was sensitive
to madness. He felt that he could not, come what might, get up and
meet them all. The front door banged, and he heard Frank's hasty call: 'Good-bye!' Evidently the lad was in an ill-humour. Siegmund listened for the sound
of the train; it seemed an age; the boy would catch it. Then the water
from the wash-hand bowl in the bathroom ran loudly out. That, he
suggested, was Vera, who was evidently not going up to town. At the
thought of this, Siegmund almost hated her. He listened for her to go
downstairs. It was nine o'clock. The footsteps of Beatrice came upstairs. She put something down in the
bathroom--his hot water. Siegmund listened intently for her to come to
his door. Would she speak? She approached hurriedly, knocked, and
waited. Siegmund, startled, for the moment, could not answer. She
knocked loudly. 'All right,' said he. Then she went downstairs. He lay probing and torturing himself for another half-hour, till Vera's
voice said coldly, beneath his window outside:

'You should clear away, then. We don't want the breakfast things on the
table for a week.' Siegmund's heart set hard. He rose, with a shut mouth, and went across
to the bathroom. There he started. The quaint figure of Gwen stood at
the bowl, her back was towards him; she was sponging her face gingerly. Her hair, all blowsed from the pillow, was tied in a stiff little
pigtail, standing out from her slender, childish neck. Her arms were
bare to the shoulder. She wore a bodiced petticoat of pink flannelette,
which hardly reached her knees. Siegmund felt slightly amused to see her
stout little calves planted so firmly close together. She carefully
sponged her cheeks, her pursed-up mouth, and her neck, soaping her hair,
but not her ears. Then, very deliberately, she squeezed out the sponge
and proceeded to wipe away the soap. For some reason or other she glanced round. Her startled eyes met his. She, too, had beautiful dark blue eyes. She stood, with the sponge at
her neck, looking full at him. Siegmund felt himself shrinking. The
child's look was steady, calm, inscrutable. 'Hello!' said her father. 'Are you here!' The child, without altering her expression in the slightest, turned her
back on him, and continued wiping her neck. She dropped the sponge in
the water and took the towel from off the side of the bath. Then she
turned to look again at Siegmund, who stood in his pyjamas before her,
his mouth shut hard, but his eyes shrinking and tender. She seemed to be
trying to discover something in him. 'Have you washed your ears?' he said gaily. She paid no heed to this, except that he noticed her face now wore a
slight constrained smile as she looked at him. She was shy. Still she
continued to regard him curiously. 'There is some chocolate on my dressing-table,' he said. 'Where have you been to?' she asked suddenly. 'To the seaside,' he answered, smiling. 'To Brighton?' she asked. Her tone was still condemning. 'Much farther than that,' he replied. 'To Worthing?' she asked. 'Farther--in a steamer,' he replied. 'But who did you go with?' asked the child. 'Why, I went all by myself,' he answered. 'Twuly?' she asked. 'Weally and twuly,' he answered, laughing. 'Couldn't you take me?' she asked. 'I will next time,' he replied. The child still looked at him, unsatisfied. 'But what did you go for?' she asked, goading him suspiciously. 'To see the sea and the ships and the fighting ships with cannons--'

'You _might_ have taken me,' said the child reproachfully. 'Yes, I ought to have done, oughtn't I?' he said, as if regretful. Gwen still looked full at him. 'You _are_ red,' she said. He glanced quickly in the glass, and replied:

'That is the sun. Hasn't it been hot?' 'Mm! It made my nose all peel. Vera said she would scrape me like a new
potato.' The child laughed and turned shyly away. 'Come here,' said Siegmund. 'I believe you've got a tooth out, haven't
you?' He was very cautious and gentle. The child drew back. He hesitated, and
she drew away from him, unwilling. 'Come and let me look,' he repeated. She drew farther away, and the same constrained smile appeared on her
face, shy, suspicious, condemning. 'Aren't you going to get your chocolate?' he asked, as the child
hesitated in the doorway. She glanced into his room, and answered:

'I've got to go to mam and have my hair done.' Her awkwardness and her lack of compliance insulted him. She went
downstairs without going into his room. Siegmund, rebuffed by the only one in the house from whom he might have
expected friendship, proceeded slowly to shave, feeling sick at heart. He was a long time over his toilet. When he stripped himself for the
bath, it seemed to him he could smell the sea. He bent his head and
licked his shoulder. It tasted decidedly salt. 'A pity to wash it off,' he said.