'Ay,' sympathized the little woman. 'And it's a very short time for you. What a pity ye can't stop for the fireworks at Cowes on Monday. They are
grand, so they say.' Helena raised her eyebrows in polite interest. 'Have you never seen
them?' she asked. 'No,' replied Mrs. Curtiss. 'I've never been able to get; but I hope to
go yet.' 'I hope you may,' said Siegmund. The little woman beamed on him. Having won a word from him, she was
quite satisfied. 'Well,' she said brightly, 'the eggs must be done by now.' She tripped out, to return directly. 'I've brought you,' she said, 'some of the Island cream, and some white
currants, if ye'll have them. You must think well of the Island, and
come back.' 'How could we help?' laughed Helena. 'We will,' smiled Siegmund. When finally the door was closed on her, Siegmund sat down in relief. Helena looked in amusement at him. She was perfectly self-possessed in
presence of the delightful little lady. 'This is one of the few places that has ever felt like home to me,' she
said. She lifted a tangled bunch of fine white currants. 'Ah!' exclaimed Siegmund, smiling at her. 'One of the few places where everything is friendly,' she said. 'And
everybody.' 'You have made so many enemies?' he asked, with gentle irony. 'Strangers,' she replied. 'I seem to make strangers of all the people I
meet.' She laughed in amusement at this _mot_. Siegmund looked at her intently. He was thinking of her left alone amongst strangers. 'Need we go--need we leave this place of friends?' he said, as if
ironically. He was very much afraid of tempting her. She looked at the clock on the mantelpiece and counted: 'One, two,
three, four, five hours, thirty-five minutes. It is an age yet,'
she laughed. Siegmund laughed too, as he accepted the particularly fine bunch of
currants she had extricated for him. _Chapter 19_


The air was warm and sweet in the little lane, remote from the sea,
which led them along their last walk. On either side the white path was
a grassy margin thickly woven with pink convolvuli. Some of the reckless
little flowers, so gay and evanescent, had climbed the trunks of an old
yew tree, and were looking up pertly at their rough host. Helena walked along, watching the flowers, and making fancies out of
them. 'Who called them "fairies' telephones"?' she said to herself. 'They are
tiny children in pinafores. How gay they are! They are children dawdling
along the pavement of a morning. How fortunate they are! See how they
take a wind-thrill! See how wide they are set to the sunshine! And when
they are tired, they will curl daintily to sleep, and some fairies in
the dark will gather them away. They won't be here in the morning,
shrivelled and dowdy ... If only we could curl up and be gone, after
our day....'

She looked at Siegmund. He was walking moodily beside her. 'It is good when life holds no anti-climax,' she said. 'Ay!' he answered. Of course, he could not understand her meaning. She strayed into the thick grass, a sturdy white figure that walked with
bent head, abstract, but happy. 'What is she thinking?' he asked himself. 'She is sufficient to
herself--she doesn't want me. She has her own private way of communing
with things, and is friends with them.' 'The dew has been very heavy,' she said, turning, and looking up at him
from under her brows, like a smiling witch. 'I see it has,' he answered. Then to himself he said: 'She can't
translate herself into language. She is incommunicable; she can't render
herself to the intelligence. So she is alone and a law unto herself: she
only wants me to explore me, like a rock-pool, and to bathe in me. After
a while, when I am gone, she will see I was not indispensable....'

The lane led up to the eastern down. As they were emerging, they saw on
the left hand an extraordinarily spick and span red bungalow. The low
roof of dusky red sloped down towards the coolest green lawn, that was
edged and ornamented with scarlet, and yellow, and white flowers
brilliant with dew. A stout man in an alpaca jacket and panama hat was seated on the bare
lawn, his back to the sun, reading a newspaper. He tried in vain to
avoid the glare of the sun on his reading. At last he closed the paper
and looked angrily at the house--not at anything in particular. He irritably read a few more lines, then jerked up his head in sudden
decision, glared at the open door of the house, and called:

'Amy! Amy!' No answer was forthcoming. He flung down the paper and strode off
indoors, his mien one of wrathful resolution. His voice was heard
calling curtly from the dining-room. There was a jingle of crockery as
he bumped the table leg in sitting down. 'He is in a bad temper,' laughed Siegmund. 'Breakfast is late,' said Helena with contempt. 'Look!' said Siegmund. An elderly lady in black and white striped linen, a young lady in
holland, both carrying some wild flowers, hastened towards the garden
gate. Their faces were turned anxiously to the house. They were hot with
hurrying, and had no breath for words. The girl pressed forward, opened
the gate for the lady in striped linen, who hastened over the lawn. Then
the daughter followed, and vanished also under the shady veranda. There was a quick sound of women's low, apologetic voices, overridden by
the resentful abuse of the man. The lovers moved out of hearing. 'Imagine that breakfast-table!' said Siegmund. 'I feel,' said Helena, with a keen twang of contempt in her voice, 'as
if a fussy cock and hens had just scuffled across my path.' 'There are many such roosts,' said Siegmund pertinently. Helena's cold scorn was very disagreeable to him. She talked to him
winsomely and very kindly as they crossed the open down to meet the next
incurving of the coast, and Siegmund was happy. But the sense of
humiliation, which he had got from her the day before, and which had
fixed itself, bled him secretly, like a wound. This haemorrhage of
self-esteem tortured him to the end. Helena had rejected him. She gave herself to her fancies only. For some
time she had confused Siegmund with her god. Yesterday she had cried to
her ideal lover, and found only Siegmund. It was the spear in the side
of his tortured self-respect. 'At least,' he said, in mortification of himself--'at least, someone
must recognize a strain of God in me--and who does? I don't believe in
it myself.' And, moreover, in the intense joy and suffering of his realized passion,
the island, with its sea and sky, had fused till, like a brilliant bead,
all their beauty ran together out of the common ore, and Siegmund saw it
naked, saw the beauty of everything naked in the shifting magic of this
bead. The island would be gone tomorrow: he would look for the beauty
and find the dirt. What was he to do? 'You know, Domine,' said Helena--it was his old nickname she used--'you
look quite stern today.' 'I feel anything but stern,' he laughed. 'Weaker than usual, in fact.' 'Yes, perhaps so, when you talk. Then you are really surprisingly
gentle. But when you are silent, I am even afraid of you--you seem
so grave.' He laughed. 'And shall I not be brave?' he said. 'Can't you smell _Fumum et opes
strepitumque Romae_?' He turned quickly to Helena. 'I wonder if that's
right,' he said. 'It's years since I did a line of Latin, and I thought
it had all gone.' 'In the first place, what does it mean?' said Helena calmly, 'for I can
only half translate. I have thrown overboard all my scrap-books of
such stuff.' 'Why,' said Siegmund, rather abashed, 'only "the row and the smoke of
Rome". But it is remarkable, Helena'--here the peculiar look of interest
came on his face again--'it is really remarkable that I should have
said that.' 'Yes, you look surprised,' smiled she. 'But it must be twenty'--he counted--'twenty-two or three years since I
learned that, and I forgot it--goodness knows how long ago. Like a
drowning man, I have these memories before....' He broke off, smiling
mockingly, to tease her. 'Before you go back to London,' said she, in a matter-of-fact, almost
ironical tone. She was inscrutable. This morning she could not bear to
let any deep emotion come uppermost. She wanted rest. 'No,' she said,
with calm distinctness, a few moments after, when they were climbing the
rise to the cliff's edge. 'I can't say that I smell the smoke of London. The mist-curtain is thick yet. There it is'--she pointed to the heavy,
purple-grey haze that hung like arras on a wall, between the sloping sky
and the sea. She thought of yesterday morning's mist-curtain, thick and
blazing gold, so heavy that no wind could sway its fringe. They lay down in the dry grass, upon the gold bits of bird's-foot
trefoil of the cliff's edge, and looked out to sea. A warm, drowsy calm
drooped over everything. 'Six hours,' thought Helena, 'and we shall have passed the mist-curtain. Already it is thinning. I could break it open with waving my hand. I
will not wave my hand.' She was exhausted by the suffering of the last night, so she refused to
allow any emotion to move her this morning, till she was strong. Siegmund was also exhausted; but his thoughts laboured like ants, in
spite of himself, striving towards a conclusion. Helena had rejected him. In his heart he felt that in this love affair
also he had been a failure. No matter how he contradicted himself, and
said it was absurd to imagine he was a failure as Helena's lover, yet he
felt a physical sensation of defeat, a kind of knot in his breast which
neither reason, nor dialectics, nor circumstance, not even Helena, could
untie. He had failed as lover to Helena. It was not surprising his marriage with Beatrice should prove
disastrous. Rushing into wedlock as he had done, at the ripe age of
seventeen, he had known nothing of his woman, nor she of him. When his
mind and soul set to develop, as Beatrice could not sympathize with his
interests, he naturally inclined away from her, so that now, after
twenty years, he was almost a stranger to her. That was not very
surprising. But why should he have failed with Helena? The bees droned fitfully over the scented grass, aimlessly swinging in
the heat. Siegmund watched one gold and amber fellow lazily let go a
white clover-head, and boom in a careless curve out to sea, humming
softer and softer as he reeled along in the giddy space. 'The little fool!' said Siegmund, watching the black dot swallowed into
the light. No ship sailed the curving sea. The light danced in a whirl upon the
ripples. Everything else watched with heavy eyes of heat enhancement the
wild spinning of the lights. 'Even if I were free,' he continued to think, 'we should only grow
apart, Helena and I. She would leave me. This time I should be the
laggard. She is young and vigorous; I am beginning to set. 'Is that why I have failed? I ought to have had her in love sufficiently
to keep her these few days. I am not quick. I do not follow her or
understand her swiftly enough. And I am always timid of compulsion. I
cannot compel anybody to follow me. 'So we are here. I am out of my depth. Like the bee, I was mad with the
sight of so much joy, such a blue space, and now I shall find no footing
to alight on. I have flown out into life beyond my strength to get back. When can I set my feet on when this is gone?' The sun grew stronger. Slower and more slowly went the hawks of
Siegmund's mind, after the quarry of conclusion. He lay bare-headed,
looking out to sea. The sun was burning deeper into his face and head. 'I feel as if it were burning into me,' thought Siegmund abstractedly. 'It is certainly consuming some part of me. Perhaps it is making me
ill.' Meanwhile, perversely, he gave his face and his hot black hair
to the sun. Helena lay in what shadow he afforded. The heat put out all her
thought-activity. Presently she said:

'This heat is terrible, Siegmund. Shall we go down to the water?' They climbed giddily down the cliff path. Already they were somewhat
sun-intoxicated. Siegmund chose the hot sand, where no shade was, on
which to lie. 'Shall we not go under the rocks?' said Helena. 'Look!' he said, 'the sun is beating on the cliffs. It is hotter, more
suffocating, there.' So they lay down in the glare, Helena watching the foam retreat slowly
with a cool splash; Siegmund thinking. The naked body of heat
was dreadful. 'My arms, Siegmund,' said she. 'They feel as if they were dipped in
fire.' Siegmund took them, without a word, and hid them under his coat. 'Are you sure it is not bad for you--your head, Siegmund? Are you sure?' He laughed stupidly. 'That is all right,' he said. He knew that the sun was burning through
him, and doing him harm, but he wanted the intoxication. As he looked wistfully far away over the sea at Helena's mist-curtain,
he said:

'I _think_ we should be able to keep together if'--he faltered--'if only
I could have you a little longer. I have never had you ...'

Some sound of failure, some tone telling her it was too late, some ring
of despair in his quietness, made Helena cling to him wildly, with a
savage little cry as if she were wounded. She clung to him, almost
beside herself. She could not lose him, she could not spare him. She
would not let him go. Helena was, for the moment, frantic. He held her safely, saying nothing until she was calmer, when, with his
lips on her cheek, he murmured:

'I should be able, shouldn't I, Helena?' 'You are always able!' she cried. 'It is I who play with you at hiding.' 'I have really had you so little,' he said. 'Can't you forget it, Siegmund?' she cried. 'Can't you forget it? It was
only a shadow, Siegmund. It was a lie, it was nothing real. Can't you
forget it, dear?' 'You can't do without me?' he asked. 'If I lose you I am lost,' answered she with swift decision. She had no
knowledge of weeping, yet her tears were wet on his face. He held her
safely; her arms were hidden under his coat. 'I will have no mercy on those shadows the next time they come between
us,' said Helena to herself. 'They may go back to hell.' She still clung to him, craving so to have him that he could not be reft
away. Siegmund felt very peaceful. He lay with his arms about her, listening
to the backward-creeping tide. All his thoughts, like bees, were flown
out to sea and lost. 'If I had her more, I should understand her through and through. If we
were side by side we should grow together. If we could stay here, I
should get stronger and more upright.' This was the poor heron of quarry the hawks of his mind had struck. Another hour fell like a foxglove bell from the stalk. There were only
two red blossoms left. Then the stem would have set to seed. Helena
leaned her head upon the breast of Siegmund, her arms clasping, under
his coat, his body, which swelled and sank gently, with the quiet of
great power. 'If,' thought she, 'the whole clock of the world could stand still now,
and leave us thus, me with the lift and fall of the strong body of
Siegmund in my arms....'

But the clock ticked on in the heat, the seconds marked off by the
falling of the waves, repeated so lightly, and in such fragile rhythm,
that it made silence sweet. 'If now,' prayed Siegmund, 'death would wipe the sweat from me, and it
were dark....'

But the waves softly marked the minutes, retreating farther, leaving the
bare rocks to bleach and the weed to shrivel. Gradually, like the shadow on a dial, the knowledge that it was time to
rise and go crept upon them. Although they remained silent, each knew
that the other felt the same weight of responsibility, the shadow-finger
of the sundial travelling over them. The alternative was, not to return,
to let the finger travel and be gone. But then ... Helena knew she must
not let the time cross her; she must rise before it was too late, and
travel before the coming finger. Siegmund hoped she would not get up. He
lay in suspense, waiting. At last she sat up abruptly. 'It is time, Siegmund,' she said. He did not answer, he did not look at her, but lay as she had left him. She wiped her face with her handkerchief, waiting. Then she bent over
him. He did not look at her. She saw his forehead was swollen and
inflamed with the sun. Very gently she wiped from it the glistening
sweat. He closed his eyes, and she wiped his cheeks and his mouth. Still
he did not look at her. She bent very close to him, feeling her heart
crushed with grief for him. 'We must go, Siegmund,' she whispered. 'All right,' he said, but still he did not move. She stood up beside him, shook herself, and tried to get a breath of
air. She was dazzled blind by the sunshine. Siegmund lay in the bright light, with his eyes closed, never moving. His face was inflamed, but fixed like a mask. Helena waited, until the terror of the passing of the hour was too
strong for her. She lifted his hand, which lay swollen with heat on the
sand, and she tried gently to draw him. 'We shall be too late,' she said in distress. He sighed and sat up, looking out over the water. Helena could not bear to see him look so vacant and expressionless. She
put her arm round his neck, and pressed his head against her skirt. Siegmund knew he was making it unbearable for her. Pulling himself
together, he bent his head from the sea, and said:

'Why, what time is it?' He took out his watch, holding it in his hand. Helena still held his
left hand, and had one arm round his neck. 'I can't see the figures,' he said. 'Everything is dimmed, as if it were
coming dark.' 'Yes,' replied Helena, in that reedy, painful tone of hers. 'My eyes
were the same. It is the strong sunlight.' 'I can't,' he repeated, and he was rather surprised--'I can't see the
time. Can you?' She stooped down and looked. 'It is half past one,' she said. Siegmund hated her voice as she spoke. There was still sufficient time
to catch the train. He stood up, moved inside his clothing, saying: 'I
feel almost stunned by the heat. I can hardly see, and all my feeling in
my body is dulled.' 'Yes,' answered Helena, 'I am afraid it will do you harm.' 'At any rate,' he smiled as if sleepily, 'I have had enough. If it's too
much--what _is_ too much?' They went unevenly over the sand, their eyes sun-dimmed. 'We are going back--we are going back!' the heart of Helena seemed to
run hot, beating these words. They climbed the cliff path toilsomely. Standing at the top, on the edge
of the grass, they looked down the cliffs at the beach and over the sea. The strand was wide, forsaken by the sea, forlorn with rocks bleaching
in the sun, and sand and seaweed breathing off their painful scent upon
the heat. The sea crept smaller, farther away; the sky stood still. Siegmund and Helena looked hopelessly out on their beautiful,
incandescent world. They looked hopelessly at each other, Siegmund's
mood was gentle and forbearing. He smiled faintly at Helena, then
turned, and, lifting his hand to his mouth in a kiss for the beauty he
had enjoyed, '_Addio_!'