As he got up dripping from the cold bath, he felt for the moment
exhilarated. He rubbed himself smooth. Glancing down at himself, he
thought: 'I look young. I look as young as twenty-six.' He turned to the mirror. There he saw himself a mature, complete man of
forty, with grave years of experience on his countenance. 'I used to think that, when I was forty,' he said to himself, 'I should
find everything straight as the nose on my face, walking through my
affairs as easily as you like. Now I am no more sure of myself, have no
more confidence than a boy of twenty. What can I do? It seems to me a
man needs a mother all his life. I don't feel much like a lord of
creation.' Having arrived at this cynicism, Siegmund prepared to go downstairs. His
sensitiveness had passed off; his nerves had become callous. When he was
dressed he went down to the kitchen without hesitation. He was
indifferent to his wife and children. No one spoke to him as he sat to
the table. That was as he liked it; he wished for nothing to touch him. He ate his breakfast alone, while his wife bustled about upstairs and
Vera bustled about in the dining-room. Then he retired to the solitude
of the drawing-room. As a reaction against his poetic activity, he felt
as if he were gradually becoming more stupid and blind. He remarked
nothing, not even the extravagant bowl of grasses placed where he would
not have allowed it--on his piano; nor his fiddle, laid cruelly on the
cold, polished floor near the window. He merely sat down in an
arm-chair, and felt sick. All his unnatural excitement, all the poetic stimulation of the past few
days, had vanished. He felt flaccid, while his life struggled slowly
through him. After an intoxication of passion and love, and beauty, and
of sunshine, he was prostrate. Like a plant that blossoms gorgeously and
madly, he had wasted the tissue of his strength, so that now his life
struggled in a clogged and broken channel. Siegmund sat with his head between his hands, leaning upon the table. He
would have been stupidly quiescent in his feeling of loathing and
sickness had not an intense irritability in all his nerves tormented him
into consciousness. 'I suppose this is the result of the sun--a sort of sunstroke,' he said,
realizing an intolerable stiffness of his brain, a stunned condition
in his head. 'This is hideous!' he said. His arms were quivering with intense
irritation. He exerted all his will to stop them, and then the hot
irritability commenced in his belly. Siegmund fidgeted in his chair
without changing his position. He had not the energy to get up and move
about. He fidgeted like an insect pinned down. The door opened. He felt violently startled; yet there was no movement
perceptible. Vera entered, ostensibly for an autograph-album into which
she was going to copy a drawing from the _London Opinion_, really to see
what her father was doing. He did not move a muscle. He only longed
intensely for his daughter to go out of the room, so that he could let
go. Vera went out of the drawing-room humming to herself. Apparently she
had not even glanced at her father. In reality, she had observed
him closely. 'He is sitting with his head in his hands,' she said to her mother. Beatrice replied: 'I'm glad he's nothing else to do.' 'I should think he's pitying himself,' said Vera. 'He's a good one at it,' answered Beatrice. Gwen came forward and took hold of her mother's skirt, looking up
anxiously. 'What is he doing, Mam?' she asked. 'Nothing,' replied her mother--'nothing; only sitting in the
drawing-room.' 'But what has he _been_ doing?' persisted the anxious child. 'Nothing--nothing that I can tell _you_. He's only spoilt all our
lives.' The little girl stood regarding her mother In the greatest distress and
perplexity. 'But what will he do, Mam?' she asked. 'Nothing. Don't bother. Run and play with Marjory now. Do you want a
nice plum?' She took a yellow plum from the table. Gwen accepted it without a word. She was too much perplexed. 'What do you say?' asked her mother. 'Thank you,' replied the child, turning away. Siegmund sighed with relief when he was again left alone. He twisted in
his chair, and sighed again, trying to drive out the intolerable clawing
irritability from his belly. 'Ah, this is horrible!' he said. He stiffened his muscles to quieten them. 'I've never been like this before. What is the matter?' he asked
himself. But the question died out immediately. It seemed useless and sickening
to try and answer it. He began to cast about for an alleviation. If he
could only do something, or have something he wanted, it would
be better. 'What do I want?' he asked himself, and he anxiously strove to find this
out. Everything he suggested to himself made him sicken with weariness or
distaste: the seaside, a foreign land, a fresh life that he had often
dreamed of, farming in Canada. 'I should be just the same there,' he answered himself. 'Just the same
sickening feeling there that I want nothing.' 'Helena!' he suggested to himself, trembling. But he only felt a deeper horror. The thought of her made him shrink
convulsively. 'I can't endure this,' he said. If this is the case, I had better be
dead. To have no want, no desire--that is death, to begin with.' He rested awhile after this. The idea of death alone seemed
entertaining. Then, 'Is there really nothing I could turn to?' he
asked himself. To him, in that state of soul, it seemed there was not. 'Helena!' he suggested again, appealingly testing himself. 'Ah, no!' he
cried, drawing sharply back, as from an approaching touch upon a
raw place. He groaned slightly as he breathed, with a horrid weight of nausea. There was a fumbling upon the door-knob. Siegmund did not start. He
merely pulled himself together. Gwen pushed open the door, and stood
holding on to the door-knob looking at him. 'Dad, Mam says dinner's ready,' she announced. Siegmund did not reply. The child waited, at a loss for some moments,
before she repeated, in a hesitating tone:

'Dinner's ready.' 'All right,' said Siegmund. 'Go away.' The little girl returned to the kitchen with tears in her eyes, very
crestfallen. 'What did he say?' asked Beatrice. 'He shouted at me,' replied the little one, breaking into tears. Beatrice flushed. Tears came into her own eyes. She took the child in
her arms and pressed her to her, kissing her forehead. 'Did he?' she said very tenderly. 'Never mind, then, dearie--never
mind.' The tears in her mother's voice made the child sob bitterly. Vera and
Marjory sat silent at table. The steak and mashed potatoes steamed and
grew cold. _Chapter 24_


When Helena arrived home on the Thursday evening she found everything
repulsive. All the odours of the sordid street through which she must
pass hung about the pavement, having crept out in the heat. The house
was bare and narrow. She remembered children sometimes to have brought
her moths shut up in matchboxes. As she knocked at the door she felt
like a numbed moth which a boy is pushing off its leaf-rest into
his box. The door was opened by her mother. She was a woman whose sunken mouth,
ruddy cheeks, and quick brown eyes gave her the appearance of a bird
which walks about pecking suddenly here and there. As Helena reluctantly
entered the mother drew herself up, and immediately relaxed, seeming to
peck forwards as she said:

'Well?' 'Well, here we are!' replied the daughter in a matter-of-fact tone. Her mother was inclined to be affectionate, therefore she became
proportionately cold. 'So I see,' exclaimed Mrs Verden, tossing her head in a peculiar jocular
manner. 'And what sort of a time have you had?' 'Oh, very good,' replied Helena, still more coolly. 'H'm!' Mrs Verden looked keenly at her daughter. She recognized the peculiar
sulky, childish look she knew so well, therefore, making an effort, she
forbore to question. 'You look well,' she said. Helena smiled ironically. 'And are you ready for your supper?' she asked, in the playful,
affectionate manner she had assumed. 'If the supper is ready I will have it,' replied her daughter. 'Well, it's not ready.' The mother shut tight her sunken mouth, and
regarded her daughter with playful challenge. 'Because,' she continued,
'I didn't known when you were coming.' She gave a jerk with her arm,
like an orator who utters the incontrovertible. 'But,' she added, after
a tedious dramatic pause, 'I can soon have it ready. What will
you have?' 'The full list of your capacious larder,' replied Helena. Mrs Verden looked at her again, and hesitated. 'Will you have cocoa or lemonade?' she asked, coming to the point
curtly. 'Lemonade,' said Helena. Presently Mr Verden entered--a small, white-bearded man with a gentle
voice. 'Oh, so you are back, Nellie!' he said, in his quiet, reserved manner. 'As you see, Pater,' she answered. 'H'm!' he murmured, and he moved about at his accounts. Neither of her parents dared to question Helena. They moved about her on
tiptoe, stealthily. Yet neither subserved her. Her father's quiet 'H'm!' her mother's curt question, made her draw inwards like a snail which can
never retreat far enough from condemning eyes. She made a careless
pretence of eating. She was like a child which has done wrong, and will
not be punished, but will be left with the humiliating smear of
offence upon it. There was a quick, light palpitating of the knocker. Mrs Verden went to
the door. 'Has she come?' And there were hasty steps along the passage. Louisa entered. She flung
herself upon Helena and kissed her. 'How long have you been in?' she asked, in a voice trembling with
affection. 'Ten minutes,' replied Helena. 'Why didn't you send me the time of the train, so that I could come and
meet you?' Louisa reproached her. 'Why?' drawled Helena. Louisa looked at her friend without speaking. She was deeply hurt by
this sarcasm. As soon as possible Helena went upstairs. Louisa stayed with her that
night. On the next day they were going to Cornwall together for their
usual midsummer holiday. They were to be accompanied by a third girl--a
minor friend of Louisa, a slight acquaintance of Helena. During the night neither of the two friends slept much. Helena made
confidences to Louisa, who brooded on these, on the romance and tragedy
which enveloped the girl she loved so dearly. Meanwhile, Helena's
thoughts went round and round, tethered amid the five days by the sea,
pulling forwards as far as the morrow's meeting with Siegmund, but
reaching no further. Friday was an intolerable day of silence, broken by little tender
advances and playful, affectionate sallies on the part of the mother,
all of which were rapidly repulsed. The father said nothing, and avoided
his daughter with his eyes. In his humble reserve there was a dignity
which made his disapproval far more difficult to bear than the repeated
flagrant questionings of the mother's eyes. But the day wore on. Helena
pretended to read, and sat thinking. She played her violin a little,
mechanically. She went out into the town, and wandered about. At last the night fell. 'Well,' said Helena to her mother, 'I suppose I'd better pack.' 'Haven't you done it?' cried Mrs Verden, exaggerating her surprise. 'You'll never have it done. I'd better help you. What times does the
train go?' Helena smiled. 'Ten minutes to ten.' Her mother glanced at the clock. It was only half-past eight. There was
ample time for everything. 'Nevertheless, you'd better look sharp,' Mrs Verden said. Helena turned away, weary of this exaggeration. 'I'll come with you to the station,' suggested Mrs Verden. 'I'll see the
last of you. We shan't see much of you just now.' Helena turned round in surprise. 'Oh, I wouldn't bother,' she said, fearing to make her disapproval too
evident. 'Yes--I will--I'll see you off.' Mrs Verden's animation and indulgence were remarkable. Usually she was
curt and undemonstrative. On occasions like these, however, when she was
reminded of the ideal relations between mother and daughter, she played
the part of the affectionate parent, much to the general distress. Helena lit a candle and went to her bedroom. She quickly packed her
dress-basket. As she stood before the mirror to put on her hat, her
eyes, gazing heavily, met her heavy eyes in the mirror. She glanced away
swiftly as if she had been burned. 'How stupid I look!' she said to herself. 'And Siegmund, how is he, I
wonder?' She wondered how Siegmund had passed the day, what had happened to him,
how he felt, how he looked. She thought of him protectively. Having strapped her basket, she carried it downstairs. Her mother was
ready, with a white lace scarf round her neck. After a short time Louisa
came in. She dropped her basket in the passage, and then sank into
a chair. 'I don't want to go, Nell,' she said, after a few moments of silence. 'Why, how is that?' asked Helena, not surprised, but condescending, as
to a child. 'Oh, I don't know; I'm tired,' said the other petulantly. 'Of course you are. What do you expect, after a day like this?' said
Helena. 'And rushing about packing,' exclaimed Mrs Verden, still in an
exaggerated manner, this time scolding playfully. 'Oh, I don't know. I don't think I want to go, dear,' repeated Louisa
dejectedly. 'Well, it is time we set out,' replied Helena, rising. 'Will you carry
the basket or the violin, Mater?' Louisa rose, and with a forlorn expression took up her light luggage. The west opposite the door was smouldering with sunset. Darkness is only
smoke that hangs suffocatingly over the low red heat of the sunken day. Such was Helena's longed-for night. The tramcar was crowded. In one
corner Olive, the third friend, rose excitedly to greet them. Helena sat
mute, while the car swung through the yellow, stale lights of a
third-rate street of shops. She heard Olive remarking on her sunburned
face and arms; she became aware of the renewed inflammation in her
blistered arms; she heard her own curious voice answering. Everything
was in a maze. To the beat of the car, while the yellow blur of the
shops passed over her eyes, she repeated: 'Two hundred and forty
miles--two hundred and forty miles.' _Chapter 25_


Siegmund passed the afternoon in a sort of stupor. At tea-time Beatrice,
who had until then kept herself in restraint, gave way to an outburst of
angry hysteria. 'When does your engagement at the Comedy Theatre commence?' she had
asked him coldly. He knew she was wondering about money. 'Tomorrow--if ever,' he had answered. She was aware that he hated the work. For some reason or other her anger
flashed out like sudden lightning at his 'if ever'. 'What do you think you _can_ do?' she cried. 'For I think you have done
enough. We can't do as we like altogether--indeed, indeed we cannot. You
have had your fling, haven't you? You have had your fling, and you want
to keep on. But there's more than one person in the world. Remember
that. But there are your children, let me remind you. Whose are they? You talk about shirking the engagement, but who is going to be
responsible for your children, do you think?' 'I said nothing about shirking the engagement,' replied Siegmund, very
coldly. 'No, there was no need to say. I know what it means. You sit there
sulking all day. What do you think _I_ do? I have to see to the
children, I have to work and slave, I go on from day to day. I tell you
_I'll_ stop, I tell you _I'll_ do as I like. _I'll_ go as well. No, I
wouldn't be such a coward, you know that. You know _I_ wouldn't leave
little children--to the workhouse or anything. They're my children; they
mightn't be yours.' 'There is no need for this,' said Siegmund contemptuously. The pressure in his temples was excruciating, and he felt loathsomely
sick. Beatrice's dark eyes flashed with rage. 'Isn't there!' she cried. 'Oh, isn't there? No, there is need for a
great deal more. I don't know what you think I am. How much farther do
you' think you can go? No, you don't like reminding of us. You sit
moping, sulking, because you have to come back to your own children. I
wonder how much you think I shall stand? What do you think I am, to put
up with it? What do you think I am? Am I a servant to eat out of
your hand?' 'Be quiet!' shouted Siegmund. 'Don't I know what you are? Listen to
yourself!'