'Then Louisa will have no holiday--and you have promised,' he said
gravely. Helena looked at him. She saw he had decided that she should go. 'Is my promise so _very_ important?' she asked. She glanced angrily at
the three ladies who were hesitating in the doorway. Nevertheless, the
ladies entered, and seated themselves at the opposite end of the
carriage. Siegmund did not know whether he were displeased or relieved
by their intrusion. If they had stayed out, he might have held Helena in
his arms for still another hour. As it was, she could not harass him
with words. He tried not to look at her, but to think. The train at last moved out of the station. As it passed through
Portsmouth, Siegmund remembered his coming down, on the Sunday. It
seemed an indefinite age ago. He was thankful that he sat on the side of
the carriage opposite from the one he had occupied five days before. The
afternoon of the flawless sky was ripening into evening. The chimneys
and the sides of the houses of Portsmouth took on that radiant
appearance which transfigures the end of day in town. A rich bloom of
light appears on the surfaces of brick and stone. 'It will go on,' thought Siegmund, 'being gay of an evening, for ever. And I shall miss it all!' But as soon as the train moved into the gloom of the Town station, he
began again:

'Beatrice will be proud, and silent as steel when I get home. She will
say nothing, thank God--nor shall I. That will expedite matters: there
will be no interruptions....

'But we cannot continue together after this. Why should I discuss
reasons for and against? We cannot. She goes to a cottage in the
country. Already I have spoken of it to her. I allow her all I can of my
money, and on the rest I manage for myself in lodgings in London. Very good. 'But when I am comparatively free I cannot live alone. I shall want
Helena; I shall remember the children. If I have the one, I shall be
damned by the thought of the other. This bruise on my mind will never
get better. Helena says she would never come to me; but she would, out
of pity for me. I know she would. 'But then, what then? Beatrice and the children in the country, and me
not looking after the children. Beatrice is thriftless. She would be in
endless difficulty. It would be a degradation to me. She would keep a
red sore inflamed against me; I should be a shameful thing in her mouth. Besides, there would go all her strength. She would not make any
efforts. "He has brought it on us," she would say; "let him see what the
result is." And things would go from bad to worse with them. It would be
a gangrene of shame. 'And Helena--I should have nothing but mortification. When she was
asleep I could not look at her. She is such a strange, incongruous
creature. But I should be responsible for her. She believes in me as if
I had the power of God. What should I think of myself?' Siegmund leaned with his head against the window, watching the country
whirl past, but seeing nothing. He thought imaginatively, and his
imagination destroyed him. He pictured Beatrice in the country. He
sketched the morning--breakfast haphazard at a late hour; the elder
children rushing off without food, miserable and untidy, the youngest
bewildered under her swift, indifferent preparations for school. He
thought of Beatrice in the evening, worried and irritable, her bills
unpaid, the work undone, declaiming lamentably against the cruelty of
her husband, who had abandoned her to such a burden of care while he
took his pleasure elsewhere. This line exhausted or intolerable, Siegmund switched off to the
consideration of his own life in town. He would go to America; the
agreement was signed with the theatre manager. But America would be only
a brief shutting of the eyes and closing of the mouth. He would wait for
the home-coming to Helena, and she would wait for him. It was
inevitable; then would begin--what? He would never have enough money to
keep Helena, even if he managed to keep himself. Their meetings would
then be occasional and clandestine. Ah, it was intolerable! 'If I were rich,' said Siegmund, 'all would be plain. I would give each
of my children enough, and Beatrice, and we would go away; but I am
nearly forty; I have no genius; I shall never be rich,' Round and round
went his thoughts like oxen over a threshing floor, treading out the
grain. Gradually the chaff flew away; gradually the corn of conviction
gathered small and hard upon the floor. As he sat thinking, Helena leaned across to him and laid her hand on his
knee. 'If I have made things more difficult,' she said, her voice harsh with
pain, 'you will forgive me.' He started. This was one of the cruel cuts of pain that love gives,
filling the eyes with blood. Siegmund stiffened himself; slowly he
smiled, as he looked at her childish, plaintive lips, and her large eyes
haunted with pain. 'Forgive you?' he repeated. 'Forgive you for five days of perfect
happiness; the only real happiness I have ever known!' Helena tightened her fingers on his knee. She felt herself stinging with
painful joy; but one of the ladies was looking her curiously. She leaned
back in her place, and turned to watch at the shocks of corn strike
swiftly, in long rows, across her vision. Siegmund, also quivering, turned his face to the window, where the
rotation of the wide sea-flat helped the movement of his thought. Helena
had interrupted him. She had bewildered his thoughts from their hawking,
so that they struck here and there, wildly, among small, pitiful prey
that was useless, conclusions which only hindered the bringing home of
the final convictions. 'What will she do?' cried Siegmund, 'What will she do when I am gone? What will become of her? Already she has no aim in life; then she will
have no object. Is it any good my going if I leave her behind? What an
inextricable knot this is! But what will she do?' It was a question she had aroused before, a question which he could
never answer; indeed, it was not for him to answer. They wound through the pass of the South Downs. As Siegmund, looking
backward, saw the northern slope of the downs swooping smoothly, in a
great, broad bosom of sward, down to the body of the land, he warmed
with sudden love for the earth; there the great downs were, naked like a
breast, leaning kindly to him. The earth is always kind; it loves us,
and would foster us like a nurse. The downs were big and tender and
simple. Siegmund looked at the farm, folded in a hollow, and he wondered
what fortunate folk were there, nourished and quiet, hearing the vague
roar of the train that was carrying him home. Up towards Arundel the cornfields of red wheat were heavy with gold. It
was evening, when the green of the trees went out, leaving dark shapes
proud upon the sky; but the red wheat was forged in the sunset, hot and
magnificent. Siegmund almost gloated as he smelled the ripe corn, and
opened his eyes to its powerful radiation. For a moment he forgot
everything, amid the forging of red fields of gold in the smithy of the
sunset. Like sparks, poppies blew along the railway-banks, a crimson
train. Siegmund waited, through the meadows, for the next wheat-field. It came like the lifting of yellow-hot metal out of the gloom of
darkened grass-lands. Helena was reassured by the glamour of evening over ripe Sussex. She
breathed the land now and then, while she watched the sky. The sunset
was stately. The blue-eyed day, with great limbs, having fought its
victory and won, now mounted triumphant on its pyre, and with white arms
uplifted took the flames, which leaped like blood about its feet. The
day died nobly, so she thought. One gold cloud, as an encouragement tossed to her, followed the train. 'Surely that cloud is for us,' said she, as she watched it anxiously. Dark trees brushed between it and her, while she waited in suspense. It
came, unswerving, from behind the trees. 'I am sure it is for us,' she repeated. A gladness came into her eyes. Still the cloud followed the train. She leaned forward to Siegmund and
pointed out the cloud to him. She was very eager to give him a little of
her faith. 'It has come with us quite a long way. Doesn't it seem to you to be
travelling with us? It is the golden hand; it is the good omen.' She then proceeded to tell him the legend from 'Aylwin'. Siegmund listened, and smiled. The sunset was handsome on his face. Helena was almost happy. 'I am right,' said he to himself. I am right in my conclusions, and
Helena will manage by herself afterwards. I am right; there is the hand
to confirm it.' The heavy train settled down to an easy, unbroken stroke, swinging like
a greyhound over the level northwards. All the time Siegmund was
mechanically thinking the well-known movement from the Valkyrie Ride,
his whole self beating to the rhythm. It seemed to him there was a
certain grandeur in this flight, but it hurt him with its heavy
insistence of catastrophe. He was afraid; he had to summon his courage
to sit quiet. For a time he was reassured; he believed he was going on
towards the right end. He hunted through the country and the sky, asking
of everything, 'Am I right? Am I right?' He did not mind what happened
to him, so long as he felt it was right. What he meant by 'right' he did
not trouble to think, but the question remained. For a time he had been
reassured; then a dullness came over him, when his thoughts were stupid,
and he merely submitted to the rhythm of the train, which stamped him
deeper and deeper with a brand of catastrophe. The sun had gone down. Over the west was a gush of brightness as the
fountain of light bubbled lower. The stars, like specks of froth from
the foaming of the day, clung to the blue ceiling. Like spiders they
hung overhead, while the hosts of the gold atmosphere poured out of the
hive by the western low door. Soon the hive was empty, a hollow dome of
purple, with here and there on the floor a bright brushing of wings--a
village; then, overhead, the luminous star-spider began to run. 'Ah, well!' thought Siegmund--he was tired--'if one bee dies in a swarm,
what is it, so long as the hive is all right? Apart from the gold light,
and the hum and the colour of day, what was I? Nothing! Apart from these
rushings out of the hive, along with swarm, into the dark meadows of
night, gathering God knows what, I was a pebble. Well, the day will
swarm in golden again, with colour on the wings of every bee, and
humming in each activity. The gold and the colour and sweet smell and
the sound of life, they exist, even if there is no bee; it only happens
we see the iridescence on the wings of a bee. It exists whether or not,
bee or no bee. Since the iridescence and the humming of life _are_
always, and since it was they who made me, then I am not lost. At least,
I do not care. If the spark goes out, the essence of the fire is there
in the darkness. What does it matter? Besides, I _have_ burned bright; I
have laid up a fine cell of honey somewhere--I wonder where? We can
never point to it; but it _is_ so--what does it matter, then!' They had entered the north downs, and were running through Dorking
towards Leatherhead. Box Hill stood dark in the dusky sweetness of the
night. Helena remembered that here she and Siegmund had come for their
first walk together. She would like to come again. Presently she saw the
quick stilettos of stars on the small, baffled river; they ran between
high embankments. Siegmund recollected that these were covered with
roses of Sharon--the large golden St John's wort of finest silk. He
looked, and could just distinguish the full-blown, delicate flowers,
ignored by the stars. At last he had something to say to Helena:

'Do you remember,' he asked, 'the roses of Sharon all along here?' 'I do,' replied Helena, glad he spoke so brightly. 'Weren't they
pretty?' After a few moments of watching the bank, she said:

'Do you know, I have never gathered one? I think I should like to; I
should like to feel them, and they should have an orangy smell.' He smiled, without answering. She glanced up at him, smiling brightly. 'But shall we come down here in the morning, and find some?' she asked. She put the question timidly. 'Would you care to?' she added. Siegmund darkened and frowned. Here was the pain revived again. 'No,' he said gently; 'I think we had better not.' Almost for the first
time he did not make apologetic explanation. Helena turned to the window, and remained, looking out at the spinning
of the lights of the towns without speaking, until they were near
Sutton. Then she rose and pinned on her hat, gathering her gloves and
her basket. She was, in spite of herself, slightly angry. Being quite
ready to leave the train, she sat down to wait for the station. Siegmund
was aware that she was displeased, and again, for the first time, he
said to himself, 'Ah, well, it must be so.' She looked at him. He was sad, therefore she softened instantly. 'At least,' she said doubtfully, 'I shall see you at the station.' 'At Waterloo?' he asked. 'No, at Wimbledon,' she replied, in her metallic tone. 'But--' he began. 'It will be the best way for us,' she interrupted, in the calm tone of
conviction. 'Much better than crossing London from Victoria to
Waterloo.' 'Very well,' he replied. He looked up a train for her in his little time-table. 'You will get in Wimbledon 10.5--leave 10.40--leave Waterloo 11.30,' he
said. 'Very good,' she answered. The brakes were grinding. They waited in a burning suspense for the
train to stop. 'If only she will soon go!' thought Siegmund. It was an intolerable
minute. She rose; everything was a red blur. She stood before him,
pressing his hand; then he rose to give her the bag. As he leaned upon
the window-frame and she stood below on the platform, looking up at him,
he could scarcely breathe. 'How long will it be?' he said to himself,
looking at the open carriage doors. He hated intensely the lady who
could not get a porter to remove her luggage; he could have killed her;
he could have killed the dilatory guard. At last the doors slammed and
the whistle went. The train started imperceptibly into motion. 'Now I lose her,' said Siegmund. She looked up at him; her face was white and dismal. 'Good-bye, then!' she said, and she turned away. Siegmund went back to his seat. He was relieved, but he trembled with
sickness. We are all glad when intense moments are done with; but why
did she fling round in that manner, stopping the keen note short; what
would she do? _Chapter 22_


Siegmund went up to Victoria. He was in no hurry to get down to
Wimbledon. London was warm and exhausted after the hot day, but this
peculiar lukewarmness was not unpleasant to him. He chose to walk from
Victoria to Waterloo. The streets were like polished gun-metal glistened over with gold. The
taxi-cabs, the wild cats of the town, swept over the gleaming floor
swiftly, soon lessening in the distance, as if scornful of the other
clumsy-footed traffic. He heard the merry click-clock of the swinging
hansoms, then the excited whirring of the motor-buses as they charged
full-tilt heavily down the road, their hearts, as it seemed, beating
with trepidation; they drew up with a sigh of relief by the kerb, and
stood there panting--great, nervous, clumsy things. Siegmund was always
amused by the headlong, floundering career of the buses. He was pleased
with this scampering of the traffic; anything for distraction. He was
glad Helena was not with him, for the streets would have irritated her
with their coarse noise. She would stand for a long time to watch the
rabbits pop and hobble along on the common at night; but the tearing
along of the taxis and the charge of a great motor-bus was painful to
her. 'Discords,' she said, 'after the trees and sea.' She liked the
glistening of the streets; it seemed a fine alloy of gold laid down for
pavement, such pavement as drew near to the pure gold streets of Heaven;
but this noise could not be endured near any wonderland. Siegmund did not mind it; it drummed out his own thoughts. He watched
the gleaming magic of the road, raced over with shadows, project itself
far before him into the night. He watched the people. Soldiers, belted
with scarlet, went jauntily on in front. There was a peculiar charm in
their movement. There was a soft vividness of life in their carriage; it
reminded Siegmund of the soft swaying and lapping of a poised
candle-flame. The women went blithely alongside. Occasionally, in
passing, one glanced at him; then, in spite of himself, he smiled; he
knew not why. The women glanced at him with approval, for he was ruddy;
besides, he had that carelessness and abstraction of despair. The eyes
of the women said, 'You are comely, you are lovable,' and
Siegmund smiled. When the street opened, at Westminster, he noticed the city sky, a
lovely deep purple, and the lamps in the square steaming out a vapour of
grey-gold light. 'It is a wonderful night,' he said to himself. 'There are not two such
in a year.' He went forward to the Embankment, with a feeling of elation in his
heart. This purple and gold-grey world, with the fluttering flame-warmth
of soldiers and the quick brightness of women, like lights that clip
sharply in a draught, was a revelation to him. As he leaned upon the Embankment parapet the wonder did not fade, but
rather increased. The trams, one after another, floated loftily over the
bridge. They went like great burning bees in an endless file into a
hive, past those which were drifting dreamily out, while below, on the
black, distorted water, golden serpents flashed and twisted to and fro. 'Ah!' said Siegmund to himself; 'it is far too wonderful for me. Here,
as well as by the sea, the night is gorgeous and uncouth. Whatever
happens, the world is wonderful.' So he went on amid all the vast miracle of movement in the city night,
the swirling of water to the sea, the gradual sweep of the stars, the
floating of many lofty, luminous cars through the bridged darkness, like
an army of angels filing past on one of God's campaigns, the purring
haste of the taxis, the slightly dancing shadows of people. Siegmund
went on slowly, like a slow bullet winging into the heart of life. He
did not lose this sense of wonder, not in the train, nor as he walked
home in the moonless dark. When he closed the door behind him and hung up his hat he frowned. He
did not think definitely of anything, but his frown meant to him: 'Now
for the beginning of Hell!' He went towards the dining-room, where the light was, and the uneasy
murmur. The clock, with its deprecating, suave chime, was striking ten,
Siegmund opened the door of the room. Beatrice was sewing, and did not
raise her head. Frank, a tall, thin lad of eighteen, was bent over a
book. He did not look up. Vera had her fingers thrust in among her hair,
and continued to read the magazine that lay on the table before her. Siegmund looked at them all. They gave no sign to show they were aware
of his entry; there was only that unnatural tenseness of people who
cover their agitation. He glanced round to see where he should go. His
wicker arm-chair remained by the fireplace; his slippers were standing
under the sideboard, as he had left them. Siegmund sat down in the
creaking chair; he began to feel sick and tired. 'I suppose the children are in bed,' he said. His wife sewed on as if she had not heard him; his daughter noisily
turned over a leaf and continued to read, as if she were pleasantly
interested and had known no interruption. Siegmund waited, with his
slipper dangling from his hand, looking from one to another. 'They've been gone two hours,' said Frank at last, still without raising
his eyes from his book. His tone was contemptuous, his voice was
jarring, not yet having developed a man's fullness. Siegmund put on his slipper, and began to unlace the other boot. The
slurring of the lace through the holes and the snacking of the tag
seemed unnecessarily loud. It annoyed his wife. She took a breath to
speak, then refrained, feeling suddenly her daughter's scornful
restraint upon her. Siegmund rested his arms upon his knees, and sat
leaning forward, looking into the barren fireplace, which was littered
with paper, and orange-peel, and a banana-skin. 'Do you want any supper?' asked Beatrice, and the sudden harshness of
her voice startled him into looking at her. She had her face averted, refusing to see him. Siegmund's heart went
down with weariness and despair at the sight of her. 'Aren't _you_ having any?' he asked. The table was not laid. Beatrice's work-basket, a little wicker
fruit-skep, overflowed scissors, and pins, and scraps of holland, and
reels of cotton on the green serge cloth. Vera leaned both her elbows on
the table. Instead of replying to him, Beatrice went to the sideboard. She took out
a table-cloth, pushing her sewing litter aside, and spread the cloth
over one end of the table. Vera gave her magazine a little knock
with her hand. 'Have you read this tale of a French convent school in here, Mother?' she asked. 'In where?' In this month's _Nash's_.' 'No,' replied Beatrice. 'What time have I for reading, much less for
anything else?' 'You should think more of yourself, and a little less of other people,
then,' said Vera, with a sneer at the 'other people'. She rose. 'Let me
do this. You sit down; you are tired, Mother,' she said. Her mother, without replying, went out to the kitchen. Vera followed
her. Frank, left alone with his father, moved uneasily, and bent his
thin shoulders lower over his book. Siegmund remained with his arms on
his knees, looking into the grate. From the kitchen came the chinking of
crockery, and soon the smell of coffee. All the time Vera was heard
chatting with affected brightness to her mother, addressing her in fond
tones, using all her wits to recall bright little incidents to retail to
her. Beatrice answered rarely, and then with utmost brevity. Presently Vera came in with the tray.