he demanded. "Mean?" she laughed, as the car swung around and they glided away. "You didn't suppose I was going to sit here and watch you depart upon
a mysterious errand? I borrowed your chauffeur's coat and his cap,
and slunk down after you. I can assure you I looked the most wonderful
female apache you ever saw! And I saw the fight. It was better than any
of the prize fights I have ever been to. The real thing is better than
the sham, isn't it?" Sir Timothy leaned back in his place and remained silent. Soon they
passed out of the land of tired people, of stalls decked out with
unsavoury provender, of foetid smells and unwholesome-looking houses. They passed through a street of silent warehouses on to the Embankment. A stronger breeze came down between the curving arc of lights. "You are not sorry that you brought me?" Lady Cynthia asked, suddenly
holding out her hand. Sir Timothy took it in his. For some reason or other, he made no answer
at all. CHAPTER XXVII


The car stopped in front of the great house in Grosvenor Square. Lady
Cynthia turned to her companion. "You must come in, please," she said. "I insist, if it is only for five
minutes." Sir Timothy followed her across the hall to a curved recess, where the
footman who had admitted them touched a bell, and a small automatic lift
came down. "I am taking you to my own quarters," she explained. "They are rather
cut off but I like them--especially on hot nights." They glided up to the extreme top of the house. She opened the gates and
led the way into what was practically an attic sitting-room, decorated
in black and white. Wide-flung doors opened onto the leads, where
comfortable chairs, a small table and an electric standard were
arranged. They were far above the tops of the other houses, and looked
into the green of the Park. "This is where I bring very few people," she said. "This is where, even
after my twenty-eight years of fraudulent life, I am sometimes myself. Wait." There were feminine drinks and sandwiches arranged on the table. She
opened the cupboard of a small sideboard just inside the sitting-room,
however, and produced whisky and a syphon of soda. There was a pail of
ice in a cool corner. From somewhere in the distance came the music
of violins floating through the window of a house where a dance was in
progress. They could catch a glimpse of the striped awning and the
long line of waiting vehicles with their twin eyes of fire. She curled
herself up on a settee, flung a cushion at Sir Timothy, who was already
ensconced in a luxurious easy-chair, and with a tumbler of iced sherbet
in one hand, and a cigarette in the other, looked across at him. "I am not sure," she said, "that you have not to-night dispelled an
illusion." "What manner of one?" he asked. "Above all things," she went on, "I have always looked upon you as
wicked. Most people do. I think that is one reason why so many of
the women find you attractive. I suppose it is why I have found you
attractive." The smile was back upon his lips. He bowed a little, and, leaning
forward, dropped a chunk of ice into his whisky and soda. "Dear Lady Cynthia," he murmured, "don't tell me that I am going to slip
back in your estimation into some normal place." "I am not quite sure," she said deliberately. "I have always looked upon
you as a kind of amateur criminal, a man who loved black things and
dark ways. You know how weary one gets of the ordinary code of morals in
these days. You were such a delightful antidote. And now, I am not sure
that you have not shaken my faith in you." "In what way?" "You really seem to have been engaged to-night in a very sporting and
philanthropic enterprise. I imagined you visiting some den of vice and
mixing as an equal with these terrible people who never seem to cross
the bridges. I was perfectly thrilled when I put on your chauffeur's
coat and hat and followed you." "The story of my little adventure is a simple one," Sir Timothy said. "I
do not think it greatly affects my character. I believe, as a matter
of fact, that I am just as wicked as you would have me be, but I have
friends in every walk of life, and, as you know, I like to peer into the
unexpected places. I had heard of this man Billy the Tanner. He beats
women, and has established a perfect reign of terror in the court and
neighbourhood where he lives. I fear I must agree with you that there
were some elements of morality--of conforming, at any rate, to the
recognised standards of justice--in what I did. You know, of course,
that I am a great patron of every form of boxing, fencing, and the
various arts of self-defence and attack. I just took along one of the
men from my gymnasium who I knew was equal to the job, to give this
fellow a lesson." "He did it all right," Lady Cynthia murmured. "But this is where I think I re-establish myself," Sir Timothy
continued, the peculiar nature of his smile reasserting itself. "I did
not do this for the sake of the neighbourhood. I did not do it from any
sense of justice at all. I did it to provide for myself an enjoyable and
delectable spectacle." She smiled lazily. "That does rather let you out," she admitted. "However, on the whole I
am disappointed. I am afraid that you are not so bad as people think." "People?" he repeated. "Francis Ledsam, for instance--my son-in-law in
posse?" "Francis Ledsam is one of those few rather brilliant persons who have
contrived to keep sane without becoming a prig," she remarked. "You know why?" he reminded her. "Francis Ledsam has been a tremendous
worker. It is work which keeps a man sane. Brilliancy without the
capacity for work drives people to the madhouse." "Where we are all going, I suppose," she sighed. "Not you," he answered. "You have just enough--I don't know what we
moderns call it--soul, shall I say?--to keep you from the muddy ways." She rose to her feet and leaned over the rails. Sir Timothy watched her
thoughtfully. Her figure, notwithstanding its suggestions of delicate
maturity, was still as slim as a young girl's. She was looking across
the tree-tops towards an angry bank of clouds--long, pencil-like streaks
of black on a purple background. Below, in the street, a taxi passed
with grinding of brakes and noisy horn. The rail against which she
leaned looked very flimsy. Sir Timothy stretched out his hand and held
her arm. "My nerves are going with my old age," he apologised. "That support
seems too fragile." She did not move. The touch of his fingers grew firmer. "We have entered upon an allegory," she murmured. "You are preserving me
from the depths." He laughed harshly. "I!" he exclaimed, with a sudden touch of real and fierce bitterness
which brought the light dancing into her eyes and a spot of colour to
her cheeks. "I preserve you! Why, you can never hear my name without
thinking of sin, of crime of some sort! Do you seriously expect me to
ever preserve any one from anything?" "You haven't made any very violent attempts to corrupt me," she reminded
him. "Women don't enter much into my scheme of life," he declared. "They
played a great part once. It was a woman, I think, who first headed me
off from the pastures of virtue." "I know," she said softly. "It was Margaret's mother." His voice rang out like a pistol-shot. "How did you know that?" She turned away from the rail and threw herself back in her chair. His
hand, however, she still kept in hers. "Uncle Joe was Minister at Rio, you know, the year it all happened,"
she explained. "He told us the story years ago--how you came back
from Europe and found things were not just as they should be between
Margaret's mother and your partner, and how you killed your partner." His nostrils quivered a little. One felt that the fire of suffering had
touched him again for a moment. "Yes, I killed him," he admitted. "That is part of my creed. The men who
defend their honour in the Law Courts are men I know nothing of. This
man would have wronged me and robbed me of my honour. I bade him defend
himself in any way he thought well. It was his life or mine. He was a
poor fighter and I killed him." "And Margaret's mother died from the shock." "She died soon afterwards." The stars grew paler. The passing vehicles, with their brilliant lights,
grew fewer and fewer. The breeze which had been so welcome at first,
turned into a cold night wind. She led the way back into the room. "I must go," he announced. "You must go," she echoed, looking up at him. "Good-bye!" She was so close to him that his embrace, sudden and passionate though
it was, came about almost naturally. She lay in his arms with perfect
content and raised her lips to his. He broke away. He was himself again, self-furious. "Lady Cynthia," he said, "I owe you my most humble apologies. The evil
that is in me does not as a rule break out in this direction." "You dear, foolish person," she laughed, "that was good, not evil. You like me, don't you? But I know you do. There is one crime you have
always forgotten to develop--you haven't the simplest idea in the world
how to lie." "Yes, I like you," he admitted. "I have the most absurd feeling for you
that any man ever found it impossible to put into words. We have indeed
strayed outside the world of natural things," he added. "Why?" she murmured. "I never felt more natural or normal in my life. I can assure you that I am loving it. I feel like muslin gowns and
primroses and the scent of those first March violets underneath a warm
hedge where the sun comes sometimes. I feel very natural indeed, Sir
Timothy." "What about me?" he asked harshly. "In three weeks' time I shall be
fifty years old." She laughed softly. "And in no time at all I shall be thirty--and entering upon a terrible
period of spinsterhood!" "Spinsterhood!" he scoffed. "Why, whenever the Society papers are at a
loss for a paragraph, they report a few more offers of marriage to the
ever-beautiful Lady Cynthia." "Don't be sarcastic," she begged. "I haven't yet had the offer of
marriage I want, anyhow." "You'll get one you don't want in a moment," he warned her. She made a little grimace. "Don't!" she laughed nervously. "How am I to preserve my romantic
notions of you as the emperor of the criminal world, if you kiss me as
you did just now--you kissed me rather well--and then ask me to marry
you? It isn't your role. You must light a cigarette now, pat the back of
my hand, and swagger off to another of your haunts of vice." "In other words, I am not to propose?" Sir Timothy said slowly. "You see how decadent I am," she sighed. "I want to toy with my
pleasures. Besides, there's that scamp of a brother of mine coming up
to have a drink--I saw him get out of a taxi--and you couldn't get it
through in time, not with dignity." The rattle of the lift as it stopped was plainly audible. He stooped and
kissed her fingers. "I fear some day," he murmured, "I shall be a great disappointment to
you." CHAPTER XXVIII


There was a great deal of discussion, the following morning at the
Sheridan Club, during the gossipy half-hour which preceded luncheon,
concerning Sir Timothy Brast's forthcoming entertainment. One of the
men, Philip Baker, who had been for many years the editor of a famous
sporting weekly, had a ticket of invitation which he displayed to an
envious little crowd. "You fellows who get invitations to these parties," a famous actor
declared, "are the most elusive chaps on earth. Half London is dying
to know what really goes on there, and yet, if by any chance one comes
across a prospective or retrospective guest, he is as dumb about it as
though it were some Masonic function. We've got you this time, Baler,
though. We'll put you under the inquisition on Friday morning." "There a won't be any need," the other replied. "One hears a great deal
of rot talked about these affairs, but so far as I know, nothing very
much out of the way goes on. There are always one or two pretty stiff
fights in the gymnasium, and you get the best variety show and supper in
the world." "Why is there this aroma of mystery hanging about the affair, then?" some one asked. "Well, for one or two reasons," Baker answered. "One, no doubt, is
because Sir Timothy has a great idea of arranging the fights himself,
and the opponents actually don't know until the fight begins whom they
are meeting, and sometimes not even then. There has been some gossiping,
too, about the rules, and the weight of the gloves, but that I know,
nothing about." "And the rest of the show?" a younger member enquired. "Is it simply
dancing and music and that sort of thing?" "Just a variety entertainment," the proud possessor of the scarlet-hued
ticket declared. "Sir Timothy always has something up his sleeve. Last
year, for instance, he had those six African girls over from Paris in
that queer dance which they wouldn't allow in London at all. This
time no one knows what is going to happen. The house, as you know, is
absolutely surrounded by that hideous stone wall, and from what I have
heard, reporters who try to get in aren't treated too kindly. Here's
Ledsam. Very likely he knows more about it." "Ledsam," some one demanded, as Francis joined the group, "are you going
to Sir Timothy Brast's show to-morrow night?" "I hope so," Francis replied, producing his strip of pasteboard. "Ever been before?" "Never." "Do you know what sort of a show it's going to be?" the actor enquired. "Not the slightest idea. I don't think any one does. That's rather a
feature of the affair, isn't it?" "It is the envious outsider who has never received an invitation, like
myself," some one remarked, "who probably spreads these rumours, for one
always hears it hinted that some disgraceful and illegal exhibition
is on tap there--a new sort of drugging party, or some novel form of
debauchery." "I don't think," Francis said quietly, "that Sir Timothy is quite that
sort of man." "Dash it all, what sort of man is he?" the actor demanded. "They tell me
that financially he is utterly unscrupulous, although he is rolling
in money. He has the most Mephistophelian expression of any man I ever
met--looks as though he'd set his heel on any one's neck for the sport
of it--and yet they say he has given at least fifty thousand pounds to
the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and that the whole
of the park round that estate of his down the river is full of lamed and
decrepit beasts which he has bought himself off the streets." "The man must have an interesting personality," a novelist who had
joined the party observed. "Of course, you know that he was in prison
for six months?" "What for?" some one asked. "Murder, only they brought it in manslaughter," was the terse reply. "He killed his partner. It was many years ago, and no one knows all the
facts of the story." "I am not holding a brief for Sir Timothy," Francis remarked, as he
sipped his cocktail. "As a matter of fact, he and I are very much at
cross-purposes. But as regards that particular instance, I am not sure
that he was very much to be blamed, any more than you can blame any
injured person who takes the law into his own hands." "He isn't a man I should care to have for an enemy," Baker declared. "Well, we'll shake the truth out of you fellows, somehow or other," one
of the group threatened. "On Friday morning we are going to have the
whole truth--none of this Masonic secrecy which Baker indulged in last
year." The men drifted in to luncheon and Francis, leaving them, took a taxi on
to the Ritz. Looking about in the vestibule for Margaret, he came face
to face with Lady Cynthia. She was dressed with her usual distinction in
a gown of yellow muslin and a beflowered hat, and was the cynosure of a
good many eyes. "One would almost imagine, Lady Cynthia," he said, as they exchanged
greetings, "that you had found that elixir we were talking about." "Perhaps I have," she answered, smiling. "Are you looking for Margaret? She is somewhere about. We were just having a chat when I was literally
carried off by that terrible Lanchester woman. Let's find her." They strolled up into the lounge. Margaret came to meet them. Her smile,
as she gave Francis her left hand, transformed and softened her whole
appearance. "You don't mind my having asked Cynthia to lunch with us?" she said. "I
really couldn't get rid of the girl. She came in to see me this morning
the most aggressively cheerful person I ever knew. I believe that she
had an adventure last night. All that she will tell me is that she dined
and danced at Claridge's with a party of the dullest people in town." A tall, familiar figure passed down the vestibule. Lady Cynthia gave a
little start, and Francis, who happened to be watching her, was amazed
at her expression. "Your father, Margaret!" she pointed out. "I wonder if he is lunching
here." "He told me that he was lunching somewhere with a South American
friend--one of his partners, I believe," Margaret replied. "I expect he
is looking for him." Sir Timothy caught sight of them, hesitated for a moment and came slowly
in their direction. "Have you found your friend?" Margaret asked. "The poor fellow is ill in bed," her father answered. "I was just
regretting that I had sent the car away, or I should have gone back to
Hatch End." "Stay and lunch with us," Lady Cynthia begged, a little impetuously. "I shall be very pleased if you will," Francis put in. "I'll go and tell
the waiter to enlarge my table." He hurried off. On his way back, a page-boy touched him on the arm. "If you please, sir," he announced, "you are wanted on the telephone." "I?" Francis exclaimed. "Some mistake, I should think. Nobody knows that
I am here." "Mr. Ledsam," the boy said. "This way, sir." Francis walked down the vestibule to the row of telephone boxes at the
further end. The attendant who was standing outside, indicated one of
them and motioned the boy to go away. Francis stepped inside. The man
followed, closing the door behind him. "I am asking your pardon, sir, for taking a great liberty," he
confessed. "No one wants you on the telephone. I wished to speak to
you." Francis looked at him in surprise. The man was evidently agitated. Somehow or other, his face was vaguely familiar. "Who are you, and what do you want with me?" Francis asked. "I was butler to Mr. Hilditch, sir," the man replied. "I waited upon you
the night you dined there, sir--the night of Mr. Hilditch's death." "Well?" "I have a revelation to make with regard to that night, sir," the man
went on, "which I should like to place in your hands. It is a very
serious matter, and there are reasons why something must be done about
it at once. Can I come and see you at your rooms, sir?" Francis studied the man for a moment intently. He was evidently
agitated--evidently, too, in very bad health.