"A leaning towards melodrama, admirable in its way, needs the leaven of
a well-balanced discretion and a sense of humour," Sir Timothy observed. "The latter quality is as a rule singularly absent amongst the myrmidons
of Scotland Yard. I do not think that Mr. Shopland will catch even fish
in the neighbourhood of The Walled House. As regards your matrimonial
proposal, let us waive that until my daughter returns." "As you will," Francis agreed. "I will be frank to this extent, at any
rate. If I can persuade your daughter to marry me, your consent will not
affect the matter." "I can leave Margaret a matter of two million pounds," Sir Timothy said
pensively. "I have enough money to support my wife myself," Francis observed. "Utopian but foolish," Sir Timothy declared. "All the same, Mr. Ledsam,
let me tell you this. You have a curious attraction for me. When I was
asked why I had invited you to The Sanctuary last night, I frankly could
not answer the question. I didn't know. I don't know. Your dislike of me
doesn't seem to affect the question. I was glad to have you there last
night. It pleases me to hear you talk, to hear your views of things. I
feel that I shall have to be very careful, Mr. Ledsam, or--"

"Or what?" Francis demanded. "Or I shall even welcome the idea of having you for a son-in-law," Sir
Timothy concluded reluctantly. "Make my excuses to Mr. Shopland. Au
revoir!" Shopland came in as the door closed behind the departing visitor. He
listened to all that Francis had to say, without comment. "If The Walled House," he said at last, "is so carefully guarded that
Sir Timothy has been informed of my watching the place and has been made
aware of my mild questionings, it must be because there is something to
conceal. I may or may not be on the track of Mr. Reginald Wilmore, but,"
the detective concluded, "of one thing I am becoming convinced--The
Walled House will pay for watching." CHAPTER XXI


It was a day when chance was kind to Francis. After leaving his rooms
at the Temple, he made a call at one of the great clubs in Pall Mall, to
enquire as to the whereabouts of a friend. On his way back towards the
Sheridan, he came face to face with Margaret Hilditch, issuing from the
doors of one of the great steamship companies. For a moment he almost
failed to recognise her. She reminded him more of the woman of the
tea-shop. Her costume, neat and correct though it was, was studiously
unobtrusive. Her motoring veil, too, was obviously worn to assist her in
escaping notice. She, too, came to a standstill at seeing him. Her first ejaculations
betrayed a surprise which bordered on consternation. Then Francis,
with a sudden inspiration, pointed to the long envelope which she was
carrying in her hand. "You have been to book a passage somewhere!" he exclaimed. "Well?" The monosyllable was in her usual level tone. Nevertheless, he could see
that she was shaken:

"You were going away without seeing me again?"' he asked reproachfully. "Yes!" she admitted. "Why?" She looked up and down a little helplessly. "I owe you no explanation for my conduct," she said. "Please let me
pass." "Could we talk for a few minutes, please?" he begged. "Tell me where you
were going?" "Oh, back to lunch, I suppose," she answered. "Your father has been up, looking for you," he told her. "I telephoned to The Sanctuary," she replied. "He had just left." "I am very anxious," he continued, "not to distress you, but I cannot
let you go away like this. Will you come to my rooms and let us talk for
a little time?" She made no answer. Somehow, he realised that speech just then was
difficult. He called a taxi and handed her in. They drove to Clarges
Street in silence. He led the way up the stairs, gave some quick
orders to his servant whom he met coming down, ushered her into his
sitting-room and saw her ensconced in an easy-chair. "Please take off that terrible veil," he begged. "It is pinned on to my hat," she told him. "Then off with both," he insisted. "You can't eat luncheon like that. I'm not going to try and bully you. If you've booked your passage to
Timbuctoo and you really want to go--why, you must. I only want the
chance of letting you know that I am coming after you." She took off her hat and veil and threw them on to the sofa, glancing
sideways at a mirror let into the door of a cabinet. "My hair is awful," she declared:

He laughed gaily, and turned around from the sideboard, where he was
busy mixing cocktails. "Thank heavens for that touch of humanity!" he exclaimed. "A woman who
can bother about her hair when she takes her hat off, is never past
praying for. Please drink this." She obeyed. He took the empty glass away from her. Then he came over to
the hearthrug by her side. "Do you know that I kissed you last night?" he reminded her. "I do," she answered. "That is why I have just paid eighty-four pounds
for a passage to Buenos Ayres." "I should have enjoyed the trip," he said. "Still, I'm glad I haven't to
go." "Do you really mean that you would have come after me?" she asked
curiously. "Of course I should," he assured her. "Believe me, there isn't such
an obstinate person in the world as the man of early middle-age who
suddenly discovers the woman he means to marry." "But you can't marry me," she protested. "Why not?" he asked. "Because I was Oliver Hilditch's wife, for one thing." "Look here," he said, "if you had been Beelzebub's wife, it wouldn't
make the least difference to me. You haven't given me much of a chance
to tell you so yet, Margaret, but I love you." She sat a little forward in her chair. Her eyes were fixed upon his
wonderingly. "But how can you?" she exclaimed. "You know, nothing of me except my
associations, and they have been horrible. What is there to love in me? I am a frozen-up woman. Everything is dead here," she went on, clasping
her hand to her heart. "I have no sentiment, no passion, nothing but an
animal desire to live my life luxuriously and quickly." He smiled confidently. Then, with very little warning, he sank on one
knee, drew her face to his, kissed her lips and then her eyes. "Are you so sure of all these things, Margaret?" he whispered. "Don't
you think it is, perhaps, because there has been no one to care for you
as I do--as I shall--to the end of my days? The lily you left on your
chair last night was like you--fair and stately and beautiful, but a
little bruised. You will come back as it has done, come back to the
world. My love will bring you. My care. Believe it, please!" Then he saw the first signs of change in her face. There was the
faintest shade of almost shell-like pink underneath the creamy-white of
her cheeks. Her lips were trembling a little, her eyes were misty. With
a sudden passionate little impulse, her arms were around his neck, her
lips sought his of their own accord. "Let me forget," she sobbed. "Kiss me let me forget!" Francis' servant was both heavy-footed and discreet. When he entered the
room with a tray, his master was standing at the sideboard. "I've done the best I could, sir," he announced, a little
apologetically. "Shall I lay the cloth?" "Leave everything on the tray, Brooks," Francis directed. "We will help
ourselves. In an hour's time bring coffee." The man glanced around the room. "There are glasses on the sideboard, sir, and the corkscrew is here. I
think you will have everything you want." He departed, closing the door behind him. Francis held out his hands to
Margaret. She rose slowly to her feet, looked in the glass helplessly
and then back at him. She was very beautiful but a little dazed. "Are we going to have luncheon?" she asked. "Of course," he answered. "Did you think I meant to starve you?" He picked up the long envelope which she had dropped upon the carpet,
and threw it on to the sofa. Then he drew up two chairs to the table,
and opened a small bottle of champagne. "I hope you won't mind a picnic," he said. "Really, Brooks hasn't done
so badly--pate de foie gras, hot toast and Devonshire butter. Let me
spread some for you. A cold chicken afterwards, and some strawberries. Please be hungry, Margaret." She laughed at him. It occurred to him suddenly, with a little pang,
that he had never heard her laugh before. It was like music. "I'm too happy," she murmured. "Believe me," he assured her, as he buttered a piece of toast,
"happiness and hunger might well be twins. They go so well together. Misery can take away one's appetite. Happiness, when one gets over the
gulpiness of it, is the best tonic in the world. And I never saw any
one, dear, with whom happiness agreed so well," he added, pausing in his
task to bend over and kiss her. "Do you know you are the most beautiful
thing on earth? It is a lucky thing we are going to live in England,
and that these are sober, matter-of-fact days, or I should find myself
committed to fighting duels all the time." She had a momentary relapse. A look of terror suddenly altered her face. She caught at his wrist. "Don't!" she cried. "Don't talk about such things!" He was a little bewildered. The moment passed. She laughed almost
apologetically. "Forgive me," she begged, "but I hate the thought of fighting of any
sort. Some day I'll explain." "Clumsy ass I was!" he declared, completing his task and setting the
result before her. "Now how's that for a first course? Drink a little of
your wine." He leaned his glass against hers. "My love," he whispered, "my love now, dear, and always, and you'll
find it quite strong enough," he went on, "to keep you from all the ugly
things. And now away with sentiment. I had a very excellent but solitary
breakfast this morning, and it seems a long time ago." "It seems amazing to think that you spent last night at The Sanctuary,"
she reflected. "And that you and I were in a punt," he reminded her, "in the pool of
darkness where the trees met, and the lilies leaned over to us." "And you nearly upset the punt." "Nothing of the sort! As a matter of fact, I was very careful. But," he
proceeded, with a sudden wave of memory, "I don't think my heart will
ever beat normally again. It seemed as though it would tear its way out
of my side when I leaned towards you, and you knew, and you lay still." She laughed. "You surely didn't expect I was going to get up? It was quite
encouragement enough to remain passive. As a matter of fact," she went
on, "I couldn't have moved. I couldn't have uttered a sound. I suppose
I must have been like one of those poor birds you read about, when some
devouring animal crouches for its last spring." "Compliments already!" he remarked. "You won't forget that my name is
Francis, will you? Try and practise it while I carve the chicken." "You carve very badly, Francis," she told him demurely. "My dear," he said, "thank heavens we shall be able to afford a butler! By-the-bye, I told your father this morning that I was going to marry
you, and he didn't seem to think it possible because he had two million
pounds." "Braggart!" she murmured. "When did you see my father?" "He came to my rooms in the Temple soon after I arrived this morning. He
seemed to think I might know where you were. I dare say he won't like me
for a son-in-law," Francis continued with a smile. "I can't help that. He shouldn't have let me go out with you in a punt." There was a discreet knock at the door. Brooks made his apologetic and
somewhat troubled entrance. "Sir Timothy Brast is here to see you, sir," he announced. "I ventured
to say that you were not at home--"

"But I happened to know otherwise," a still voice remarked from outside. "May I come in, Mr. Ledsam?" Sir Timothy stepped past the servant, who at a sign from Francis
disappeared, closing the door behind him. CHAPTER XXII


After his first glance at Sir Timothy, Francis' only thought was for
Margaret. To his intense relief, she showed no signs whatever of terror,
or of any relapse to her former state. She was entirely mistress of
herself and the occasion. Sir Timothy's face was cold and terrible. "I must apologise for this second intrusion, Mr. Ledsam," he said
cuttingly. "I think you will admit that the circumstances warrant it. Am
I to understand that you lied to me this morning?" "You are to understand nothing of the sort," Francis answered. "I told
you everything I knew at that time of your daughter's movements." "Indeed!" Sir Timothy murmured. "This little banquet, then, was
unpremeditated?" "Entirely," Francis replied. "Here is the exact truth, so far as I am
concerned. I met your daughter little more than an hour ago, coming out
of a steamship office, where she had booked a passage to Buenos Ayres
to get away from me. I was fortunate enough to induce her to change
her mind. She has consented instead to remain in England as my wife. We
were, as you see, celebrating the occasion." Sir Timothy laid his hat upon the sideboard and slowly removed his
gloves. "I trust," he said, "that this pint bottle does not represent your
cellar. I will drink a glass of wine with you, and with your permission
make myself a pate sandwich. I was just sitting down to luncheon when I
received the information which brought me here." Francis produced another bottle of wine from the sideboard and filled
his visitor's glass. "You will drink, I hope, to our happiness," he said. "I shall do nothing of the sort," Sir Timothy declared, helping himself
with care to the pate. "I have no superstitions about breaking bread
with an enemy, or I should not have asked you to visit me at The
Sanctuary, Mr. Ledsam. I object to your marriage with my daughter, and I
shall take what steps I can to prevent it." "Why?" Sir Timothy did not at once reply. He seemed to be enjoying his
sandwich; he also appreciated the flavour of his wine. "Your question," he said, "strikes me as being a little ingenuous. You
are at the present moment suspecting me of crimes beyond number. You
encourage Scotland Yard detectives to make asses of themselves in my
stream. Your myrmidons scramble on to the top of my walls and try to
bribe my servants to disclose the mysteries of my household. You have
accepted to the fullest extent my volunteered statement that I am a
patron of crime. You are, in short--forgive me if I help myself to a
little more of this pate--engaged in a strenuous attempt to bring me to
justice." "None of these things affects your daughter," Francis pointed out. "Pardon me," Sir Timothy objected. "You are a great and shining light of
the English law. People speak of you as a future Chancellor. How can you
contemplate an alliance with the widow of one criminal and the daughter
of another?" "As to Margaret being Oliver Hilditch's widow," Francis replied, "you
were responsible for that, and no one else. He was your protege; you
gave your consent to the marriage. As to your being her father, that
again is not Margaret's fault. I should marry her if Oliver Hilditch had
been three times the villain he was, and if you were the Devil himself." "I am getting quite to like you, Mr. Ledsam," Sir Timothy declared,
helping himself to another piece of toast and commencing to butter it. "Margaret, what have you to say about all this?" "I have nothing to say," she answered. "Francis is speaking for me. I
never dreamed that after what I have gone through I should be able to
care for any one again in this world. I do care, and I am very happy
about it. All last night I lay awake, making up my mind to run away,
and this morning I actually booked my passage to Buenos Ayres. Then we
met--just outside the steamship office--and I knew at once that I was
making a mistake. I shall marry Francis exactly when he wants me to." Sir Timothy passed his glass towards his proposed son-in-law. "Might one suggest," he began--"thank you very much. This is of course
very upsetting to me. I seem to be set completely at defiance. It is a
very excellent wine, this, and a wonderful vintage." Francis bent over Margaret. "Please finish your lunch, dear," he begged. "It is perhaps just as well
that your father came. We shall know exactly where we are." "Just so," Sir Timothy agreed. There was a queer constrained silence for several moments. Then Sir
Timothy leaned back in his chair and with a word of apology lit a
cigarette. "Let us," he said, "consider the situation. Margaret is my daughter. You
wish to marry her. Margaret is of age and has been married before. She
is at liberty, therefore, to make her own choice. You agree with me so
far?" "Entirely," Francis assented. "It happens," Sir Timothy went on, "that I disapprove of her choice. She
desires to marry a young man who belongs to a profession which I detest,
and whose efforts in life are directed towards the extermination of a
class of people for whom I have every sympathy. To me he represents
the smug as against the human, the artificially moral as against the
freethinker. He is also my personal enemy. I am therefore naturally
desirous that my daughter should not marry this young man." "We will let it go at that," Francis commented, "but I should like to
point out to you that the antagonism between us is in no way personal. You have declared yourself for forces with which I am at enmity, like
any other decent-living citizen. Your declaration might at any time be
amended." Sir Timothy bowed.