

CHAPTER I


Francis Ledsam, alert, well-satisfied with himself and the world, the
echo of a little buzz of congratulations still in his ears, paused on
the steps of the modern Temple of Justice to light a cigarette before
calling for a taxi to take him to his club. Visions of a whisky and
soda--his throat was a little parched--and a rubber of easy-going bridge
at his favourite table, were already before his eyes. A woman who had
followed him from the Court touched him on the shoulder. "Can I speak to you for a moment, Mr. Ledsam?" The barrister frowned slightly as he swung around to confront his
questioner. It was such a familiar form of address. "What do you want?" he asked, a little curtly. "A few minutes' conversation with you," was the calm reply. "The matter
is important." The woman's tone and manner, notwithstanding her plain, inconspicuous
clothes, commanded attention. Francis Ledsam was a little puzzled. Small
things meant much to him in life, and he had been looking forward almost
with the zest of a schoolboy to that hour of relaxation at his club. He was impatient of even a brief delay, a sentiment which he tried to
express in his response. "What do you want to speak to me about?" he repeated bluntly. "I shall
be in my rooms in the Temple to-morrow morning, any time after eleven." "It is necessary for me to speak to you now," she insisted. "There is a
tea-shop across the way. Please accompany me there." Ledsam, a little surprised at the coolness of her request, subjected his
accoster to a closer scrutiny. As he did so, his irritation diminished. He shrugged his shoulders slightly. "If you really have business with me," he said, "I will give you a few
minutes." They crossed the street together, the woman self-possessed, negative,
wholly without the embarrassment of one performing an unusual action. Her companion felt the awakening of curiosity. Zealously though she had,
to all appearance, endeavoured to conceal the fact, she was without a
doubt personable. Her voice and manner lacked nothing of refinement. Yet
her attraction to Francis Ledsam, who, although a perfectly normal human
being, was no seeker after promiscuous adventures, did not lie in these
externals. As a barrister whose success at the criminal bar had been
phenomenal, he had attained to a certain knowledge of human nature. He
was able, at any rate, to realise that this woman was no imposter. He
knew that she had vital things to say. They passed into the tea-shop and found an empty corner. Ledsam hung up
his hat and gave an order. The woman slowly began to remove her gloves. When she pushed back her veil, her vis-a-vis received almost a shock. She was quite as good-looking as he had imagined, but she was far
younger--she was indeed little more than a girl. Her eyes were of a deep
shade of hazel brown, her eyebrows were delicately marked, her features
and poise admirable. Yet her skin was entirely colourless. She was as
pale as one whose eyes have been closed in death. Her lips, although
in no way highly coloured, were like streaks of scarlet blossom upon
a marble image. The contrast between her appearance and that of her
companion was curiously marked. Francis Ledsam conformed in no way to
the accepted physical type of his profession. He was over six feet in
height, broad-shouldered and powerfully made. His features were cast in
a large mould, he was of fair, almost sandy complexion, even his mouth
was more humourous than incisive. His eyes alone, grey and exceedingly
magnetic, suggested the gifts which without a doubt lay behind his
massive forehead. "I am anxious to avoid any possible mistake," she began. "Your name is
Francis Ledsam?" "It is," he admitted. "You are the very successful criminal barrister," she continued, "who
has just been paid an extravagant fee to defend Oliver Hilditch." "I might take exception to the term 'extravagant'," Ledsam observed
drily. "Otherwise, your information appears to be singularly correct. I do not know whether you have heard the verdict. If not, you may be
interested to know that I succeeded in obtaining the man's acquittal." "I know that you did," the woman replied. "I was in the Court when the
verdict was brought in. It has since occurred to me that I should like
you to understand exactly what you have done, the responsibility you
have incurred." Ledsam raised his eyebrows. "Responsibility?" he repeated. "What I have done is simple enough. I
have earned a very large fee and won my case." "You have secured the acquittal of Oliver Hilditch," she persisted. "He is by this time a free man. Now I am going to speak to you of that
responsibility. I am going to tell you a little about the man who owes
his freedom to your eloquence." It was exactly twenty minutes after their entrance into the teashop when
the woman finished her monologue. She began to draw on her gloves again. Before them were two untasted cups of tea and an untouched plate of
bread and butter. From a corner of the room the waitress was watching
them curiously. "Good God!" Francis Ledsam exclaimed at last, suddenly realising his
whereabouts. "Do you mean to affirm solemnly that what you have been
telling me is the truth?" The woman continued to button her gloves. "It is the truth," she said. Ledsam sat up and looked around him. He was a little dazed. He had
almost the feeling of a man recovering from the influence of some
anaesthetic. Before his eyes were still passing visions of terrible
deeds, of naked, ugly passion, of man's unscrupulous savagery. During
those few minutes he had been transported to New York and Paris, London
and Rome. Crimes had been spoken of which made the murder for which
Oliver Hilditch had just been tried seem like a trifling indiscretion. Hard though his mentality, sternly matter-of-fact as was his outlook,
he was still unable to fully believe in himself, his surroundings, or
in this woman who had just dropped a veil over her ashen cheeks. Reason
persisted in asserting itself. "But if you knew all this," he demanded, "why on earth didn't you come
forward and give evidence?" "Because," she answered calmly, as she rose to her feet, "my evidence
would not have been admissible. I am Oliver Hilditch's wife." CHAPTER II


Francis Ledsam arrived at his club, the Sheridan, an hour later than he
had anticipated. He nodded to the veteran hall-porter, hung up his hat
and stick, and climbed the great staircase to the card-room without any
distinct recollection of performing any of these simple and reasonable
actions. In the cardroom he exchanged a few greetings with friends,
accepted without comment or without the slightest tinge of gratification
a little chorus of chafing congratulations upon his latest triumph,
and left the room without any inclination to play, although there was
a vacant place at his favourite table. From sheer purposelessness he
wandered back again into the hall, and here came his first gleam of
returning sensation. He came face to face with his most intimate friend,
Andrew Wilmore. The latter, who had just hung up his coat and hat,
greeted him with a growl of welcome. "So you've brought it off again, Francis!" "Touch and go," the barrister remarked. "I managed to squeak home." Wilmore laid his hand upon his friend's shoulder and led the way towards
two easy-chairs in the lounge. "I tell you what it is, old chap," he confided, "you'll be making
yourself unpopular before long. Another criminal at large, thanks to
that glib tongue and subtle brain of yours. The crooks of London will
present you with a testimonial when you're made a judge." "So you think that Oliver Hilditch was guilty, then?" Francis asked
curiously. "My dear fellow, how do I know or care?" was the indifferent reply. "I shouldn't have thought that there had been any doubt about it. You
probably know, anyway." "That's just what I didn't when I got up to make my speech," Francis
assured his friend emphatically. "The fellow was given an opportunity of
making a clean breast of it, of course--Wensley, his lawyer, advised him
to, in fact--but the story he told me was precisely the story he told at
the inquest." They were established now in their easy-chairs, and Wilmore summoned a
waiter. "Two large whiskies and sodas," he ordered. "Francis," he went on,
studying his companion intently, "what's the matter with you? You don't
look as though your few days in the country last week had done you any
good." Francis glanced around as though to be sure that they were alone. "I was all right when I came up, Andrew," he muttered. "This case has
upset me." "Upset you? But why the dickens should it?" the other demanded, in a
puzzled tone. "It was quite an ordinary case, in its way, and you won
it." "I won it," Francis admitted. "Your defence was the most ingenious thing I ever heard." "Mostly suggested, now I come to think of it," the barrister remarked
grimly, "by the prisoner himself." "But why are you upset about it, anyway?" Wilmore persisted. Francis rose to his feet, shook himself, and with his elbow resting upon
the mantelpiece leaned down towards his friend. He could not rid himself
altogether of this sense of unreality. He had the feeling that he had
passed through one of the great crises of his life. "I'll tell you, Andrew. You're about the only man in the world I could
tell. I've gone crazy." "I thought you looked as though you'd been seeing spooks," Wilmore
murmured sympathetically. "I have seen a spook," Francis rejoined, with almost passionate
seriousness, "a spook who lifted an invisible curtain with invisible
fingers, and pointed to such a drama of horrors as De Quincey, Poe and
Sue combined could never have imagined. Oliver Hilditch was guilty,
Andrew. He murdered the man Jordan--murdered him in cold blood." "I'm not surprised to hear that," was the somewhat puzzled reply. "He was guilty, Andrew, not only of the murder of this man, his partner,
but of innumerable other crimes and brutalities," Francis went on. "He
is a fiend in human form, if ever there was one, and I have set him
loose once more to prey upon Society. I am morally responsible for his
next robbery, his next murder, the continued purgatory of those forced
to associate with him." "You're dotty, Francis," his friend declared shortly. "I told you I was crazy," was the desperate reply. "So would you be if
you'd sat opposite that woman for half-an-hour, and heard her story." "What woman?" Wilmore demanded, leaning forward in his chair and gazing
at his friend with increasing uneasiness. "A woman who met me outside the Court and told me the story of Oliver
Hilditch's life." "A stranger?" "A complete stranger to me. It transpired that she was his wife." Wilmore lit a cigarette. "Believe her?" "There are times when one doesn't believe or disbelieve," Francis
answered. "One knows." Wilmore nodded. "All the same, you're crazy," he declared. "Even if you did save the
fellow from the gallows, you were only doing your job, doing your duty
to the best of poor ability. You had no reason to believe him guilty." "That's just as it happened," Francis pointed out. "I really didn't care
at the time whether he was or not. I had to proceed on the assumption
that he was not, of course, but on the other hand I should have fought
just as hard for him if I had known him to be guilty." "And you wouldn't now--to-morrow, say?" "Never again." "Because of that woman's story?" "Because of the woman." There was a short silence. Then Wilmore asked a very obvious question. "What sort of a person was she?" Francis Ledsam was several moments before he replied. The question was
one which he had been expecting, one which he had already asked himself
many times, yet he was unprepared with any definite reply. "I wish I could answer you, Andrew," his friend confessed. "As a matter
of fact, I can't. I can only speak of the impression she left upon me,
and you are about the only person breathing to whom I could speak of
that." Wilmore nodded sympathetically. He knew that, man of the world though
Francis Ledsam appeared, he was nevertheless a highly imaginative
person, something of an idealist as regards women, unwilling as a rule
to discuss them, keeping them, in a general way, outside his daily life. "Go ahead, old fellow," he invited. "You know I understand." "She left the impression upon me," Francis continued quietly, "of a
woman who had ceased to live. She was young, she was beautiful, she had
all the gifts--culture, poise and breeding--but she had ceased to live. We sat with a marble table between us, and a few feet of oil-covered
floor. Those few feet, Andrew, were like an impassable gulf. She spoke
from the shores of another world. I listened and answered, spoke and
listened again. And when she told her story, she went. I can't shake off
the effect she had upon me, Andrew. I feel as though I had taken a step
to the right or to the left over the edge of the world." Andrew Wilmore studied his friend thoughtfully. He was full of sympathy and understanding. His one desire at that moment
was not to make a mistake. He decided to leave unasked the obvious
question. "I know," he said simply. "Are you dining anywhere?" "I thought of staying on here," was the indifferent reply. "We won't do anything of the sort," Wilmore insisted. "There's scarcely
a soul in to-night, and the place is too humpy for a man who's been
seeing spooks. Get back to your rooms and change. I'll wait here." "What about you?" "I have some clothes in my locker. Don't be long. And, by-the-bye, which
shall it be--Bohemia or Mayfair? I'll telephone for a table. London's so
infernally full, these days." Francis hesitated. "I really don't care," he confessed. "Now I think of it, I shall be glad
to get away from here, though. I don't want any more congratulations
on saving Oliver Hilditch's life. Let's go where we are least likely to
meet any one we know." "Respectability and a starched shirt-front, then," Wilmore decided. "We'll go to Claridge's." CHAPTER III


The two men occupied a table set against the wall, not far from the
entrance to the restaurant, and throughout the progress of the earlier
part of their meal were able to watch the constant incoming stream of
their fellow-guests. They were, in their way, an interesting contrast
physically, neither of them good-looking according to ordinary
standards, but both with many pleasant characteristics. Andrew Wilmore,
slight and dark, with sallow cheeks and brown eyes, looked very much
what he was--a moderately successful journalist and writer of stories,
a keen golfer, a bachelor who preferred a pipe to cigars, and lived
at Richmond because he could not find a flat in London which he could
afford, large enough for his somewhat expansive habits. Francis Ledsam
was of a sturdier type, with features perhaps better known to the world
owing to the constant activities of the cartoonist. His reputation
during the last few years had carried him, notwithstanding his
comparative youth--he was only thirty-five years of age--into the very
front ranks of his profession, and his income was one of which men spoke
with bated breath. He came of a family of landed proprietors, whose
younger sons for generations had drifted always either to the Bar or the
Law, and his name was well known in the purlieus of Lincoln's Inn
before he himself had made it famous. He was a persistent refuser
of invitations, and his acquaintances in the fashionable world were
comparatively few. Yet every now and then he felt a mild interest in the
people whom his companion assiduously pointed out to him. "A fashionable restaurant, Francis, is rather like your Law Courts--it
levels people up," the latter remarked. "Louis, the head-waiter, is the
judge, and the position allotted in the room is the sentence. I wonder
who is going to have the little table next but one to us. Some favoured
person, evidently." Francis glanced in the direction indicated without curiosity. The
table in question was laid for two and was distinguished by a wonderful
cluster of red roses. "Why is it," the novelist continued speculatively, "that, whenever we
take another man's wife out, we think it necessary to order red roses?" "And why is it," Francis queried, a little grimly, "that a dear fellow
like you, Andrew, believes it his duty to talk of trifles for his pal's
sake, when all the time he is thinking of something else? I know you're
dying to talk about the Hilditch case, aren't you? Well, go ahead." "I'm only interested in this last development," Wilmore confessed. "Of course, I read the newspaper reports. To tell you the truth, for a
murder trial it seemed to me to rather lack colour." "It was a very simple and straightforward case," Francis said slowly. "Oliver Hilditch is the principal partner in an American financial
company which has recently opened offices in the West End. He seems to
have arrived in England about two years ago, to have taken a house in
Hill Street, and to have spent a great deal of money. A month or so ago,
his partner from New York arrived in London, a man named Jordan of whom
nothing was known. It has since transpired, however, that his journey
to Europe was undertaken because he was unable to obtain certain figures
relating to the business, from Hilditch. Oliver Hilditch met him at
Southampton, travelled with him to London and found him a room at the
Savoy. The next day, the whole of the time seems to have been spent in
the office, and it is certain, from the evidence of the clerk, that
some disagreement took place between the two men. They dined together,
however, apparently on good terms, at the Cafe Royal, and parted in
Regent Street soon after ten. At twelve o'clock, Jordan's body was
picked up on the pavement in Hill Street, within a few paces of
Heidrich's door. He had been stabbed through the heart with some
needle-like weapon, and was quite dead." "Was there any vital cause of quarrel between them?" Wilmore enquired. "Impossible to say," Francis replied. "The financial position of
the company depends entirely upon the value of a large quantity of
speculative bonds, but as there was only one clerk employed, it was
impossible to get at any figures. Hilditch declared that Jordan had only
a small share in the business, from which he had drawn a considerable
income for years, and that he had not the slightest cause for
complaint." "What were Hilditch's movements that evening?" Wilmore asked. "Not a soul seems to have seen him after he left Regent Street," was the
somewhat puzzled answer. "His own story was quite straightforward
and has never been contradicted. He let himself into his house with a
latch-key after his return from the Cafe Royal, drank a whisky and
soda in the library, and went to bed before half-past eleven. The whole
affair--"

Francis broke off abruptly in the middle of his sentence. He sat with
his eyes fixed upon the door, silent and speechless. "What in Heaven's name is the matter, old fellow?" Wilmore demanded,
gazing at his companion in blank amazement. The latter pulled himself together with an effort. The sight of the two
new arrivals talking to Louis on the threshold of the restaurant, seemed
for the moment to have drawn every scrap of colour from his cheeks. Nevertheless, his recovery was almost instantaneous. "If you want to know any more," he said calmly, "you had better go and
ask him to tell you the whole story himself. There he is." "And the woman with him?" Wilmore exclaimed under his breath. "His wife!" CHAPTER IV


To reach their table, the one concerning which Francis and his friend
had been speculating, the new arrivals, piloted by Louis, had to pass
within a few feet of the two men. The woman, serene, coldly beautiful,
dressed like a Frenchwoman in unrelieved black, with extraordinary
attention to details, passed them by with a careless glance and subsided
into the chair which Louis was holding. Her companion, however, as he
recognised Francis hesitated. His expression of somewhat austere gloom
was lightened. A pleasant but tentative smile parted his lips. He
ventured upon a salutation, half a nod, half a more formal bow, a
salutation which Francis instinctively returned. Andrew Wilmore looked
on with curiosity. "So that is Oliver Hilditch," he murmured. "That is the man," Francis observed, "of whom last evening half the
people in this restaurant were probably asking themselves whether or
not he was guilty of murder. To-night they will be wondering what he is
going to order for dinner. It is a strange world." "Strange indeed," Wilmore assented. "This afternoon he was in the dock,
with his fate in the balance--the condemned cell or a favoured table at
Claridge's. And your meeting! One can imagine him gripping your hands,
with tears in his eyes, his voice broken with emotion, sobbing out his
thanks. And instead you exchange polite bows. I would not have missed
this situation for anything." "Tradesman!" Francis scoffed. "One can guess already at the plot of your
next novel." "He has courage," Wilmore declared. "He has also a very beautiful
companion. Were you serious, Francis, when you told me that that was his
wife?" "She herself was my informant," was the quiet reply. Wilmore was puzzled. "But she passed you just now without even a glance of recognition, and
I thought you told me at the club this afternoon that all your knowledge
of his evil ways came from her. Besides, she looks at least twenty years
younger than he does." Francis, who had been watching his glass filled with champagne, raised
it to his lips and drank its contents steadily to the last drop. "I can only tell you what I know, Andrew," he said, as he set down the
empty glass. "The woman who is with him now is the woman who spoke to me
outside the Old Bailey this afternoon. We went to a tea-shop together. She told me the story of his career.