"Some day," Francis ventured, "I shall hope to be asked to one of your
more notorious gatherings. For the present occasion I much prefer the
entertainment you offer." "Then we are both content," Sir Timothy said, smiling. "Au revoir!" Francis walked across Green Park, along the Mall, down Horse Guards
Parade, along the Embankment to his rooms on the fringe of the Temple. Here he found his clerk awaiting his arrival in some disturbance of
spirit. "There is a young gentleman here to see you, sir," he announced. "Mr.
Reginald Wilmore his name is, I think." "Wilmore?" Francis repeated. "What have you done with him?" "He is in your room, sir. He seems very impatient. He has been out two
or three times to know how long I thought you would be." Francis passed down the stone passage and entered his room, a large,
shady apartment at the back of the building. To his surprise it was
empty. He was on the point of calling to his clerk when he saw that the
writing-paper on his desk had been disturbed. He went over and read a
few lines written in a boy's hasty writing:

DEAR Mr. LEDSAM:

I am in a very strange predicament and I have come to ask your advice. You know my brother Andrew well, and you may remember playing tennis
with me last year. I am compelled--

At that point the letter terminated abruptly. There was a blot and a
smudge. The pen lay where it seemed to have rolled--on the floor. The
ink was not yet dry. Francis called to his clerk. "Angrave," he said, "Mr. Wilmore is not here." The clerk looked around in obvious surprise. "It isn't five minutes since he came out to my office, sir!" he
exclaimed. "I heard him go back again afterwards." Francis shrugged his shoulders. "Perhaps he decided not to wait and you didn't hear him go by." Angrave shook his head. "I do not see how he could have left the place without my hearing him,
sir," he declared. "The door of my office has been open all the time,
and I sit opposite to it. Besides, on these stone floors one can hear
any one so distinctly." "Then what," Francis asked, "has become of him?" The clerk shook his head. "I haven't any idea, sir," he confessed. Francis plunged into his work and forgot all about the matter. He
was reminded of it, however, at luncheon-time, when, on entering the
dining-room of the club, he saw Andrew Wilmore seated alone at one of
the small tables near the wall. He went over to him at once. "Hullo, Andrew," he greeted him, "what are you doing here by yourself?" "Bit hipped, old fellow," was the depressed reply. "Sit down, will you?" Francis sat down and ordered his lunch. "By-the-bye," he said, "I had rather a mysterious visit this morning
from your brother Reggie." Wilmore stared at him for a moment, half in relief, half in amazement. "Good God, Francis, you don't say so!" he exclaimed. "How was he? What
did he want? Tell me about it at once? We've been worried to death about
the boy." "Well, as a matter of fact, I didn't see him," Francis explained. "He arrived before I reached my rooms--as you know, I don't live
there--waited some time, began to write me this note,"--drawing the
sheet of paper from his pocket--"and when I got there had disappeared
without leaving a message or anything." Wilmore adjusted his pince nez with trembling fingers. Then he read the
few lines through. "Francis," he said, when he had finished them, "do you know that this is
the first word we've heard of him for three days?" "Great heavens!" Francis exclaimed. "He was living with his mother,
wasn't he?" "Down at Kensington, but he hasn't been there since Monday," Andrew
replied. "His mother is in a terrible state. And now this, I don't
understand it at all." "Was the boy hard up?" "Not more than most young fellows are," was the puzzled reply. "His
allowance was due in a few days, too. He had money in the bank, I feel
sure. He was saving up for a motorcar." "Haven't I seen him once or twice at restaurants lately?" Francis
enquired. "Soto's, for instance?" "Very likely," his brother assented. "Why not? He's fond of dancing, and
we none of us ever encouraged him to be a stay-at-home." "Any particular girl was he interested in?" "Not that we know of. Like most young fellows of his age, he was rather
keen on young women with some connection with the stage, but I don't
believe there was any one in particular. Reggie was too fond of games to
waste much time that way. He's at the gymnasium three evenings a week." "I wish I'd been at the office a few minutes earlier this morning,"
Francis observed. "I tell you what, Andrew. I have some pals down at
Scotland Yard, and I'll go down and see them this afternoon. They'll
want a photograph, and to ask a few questions, I dare say, but I
shouldn't talk about the matter too much." "You're very kind, Francis," his friend replied, "but it isn't so easy
to sit tight. I was going to the police myself this afternoon." "Take my advice and leave it to me," Francis begged. "I have a
particular pal down at Scotland Yard who I know will be interested, and
I want him to take up the case." "You haven't any theory, I suppose?" Wilmore asked, a little wistfully. Francis shook his head. "Not the ghost of one," he admitted. "The reason I am advising you to
keep as quiet as possible, though, is just this. If you create a lot of
interest in a disappearance, you have to satisfy the public curiosity
when the mystery is solved." "I see," Wilmore murmured. "All the same, I can't imagine Reggie getting
mixed up in anything discreditable." "Neither can I, from what I remember of the boy," Francis agreed. "Let
me see, what was he doing in the City?" "He was with Jameson & Scott, the stockbrokers," Wilmore replied. "He
was only learning the business and he had no responsibilities. Curiously
enough, though, when I went to see Mr. Jameson he pointed out one or two
little matters that Reggie had attended to, which looked as though he
were clearing up, somehow or other." "He left no message there, I suppose?" "Not a line or a word. He gave the porter five shillings, though, on the
afternoon before he disappeared--a man who has done some odd jobs for
him." "Well, a voluntary disappearance is better than an involuntary one,"
Francis remarked. "What was his usual programme when he left the
office?" "He either went to Queen's and played racquets, or he went straight to
his gymnasium in the Holborn. I telephoned to Queen's. He didn't call
there on the Wednesday night, anyhow." "Where's the gymnasium?" "At 147 a Holborn. A lot of city young men go there late in the evening,
but Reggie got off earlier than most of them and used to have the place
pretty well to himself. I think that's why he stuck to it." Francis made a note of the address. "I'll get Shopland to step down there some time," he said. "Or better
still, finish your lunch and we'll take a taxi there ourselves. I'm
going to the country later on, but I've half-an-hour to spare. We can go
without our coffee and be there in ten minutes." "A great idea," Wilmore acquiesced. "It's probably the last place Reggie
visited, anyway." CHAPTER XVII


The gymnasium itself was a source of immense surprise to both Francis
and Wilmore. It stretched along the entire top storey of a long block of
buildings, and was elaborately fitted with bathrooms, a restaurant and a
reading-room. The trapezes, bars, and all the usual appointments were of
the best possible quality. The manager, a powerful-looking man dressed
with the precision of the prosperous city magnate, came out of his
office to greet them. "What can I do for you, gentlemen?" he enquired. "First of all," Francis replied, "accept our heartiest congratulations
upon your wonderful gymnasium." The man bowed. "It is the best appointed in the country, sir," he said proudly. "Absolutely no expense has been spared in fitting it up. Every one of
our appliances is of the latest possible description, and our bathrooms
are an exact copy of those in a famous Philadelphia club." "What is the subscription?" Wilmore asked. "Five shillings a year." "And how many members?" "Two thousand." The manager smiled as he saw his two visitors exchange puzzled glances. "Needless to say, sir," he added, "we are not self-supporting. We have
very generous patrons." "I lave heard my brother speak of this place as being quite wonderful,"
Wilmore remarked, "but I had no idea that it was upon this scale." "Is your brother a member?" the man asked. "He is. To tell you the truth, we came here to ask you a question about
him." "What is his name?" "Reginald Wilmore. He was here, I think, last Wednesday night." While Wilmore talked, Francis watched. He was conscious of a curious
change in the man's deportment at the mention of Reginald Wilmore's
name. From being full of bumptious, almost condescending good-nature,
his expression had changed into one of stony incivility. There was
something almost sinister in the tightly-closed lips and the suspicious
gleam in his eyes. "What questions did you wish to ask?" he demanded. "Mr. Reginald Wilmore has disappeared," Francis explained simply. "He
came here on leaving the office last Monday. He has not been seen or
heard of since." "Well?" the manager asked. "We came to ask whether you happen to remember his being here on that
evening, and whether he gave any one here any indication of his future
movements. We thought, perhaps, that the instructor who was with him
might have some information." "Not a chance," was the uncompromising reply. "I remember Mr. Wilmore
being here perfectly. He was doing double turns on the high bar. I saw
more of him myself than any one. I was with him when he went down to
have his swim." "Did he seem in his usual spirits?" Wilmore ventured. "I don't notice what spirits my pupils are in," the man answered, a
little insolently. "There was nothing the matter with him so far as I
know." "He didn't say anything about going away?" "Not a word. You'll excuse me, gentlemen--"

"One moment," Francis interrupted. "We came here ourselves sooner than
send a detective. Enquiries are bound to be made as to the young man's
disappearance, and we have reason to know that this is the last place at
which he was heard of. It is not unreasonable, therefore, is it, that we
should come to you for information?" "Reasonable or unreasonable, I haven't got any," the man declared
gruffly. "If Mr. Wilmore's cleared out, he's cleared out for some reason
of his own. It's not my business and I don't know anything about it." "You understand," Francis persisted, "that our interest in young Mr.
Wilmore is entirely a friendly one?" "I don't care whether it's friendly or unfriendly. I tell you I don't
know anything about him. And," he added, pressing his thumb upon the
button for the lift, "I'll wish you two gentlemen good afternoon. I've
business to attend to." Francis looked at him curiously. "Haven't I seen you somewhere before?" he asked, a little abruptly. "I can't say. My name is John Maclane." "Heavy-weight champion about seven years ago?" "I was," the man acknowledged. "You may have seen me in the ring. Now,
gentlemen, if you please." The lift had stopped opposite to them. The manager's gesture of
dismissal was final. "I am sorry, Mr. Maclane, if we have annoyed you with our questions,"
Francis said. "I wish you could remember a little more of Mr. Wilmore's
last visit." "Well, I can't, and that's all there is to it," was the blunt reply. "As
to being annoyed, I am only annoyed when my time's wasted. Take these
gents down, Jim. Good afternoon!" The door was slammed to and they shot downwards. Francis turned to the
lift man. "Do you know a Mr. Wilmore who comes here sometimes?" he asked. "Not likely!" the man scoffed. "They're comin' and goin' all the time
from four o'clock in the afternoon till eleven at night. If I heard a
name I shouldn't remember it. This way out, gentlemen." Wilmore's hand was in his pocket but the man turned deliberately away. They walked out into the street. "For downright incivility," the former observed, "commend me to the
attendants of a young men's gymnasium!" Francis smiled. "All the same, old fellow," he said, "if you worry for another five
minutes about Reggie, you're an ass." At six o'clock that evening Francis turned his two-seater into a winding
drive bordered with rhododendrons, and pulled up before the porch of
a charming two-storied bungalow, covered with creepers, and with
French-windows opening from every room onto the lawns. A man-servant who
had heard the approach of the car was already standing in the porch. Sir
Timothy, in white flannels and a panama hat, strolled across the lawn to
greet his approaching guest. "Excellently timed, my young friend," he said. "You will have time for
your first cocktail before you change. My daughter you know, of course. Lady Cynthia Milton I think you also know." Francis shook hands with the two girls who were lying under the cedar
tree. Margaret Hilditch seemed to him more wonderful than ever in her
white serge boating clothes. Lady Cynthia, who had apparently just
arrived from some function in town, was still wearing muslin and a large
hat. "I am always afraid that Mr. Ledsam will have forgotten me," she
observed, as she gave him her hand. "The last time I met you was at the
Old Bailey, when you had been cheating the gallows of a very respectable
wife murderer. Poynings, I think his name was." "I remember it perfectly," Francis assented. "We danced together
that night, I remember, at your aunt's, Mrs. Malcolm's, and you were
intensely curious to know how Poynings had spent his evening." "Lady Cynthia's reminder is perhaps a little unfortunate," Sir Timothy
observed. "Mr. Ledsam is no longer the last hope of the enterprising
criminal. He has turned over a new leaf. To secure the services of his
silver tongue, you have to lay at his feet no longer the bags of gold
from your ill-gotten gains but the white flower of the blameless life." "This is all in the worst possible taste," Margaret Hilditch declared,
in her cold, expressionless tone. "You might consider my feelings." Lady Cynthia only laughed. "My dear Margaret," she said, "if I thought that you had any, I should
never believe that you were your father's daughter. Here's to them,
anyway," she added, accepting the cocktail from the tray which the
butler had just brought out. "Mr. Ledsam, are you going to attach
yourself to me, or has Margaret annexed you?" "I have offered myself to Mrs. Hilditch," Francis rejoined promptly,
"but so far I have made no impression." "Try her with a punt and a concertina after dinner," Lady Cynthia
suggested. "After all, I came down here to better my acquaintance with
my host. You flirted with me disgracefully when I was a debutante, and
have never taken any notice of me since. I hate infidelity in a man. Sir
Timothy, I shall devote myself to you. Can you play a concertina?" "Where the higher forms of music are concerned," he replied, "I have no
technical ability. I should prefer to sit at your feet." "While I punt, I suppose?" "There are backwaters," he suggested. Lady Cynthia sipped her cocktail appreciatively. "I wonder how it is," she observed, "that in these days, although
we have become callous to everything else in life, cocktails and
flirtations still attract us. You shall take me to a backwater after
dinner, Sir Timothy. I shall wear my silver-grey and take an armful of
those black cushions from the drawing-room. In that half light, there is
no telling what success I may not achieve." Sir Timothy sighed. "Alas!" he said, "before dinner is over you will probably have changed
your mind." "Perhaps so," she admitted, "but you must remember that Mr. Ledsam is
my only alternative, and I am not at all sure that he likes me. I am not
sufficiently Victorian for his taste." The dressing-bell rang. Sir Timothy passed his arm through Francis'. "The sentimental side of my domain;" he said, "the others may show you. My rose garden across the stream has been very much admired. I am
now going to give you a glimpse of The Walled House, an edifice the
possession of which has made me more or less famous." He led the way through a little shrubbery, across a further strip of
garden and through a door in a high wall, which he opened with a key
attached to his watch-chain. They were in an open park now, studded
with magnificent trees, in the further corner of which stood an
imposing mansion, with a great domed roof in the centre, and broad stone
terraces, one of which led down to the river. The house itself was an
amazingly blended mixture of old and new, with great wings supported by
pillars thrown out on either side. It seemed to have been built without
regard to any definite period of architecture, and yet to have attained
a certain coherency--a far-reaching structure, with long lines of
outbuildings. In the park itself were a score or more of horses, and in
the distance beyond a long line of loose boxes with open doors. Even as
they stood there, a grey sorrel mare had trotted up to their side
and laid her head against Sir Timothy's shoulder. He caressed her
surreptitiously, affecting not to notice the approach of other animals
from all quarters. "Let me introduce you to The Walled House," its owner observed, "so
called, I imagine, because this wall, which is a great deal older than
you or I, completely encloses the estate. Of course, you remember the
old house, The Walled Palace, they called it? It belonged for many years
to the Lynton family, and afterwards to the Crown." "I remember reading of your purchase," Francis said, "and of course
I remember the old mansion. You seem to have wiped it out pretty
effectually." "I was obliged to play the vandal," his host confessed. "In its previous
state, the house was picturesque but uninhabitable. As you see it now,
it is an exact reproduction of the country home of one of the lesser
known of the Borgias--Sodina, I believe the lady's name was. You will
find inside some beautiful arches, and a sense of space which all modern
houses lack. It cost me a great deal of money, and it is inhabited, when
I am in Europe, about once a fortnight. You know the river name for it? 'Timothy's Folly!"' "But what on earth made you build it, so long as you don't care to live
there?" Francis enquired. Sir Timothy smiled reflectively. "Well," he explained, "I like sometimes to entertain, and I like to
entertain, when I do, on a grand scale. In London, if I give a
party, the invitations are almost automatic. I become there a very
insignificant link in the chain of what is known as Society, and Society
practically helps itself to my entertainment, and sees that everything
is done according to rule. Down here things are entirely different. An
invitation to The Walled House is a personal matter.