There were little sobs and tremors of excitement, strange banks of
silence. Both men seemed out of condition. The sound of their hoarse
breathing was easily heard against the curtain of spellbound silence. For a time their knives stabbed the empty air, but from the first the
end seemed certain. The Englishman attacked wildly. His adversary waited
his time, content with avoiding the murderous blows struck at him,
striving all the time to steal underneath the other's guard. And then,
almost without warning, it was all over. Jim was on his back in a
crumpled heap. There was a horrid stain upon his coat. The other man
was kneeling by his side, hate, glaring out of his eyes, guiding all
the time the rising and falling of his knife. There was one more
shriek--then silence only the sound of the victor's breathing as he rose
slowly from his ghastly task. Sir Timothy rose to his feet and waved his
hand. The curtain went down. "On deck, if you please, ladies and gentlemen," he said calmly. No one stirred. A woman began to sob. A fat, unhealthy-looking man in
front of Francis reeled over in a dead faint. Two other of the guests
near had risen from their seats and were shouting aimlessly like
lunatics. Even Francis was conscious of that temporary imprisonment of
the body due to his lacerated nerves. Only the clinging of Lady Cynthia
to his arm kept him from rushing from the spot. "You are faint?" he whispered hoarsely. "Upstairs--air," she faltered. They rose to their feet. The sound of Sir Timothy's voice reached them
as they ascended the stairs. "On deck, every one, if you please," he insisted. "Refreshments are
being served there. There are inquisitive people who watch my launch,
and it is inadvisable to remain here long." People hurried out then as though their one desire was to escape from
the scene of the tragedy. Lady Cynthia, still clinging to Francis' arm,
led him to the furthermost corner of the launch. There were real tears
in her eyes, her breath was coming in little sobs. "Oh, it was horrible!" she cried. "Horrible! Mr. Ledsam--I can't help
it--I never want to speak to Sir Timothy again!" One final horror arrested for a moment the sound of voices. There was
a dull splash in the river. Something had been thrown overboard. The
orchestra began to play dance music. Conversation suddenly burst out. Every one was hysterical. A Peer of the Realm, red-eyed and shaking
like an aspen leaf, was drinking champagne out of the bottle. Every
one seemed to be trying to outvie the other in loud conversation, in
outrageous mirth. Lady Isabel, with a glass of champagne in her hand,
leaned back towards Francis. "Well," she asked, "how are you feeling, Mr. Ledsam?" "As though I had spent half-an-hour in Hell," he answered. She screamed with laughter. "Hear this man," she called out, "who will send any poor ragamuffin to
the gallows if his fee is large enough! Of course," she added, turning
back to him, "I ought to remember you are a normal person and to-night's
entertainment was not for normal persons. For myself I am grateful
to Sir Timothy. For a few moments of this aching aftermath of life, I
forgot." Suddenly all the lights around the launch flamed out, the music stopped. Sir Timothy came up on deck. On either side of him was a man in ordinary
dinner clothes. The babel of voices ceased. Everyone was oppressed by
some vague likeness. A breathless silence ensued. "Ladies and gentlemen," Sir Timothy said, and once more the smile upon
his lips assumed its most mocking curve, "let me introduce you to the
two artists who have given us to-night such a realistic performance,
Signor Guiseppe Elito and Signor Carlos Marlini. I had the good
fortune," he went on, "to witness this very marvellous performance in a
small music-hall at Palermo, and I was able to induce the two actors to
pay us a visit over here. Steward, these gentlemen will take a glass of
champagne." The two Sicilians raised their glasses and bowed expectantly to the
little company. They received, however, a much greater tribute to their
performance than the applause which they had been expecting. There
reigned everywhere a deadly, stupefied silence. Only a half-stifled sob
broke from Lady Cynthia's lips as she leaned over the rail, her face
buried in her hands, her whole frame shaking. CHAPTER XXXVI


Francis and Margaret sat in the rose garden on the following morning. Their conversation was a little disjointed, as the conversation of
lovers in a secluded and beautiful spot should be, but they came back
often to the subject of Sir Timothy. "If I have misunderstood your father," Francis, declared, "and I admit
that I have, it has been to some extent his own fault. To me he was
always the deliberate scoffer against any code of morals, a rebel
against the law even if not a criminal in actual deeds. I honestly
believed that The Walled House was the scene of disreputable orgies,
that your father was behind Fairfax in that cold-blooded murder, and
that he was responsible in some sinister way for the disappearance of
Reggie Wilmore. Most of these things seem to have been shams, like the
fight last night." She moved uneasily in her place. "I am glad I did not see that," she said, with a shiver. "I think," he went on, "that the reason why your father insisted upon
Lady Cynthia's and my presence there was that he meant it as a sort of
allegory. Half the vices in life he claims are unreal." Margaret passed her arm through his and leaned a little towards him. "If you knew just one thing I have never told you," she confided, "I
think that you would feel sorry for him. I do, more and more every day,
because in a way that one thing is my fault." Notwithstanding the warm sunshine, she suddenly shivered. Francis took
her hands in his. They were cold and lifeless. "I know that one thing, dear," he told her quietly. She looked at him stonily. There was a questioning fear in her eyes. "You know--"

"I know that your fattier killed Oliver Hilditch." She suddenly broke out into a stream of words. There was passion in her
tone and in her eyes. She was almost the accuser. "My father was right, then!" she exclaimed. "He told me this morning
that he believed that it was to you or to your friend at Scotland Yard
that Walter had told his story. But you don't know you don't know how
terrible the temptation was how--you see I say it quite coolly--how
Oliver Hilditch deserved to die. He was trusted by my father in South
America and he deceived him, he forged the letters which induced me to
marry him. It was part of his scheme of revenge. This was the first time
we had any of us met since. I told my father the truth that afternoon. He knew for the first time how my marriage came about. My husband had
prayed me to keep silent. I refused. Then he became like a devil. We
were there, we three, that night after you left, and Francis, as I live,
if my father had not killed him, I should have!" "There was a time when I believed that you had," he reminded her. "I
didn't behave like a pedagogic upholder of the letter of the law then,
did I?" She drew closer to him. "You were wonderful," she whispered. "Dearest, your father has nothing to fear from me," he assured her
tenderly. "On the contrary, I think that I can show him the way to
safety." She rose impulsively to her feet. "He will be here directly," she said. "He promised to come across at
half-past twelve. Let us go and meet him. But, Francis--"

For a single moment she crept into his arms. Their lips met, her eyes
shone into his. He held her away from him a moment later. The change was
amazing. She was no longer a tired woman. She had become a girl again. Her eyes were soft with happiness, the little lines had gone from about
her mouth, she walked with all the spring of youth and happiness. "It is marvellous," she whispered. "I never dreamed that I should ever
be happy again." They crossed the rustic bridge which led on to the lawn. Lady Cynthia
came out of the house to meet them. She showed no signs of fatigue, but
her eyes and her tone were full of anxiety. "Margaret," she cried, "do you know that the hall is filled with your
father's luggage, and that the car is ordered to take him to Southampton
directly after lunch?" Margaret and Francis exchanged glances. "Sir Timothy may change his mind," the latter observed. "I have news for
him directly he arrives." On the other side of the wall they heard the whinnying of the old mare,
the sound of galloping feet from all directions. "Here he comes!" Lady Cynthia exclaimed. "I shall go and meet him." Francis laid his hand upon her arm. "Let me have a word with him first," he begged. She hesitated. "You are not going to say anything--that will make him want to go away?" "I am going to tell him something which I think will keep him at home." Sir Timothy came through the postern-gate, a moment or two later. He
waved his hat and crossed the lawn in their direction. Francis went
alone to meet him and, as he drew near, was conscious of a little shock. His host, although he held himself bravely, seemed to have aged in the
night. "I want one word with you, sir, in your study, please," Francis said. Sir Timothy shrugged his shoulders and led the way. He turned to wave
his hand once more to Margaret and Lady Cynthia, however, and he looked
with approval at the luncheon-table which a couple of servants were
laying under the cedar tree. "Wonderful thing, these alfresco meals," he declared. "I hope Hedges
won't forget the maraschino with the melons. Come into my den, Ledsam." He led the way in courtly fashion. He was the ideal host leading a
valued guest to his sanctum for a few moments' pleasant conversation. But when they arrived in the little beamed room and the door was closed,
his manner changed. He looked searchingly, almost challengingly at
Francis. "You have news for me?" he asked. "Yes!" Francis answered. Sir Timothy shrugged his shoulders. He threw himself a little wearily
into an easy-chair. His hands strayed out towards a cigarette box. He
selected one and lit it. "I expected your friend, Mr. Shopland," he murmured. "I hope he is none
the worse for his ducking." "Shopland is a fool," Francis replied. "He has nothing to do with this
affair, anyway. I have something to give you, Sir Timothy." He took the two papers from his pocket and handed them over. "I bought these from John Walter the day before yesterday," he
continued. "I gave him two hundred pounds for them. The money was just
in time. He caught a steamer for Australia late in the afternoon. I had
this wireless from him this morning." Sir Timothy studied the two documents, read the wireless. There was
little change in his face. Only for a single moment his lips quivered. "What does this mean?" he asked, rising to his feet with the documents
in his hand. "It means that those papers are yours to do what you like with. I
drafted the second one so that you should be absolutely secure against
any further attempt at blackmail. As a matter of fact, though, Walter is
on his last legs. I doubt whether he will live to land in Australia." "You know that I killed Oliver Hilditch?" Sir Timothy said, his eyes
fixed upon the other's. "I know that you killed Oliver Hilditch," Francis repeated. "If I had
been Margaret's father, I think that I should have done the same." Sir Timothy seemed suddenly very much younger. The droop of his lips was
no longer pathetic. There was a little humourous twitch there. "You, the great upholder of the law?" he murmured. "I have heard the story of Oliver Hilditch's life," Francis replied. "I
was partially responsible for saving him from the gallows. I repeat what
I have said. And if you will--"

He held out his hand. Sir Timothy hesitated for one moment. Instead of
taking it, he laid his hand upon Francis' shoulder. "Ledsam," he said, "we have thought wrong things of one another. I
thought you a prig, moral to your finger-tips with the morality of the
law and the small places. Perhaps I was tempted for that reason to give
you a wrong impression of myself. But you must understand this. Though I
have had my standard and lived up to it all my life, I am something of
a black sheep. A man stole my wife. I did not trouble the Law Courts. I
killed him." "I have the blood of generations of lawyers in my veins," Francis
declared, "but I have read many a divorce case in which I think it would
have been better and finer if the two men had met as you and that man
met." "I was born with the love of fighting in my bones," Sir Timothy went
on. "In my younger days, I fought in every small war in the southern
hemisphere. I fought, as you know, in our own war. I have loved to see
men fight honestly and fairly." "It is a man's hobby," Francis pronounced. "I encouraged you deliberately to think," Sir Timothy went on, "what
half the world thinks that--my parties at The Walled House were
mysterious orgies of vice. They have, as a matter of fact, never been
anything of the sort. The tragedies which are supposed to have taken
place on my launch have been just as much mock tragedies as last
night's, only I have not previously chosen to take the audiences into
my confidence. The greatest pugilists in the world have fought in my
gymnasium, often, if you will, under illegal conditions, but there has
never been a fight that was not fair." "I believe that," Francis said. "And there is another matter for which I take some blame," Sir Timothy
went on, "the matter of Fairfax and Victor Bidlake. They were neither
of them young men for whose loss the world is any the worse. Fairfax
to some extent imposed upon me. He was brought to The Walled House by a
friend who should have known better. He sought my confidence. The story
he told was exactly that of the mock drama upon the launch. Bidlake had
taken his wife. He had no wish to appeal to the Courts. He wished to
fight, a point of view with which I entirely sympathised. I arranged a
fight between the two. Bidlake funked it and never turned up. My advice
to Fairfax was, whenever he met Bidlake, to give him the soundest
thrashing he could. That night at Soto's I caught sight of Fairfax some
time before dinner. He was talking to the woman who had been his wife,
and he had evidently been drinking. He drew me on one side. 'To-night,'
he told me, 'I am going to settle accounts with Bidlake.' 'Where?' I
asked. 'Here,' he answered. He went out to the theatre, I upstairs to
dine. That was the extent of the knowledge I possessed which enabled me
to predict some unwonted happening that night. Fairfax was a bedrugged
and bedrunken decadent who had not the courage afterwards to face what
he had done. That is all." The hand slipped from Francis' shoulder. Francis, with a smile, held
out his own. They stood there for a moment with clasped hands--a queer,
detached moment, as it seemed to Francis, in a life which during the
last few months had been full of vivid sensations. From outside came
the lazy sounds of the drowsy summer morning--the distant humming of
a mowing machine, the drone of a reaper in the field beyond, the
twittering of birds in the trees, even the soft lapping of the stream
against the stone steps. The man whose hand he was holding seemed to
Francis to have become somehow transformed. It was as though he had
dropped a mask and were showing a more human, a more kindly self. Francis wondered no longer at the halting gallop of the horses in the
field. "You'll be good to Margaret?" Sir Timothy begged. "She's had a wretched
time." Francis smiled confidently. "I'm going to make up for it, sir," he promised. "And this South
American trip," he continued, as they turned towards the French windows,
"you'll call that off?" Sir Timothy hesitated. "I am not quite sure." When they reached the garden, Lady Cynthia was alone. She scarcely
glanced at Francis. Her eyes were anxiously fixed upon his companion. "Margaret has gone in to make the cocktails herself," she explained. "We have both sworn off absinthe for the rest of our lives, and we know
Hedges can't be trusted to make one without." "I'll go and help her," Francis declared. Lady Cynthia passed her arm through Sir Timothy's. "I want to know about South America," she begged. "The sight of those
trunks worries me." Sir Timothy's casual reply was obviously a subterfuge. They crossed the
lawn and the rustic bridge, almost in silence, passing underneath the
pergola of roses to the sheltered garden at the further end. Then Lady
Cynthia paused. "You are not going to South America," she pleaded, "alone?" Sir Timothy took her hands. "My dear," he said, "listen, please, to my confession. I am a fraud. I am not a purveyor of new sensations for a decadent troop of weary,
fashionable people. I am a fraud sometimes even to myself. I have had
good luck in material things. I have had bad luck in the precious,
the sentimental side of life. It has made something of an artificial
character of me, on the surface at any rate. I am really a simple,
elderly man who loves fresh air, clean, honest things, games, and a
healthy life. I have no ambitions except those connected with sport. I
don't even want to climb to the topmost niches in the world of finance. I think you have looked at me through the wrong-coloured spectacles. You
have had a whimsical fancy for a character which does not exist." "What I have seen," Lady Cynthia answered, "I have seen through no
spectacles at all--with my own eyes. But what I have seen, even, does
not count. There is something else." "I am within a few weeks of my fiftieth birthday," Sir Timothy reminded
her, "and you, I believe, are twenty-nine." "My dear man," Lady Cynthia assured him fervently, "you are the only
person in the world who can keep me from feeling forty-nine." "And your people--"

"Heavens! My people, for the first time in their lives, will count me a
brilliant success," Lady Cynthia declared. "You'll probably have to
lend dad money, and I shall be looked upon as the fairy child who has
restored the family fortunes." Sir Timothy leaned a little towards her. "Last of all," he said, and this time his voice was not quite so steady,
"are you really sure that you care for me, dear, because I have loved
you so long, and I have wanted love so badly, and it is so hard to
believe--"

It was the moment, it seemed to her, for which she had prayed. She was
in his arms, tired no longer, with all the splendid fire of life in her
love-lit eyes and throbbing pulses. Around them the bees were humming,
and a soft summer breeze shook the roses and brought little wafts of
perfume from the carnation bed. "There is nothing in life," Lady Cynthia murmured brokenly, "so
wonderful as this." Francis and Margaret came out from the house, the former carrying a
silver tray. They had spent a considerable time over their task, but
Lady Cynthia and Sir Timothy were still absent. Hedges followed them, a
little worried.