"Nothing! Only I wish to God I'd never stepped into that Mayfair agency. I wish I'd never gone to Mrs. Hilditch's as a temporary butler. I wish
I'd never seen any one of you! That's all. You can go to Hell which way
you like, only, if you take my advice, you'll go by the way of South
America. The scaffold isn't every man's fancy." There was a burr of the instrument and then silence. Sir Timothy
carefully replaced the receiver, paused on his way out of the room to
smell a great bowl of lavender, and passed back into the garden. "More applicants for invitations?" Lady Cynthia enquired lazily. Her host smiled. "Not exactly! Although," he added, "as a matter of fact my party would
have been perhaps a little more complete with the presence of the person
to whom I have been speaking." Lady Cynthia pointed to the stream, down which the punt was slowly
drifting. The moon had gone behind a cloud, and Francis' figure, as he
stood there, was undefined and ghostly. A thought seemed to flash into
her mind. She leaned forward. "Once," she said, "he told me that he was your enemy." "The term is a little melodramatic," Sir Timothy protested. "We look
at certain things from opposite points of view. You see, my prospective
son-in-law, if ever he becomes that, represents the law--the Law with a
capital 'L'--which recognises no human errors or weaknesses, and judges
crime out of the musty books of the law-givers of old. He makes of the
law a mechanical thing which can neither bend nor give, and he judges
humanity from the same standpoint. Yet at heart he is a good fellow and
I like him." "And you?" "My weakness lies the other way," he confessed, "and my sympathy is with
those who do not fear to make their own laws." She held out her hand, white and spectral in the momentary gloom. At the
other end of the lawn, Francis and Margaret were disembarking from the
punt. "Does it sound too shockingly obvious," she murmured, "if I say that I
want to make you my law?" CHAPTER XXXIII


It would have puzzled anybody, except, perhaps, Lady Cynthia herself, to
have detected the slightest alteration in Sir Timothy's demeanour during
the following day, when he made fitful appearances at The Sanctuary, or
at the dinner which was served a little earlier than usual, before his
final departure for the scene of the festivities. Once he paused in the
act of helping himself to some dish and listened for a moment to the
sound of voices in the hall, and when a taxicab drove up he set down his
glass and again betrayed some interest. "The maid with my frock, thank heavens!" Lady Cynthia announced,
glancing out of the window. "My last anxiety is removed. I am looking
forward now to a wonderful night." "You may very easily be disappointed," her host warned her. "My
entertainments appeal more, as a rule, to men." "Why don't you be thoroughly original and issue no invitations to women
at all?" Margaret enquired. "For the same reason that you adorn your rooms and the dinner-table with
flowers," he answered. "One needs them--as a relief. Apart from that, I
am really proud of my dancing-room, and there again, you see, your sex
is necessary." "We are flattered," Margaret declared, with a little bow. "It does seem
queer to think that you should own what Cynthia's cousin, Davy Hinton,
once told me was the best floor in London, and that I have never danced
on it." "Nor I," Lady Cynthia put in. "There might have been some excuse for not
asking you, Margaret, but why an ultra-Bohemian like myself has had to
beg and plead for an invitation, I really cannot imagine." "You might find," Sir Timothy said, "you may even now--that some of my
men guests are not altogether to your liking." "Quite content to take my risk," Lady Cynthia declared cheerfully. "The
man with the best manners I ever met--it was at one of Maggie's studio
dances, too--was a bookmaker. And a retired prize-fighter brought me
home once from an Albert Hall dance." "How did he behave?" Francis asked. "He was wistful but restrained," Lady Cynthia replied, "quite the
gentleman, in fact." "You encourage me to hope for the best," Sir Timothy said, rising to his
feet. "You will excuse me now? I have a few final preparations to make." "Are we to be allowed," Margaret enquired, "to come across the park?" "You would not find it convenient," her father assured her. "You had
better order a car, say for ten o'clock. Don't forget to bring your
cards of invitation, and find me immediately you arrive. I wish to
direct your proceedings to some extent." Lady Cynthia strolled across with him to the postern-gate and stood
by his side after he had opened it. Several of the animals, grazing in
different parts of the park, pricked up their ears at the sound. An old
mare came hobbling towards him; a flea-bitten grey came trotting down
the field, his head in the air, neighing loudly. "You waste a great deal of tenderness upon your animal friends, dear
host," she murmured. He deliberately looked away from her. "The reciprocation, at any rate, has its disadvantages," he remarked,
glancing a little disconsolately at the brown hairs upon his
coat-sleeve. "I shall have to find another coat before I can receive my
guests--which is a further reason," he added, "why I must hurry." At the entrance to the great gates of The Walled House, two men in
livery were standing. One of them examined with care the red cards of
invitation, and as soon as he was satisfied the gates were opened by
some unseen agency. The moment the car had passed through, they were
closed again. "Father seems thoroughly mediaeval over this business," Margaret
remarked, looking about her with interest. "What a quaint courtyard,
too! It really is quite Italian." "It seems almost incredible that you have never been here!" Lady Cynthia
exclaimed. "Curiosity would have brought me if I had had to climb over
the wall!" "It does seem absurd in one way," Margaret agreed, "but, as a matter
of fact, my father's attitude about the place has always rather set me
against it. I didn't feel that there was any pleasure to be gained by
coming here. I won't tell you really what I did think. We must keep to
our bargain. We are not to anticipate." At the front entrance, under the covered portico, the white tickets
which they had received in exchange for their tickets of invitation,
were carefully collected by another man, who stopped the car a few yards
from the broad, curving steps. After that, there was no more suggestion
of inhospitality. The front doors, which were of enormous size and
height, seemed to have been removed, and in the great domed hall beyond
Sir Timothy was already receiving his guests. Being without wraps, the
little party made an immediate entrance. Sir Timothy, who was talking to
one of the best-known of the foreign ambassadors, took a step forward to
meet them. "Welcome," he said, "you, the most unique party, at least, amongst my
guests. Prince, may I present you to my daughter, Mrs. Hilditch? Lady
Cynthia Milton and Mr. Ledsam you know, I believe." "Your father has just been preparing me for this pleasure," the Prince
remarked, with a smile. "I am delighted that his views as regards these
wonderful parties are becoming a little more--would it be correct to say
latitudinarian? He has certainly been very strict up to now." "It is the first time I have been vouchsafed an invitation," Margaret
confessed. "You will find much to interest you," the Prince observed. "For myself,
I love the sport of which your father is so noble a patron. That,
without doubt, though, is a side of his entertainment of which you will
know nothing." Sir Timothy, choosing a moment's respite from the inflowing stream of
guests, came once more across to them. "I am going to leave you, my honoured guests from The Sanctuary," he
said, with a faint smile, "to yourselves for a short time. In the room
to your left, supper is being served. In front is the dancing-gallery. To the right, as you see, is the lounge leading into the winter-garden. The gymnasium is closed until midnight. Any other part of the place
please explore at your leisure, but I am going to ask you one thing. I want you to meet me in a room which I will show you, at a quarter to
twelve." He led them down one of the corridors which opened from the hall. Before
the first door on the right a man-servant was standing as though
on sentry duty. Sir Timothy tapped the panel of the door with his
forefinger. "This is my sanctum," he announced. "I allow no one in here without
special permission. I find it useful to have a place to which one can
come and rest quite quietly sometimes. Williams here has no other duty
except to guard the entrance. Williams, you will allow this gentleman
and these two ladies to pass in at a quarter to twelve." The man looked at them searchingly. "Certainly, sir," he said. "No one else?" "No one, under any pretext." Sir Timothy hurried back to the hall, and the others followed him in
more leisurely fashion. They were all three full of curiosity. "I never dreamed," Margaret declared, as she looked around her, "that
I should ever find myself inside this house. It has always seemed to
me like one great bluebeard's chamber. If ever my father spoke of it at
all, it was as of a place which he intended to convert into a sort of
miniature Hell." Sir Timothy leaned back to speak to them as they passed. "You will find a friend over there, Ledsam," he said. Wilmore turned around and faced them. The two men exchanged somewhat
surprised greetings. "No idea that I was coming until this afternoon," Wilmore explained. "I
got my card at five o'clock, with a note from Sir Timothy's secretary. I
am racking my brains to imagine what it can mean." "We're all a little addled," Francis confessed. "Come and join our
tour of exploration. You know Lady Cynthia. Let me present you to Mrs. Hilditch." The introduction was effected and they all, strolled on together. Margaret and Lady Cynthia led the way into the winter-garden, a palace
of glass, tall palms, banks of exotics, flowering shrubs of every
description, and a fountain, with wonderfully carved water nymphs,
brought with its basin from Italy. Hidden in the foliage, a small
orchestra was playing very softly. The atmosphere of the place was
languorous and delicious. "Leave us here," Margaret insisted, with a little exclamation of
content. "Neither Cynthia nor I want to go any further. Come back and
fetch us in time for our appointment." The two men wandered off. The place was indeed a marvel of architecture,
a country house, of which only the shell remained, modernised and made
wonderful by the genius of a great architect. The first room which
they entered when they left the winter-garden, was as large as a small
restaurant, panelled in cream colour, with a marvellous ceiling. There
were tables of various sizes laid for supper, rows of champagne bottles
in ice buckets, and servants eagerly waiting for orders. Already a
sprinkling of the guests had found their way here. The two men crossed
the floor to the cocktail bar in the far corner, behind which a familiar
face grinned at them. It was Jimmy, the bartender from Soto's, who stood
there with a wonderful array of bottles on a walnut table. "If it were not a perfectly fatuous question, I should ask what you were
doing here, Jimmy?" Francis remarked. "I always come for Sir Timothy's big parties, sir," Jimmy explained. "Your first visit, isn't it, sir?" "My first," Francis assented. "And mine," his companion echoed. "What can I have the pleasure of making for you, sir?" the man enquired. "A difficult question," Francis admitted. "It is barely an hour and a
half since we finished diner. On the other hand, we are certainly going
to have some supper some time or other." Jimmy nodded understandingly. "Leave it to me, sir," he begged. He served them with a foaming white concoction in tall glasses. A
genuine lime bobbed up and down in the liquid. "Sir Timothy has the limes sent over from his own estate in South
America," Jimmy announced. "You will find some things in that drink you
don't often taste." The two men sipped their beverage and pronounced it delightful. Jimmy
leaned a little across the table. "A big thing on to-night, isn't there, sir?" he asked cautiously. "Is there?" Francis replied. "You mean--?" Jimmy motioned towards the open window, close to which the river was
flowing by. "You going down, sir?" Francis shook his head dubiously. "Where to?" The bartender looked with narrowed eyes from one to the other of the two
men. Then he suddenly froze up. Wilmore leaned a little further over the
impromptu counter. "Jimmy," he asked, "what goes on here besides dancing and boxing and
gambling?" "I never heard of any gambling," Jimmy answered, shaking his head. "Sir
Timothy doesn't care about cards being played here at all." "What is the principal entertainment, then?" Francis demanded. "The
boxing?" The bartender shook his head. "No one understands very much about this house, sir," he said, "except
that it offers the most wonderful entertainment in Europe. That is
for the guests to find out, though. We servants have to attend to our
duties. Will you let me mix you another drink, sir?" "No, thanks," Francis answered. "The last was too good to spoil. But you
haven't answered my question, Jimmy. What did you mean when you asked if
we were going down?" Jimmy's face had become wooden. "I meant nothing, sir," he said. "Sorry I spoke." The two men turned away. They recognised many acquaintances in the
supper-room, and in the long gallery beyond, where many couples were
dancing now to the music of a wonderful orchestra. By slow stages
they made their way back to the winter-garden, where Lady Cynthia and
Margaret were still lost in admiration of their surroundings. They all
walked the whole length of the place. Beyond, down a flight of stone
steps, was a short, paved way to the river. A large electric launch
was moored at the quay. The grounds outside were dimly illuminated with
cunningly-hidden electric lights shining through purple-coloured globes
into the cloudy darkness. In the background, enveloping the whole of the
house and reaching to the river on either side, the great wall loomed
up, unlit, menacing almost in its suggestions. A couple of loiterers
stood within a few yards of them, looking at the launch. "There she is, ready for her errand, whatever it may be," one said to
the other curiously. "We couldn't play the stowaway, I suppose, could
we?" "Dicky Bell did that once," the other answered. "Sir Timothy has only
one way with intruders. He was thrown into the river and jolly nearly
drowned." The two men passed out of hearing. "I wonder what part the launch plays in the night's entertainment,"
Wilmore observed. Francis shrugged his shoulders. "I have given up wondering," he said. "Margaret, do you hear that
music?" She laughed. "Are we really to dance?" she murmured. "Do you want to make a girl of
me again?" "Well, I shouldn't be a magician, should I?" he answered. They passed into the ballroom and danced for some time. The music was
seductive and perfect, without any of the blatant notes of too many of
the popular orchestras. The floor seemed to sway under their feet. "This is a new joy come back into life!" Margaret exclaimed, as they
rested for a moment. "The first of many," he assured her. They stood in the archway between the winter-garden and the
dancing-gallery, from which they could command a view of the passing
crowds. Francis scanned the faces of the men and women with intense
interest. Many of them were known to him by sight, others were
strangers. There was a judge, a Cabinet Minister, various members of the
aristocracy, a sprinkling from the foreign legations, and although the
stage was not largely represented, there were one or two well-known
actors. The guests seemed to belong to no universal social order, but to
Francis, watching them almost eagerly, they all seemed to have something
of the same expression, the same slight air of weariness, of restless
and unsatisfied desires. "I can't believe that the place is real, or that these people we see are
not supers," Margaret whispered. "I feel every moment that a clock will strike and that it will all fade
away." "I'm afraid I'm too material for such imaginings," Francis replied, "but
there is a quaintly artificial air about it all. We must go and look for
Wilmore and Lady Cynthia." They turned back into the enervating atmosphere of the winter-garden,
and came suddenly face to face with Sir Timothy, who had escorted a
little party of his guests to see the fountain, and was now returning
alone. "You have been dancing, I am glad to see," the latter observed. "I trust
that you are amusing yourselves?" "Excellently, thank you," Francis replied. "And so far," Sir Timothy went on, with a faint smile, "you find my
entertainment normal? You have no question yet which you would like to
ask?" "Only one--what do you do with your launch up the river on moonless
nights, Sir Timothy?" Sir Timothy's momentary silence was full of ominous significance. "Mr. Ledsam," he said, after a brief pause, "I have given you almost
carte blanche to explore my domains here. Concerning the launch,
however, I think that you had better ask no questions at present." "You are using it to-night?" Francis persisted. "Will you come and see, my venturesome guest?" "With great pleasure," was the prompt reply. Sir Timothy glanced at his watch. "That," he said, "is one of the matters of which we will speak at a
quarter to twelve. Meanwhile, let me show you something. It may amuse
you as it has done me." The three moved back towards one of the arched openings which led into
the ballroom. "Observe, if you please," their host continued, "the third couple who
pass us. The girl is wearing green--the very little that she does wear. Watch the man, and see if he reminds you of any one." Francis did as he was bidden. The girl was a well-known member of the
chorus of one of the principal musical comedies, and she seemed to be
thoroughly enjoying both the dance and her partner. The latter appeared
to be of a somewhat ordinary type, sallow, with rather puffy cheeks, and
eyes almost unnaturally dark. He danced vigorously and he talked all the
time. Something about him was vaguely familiar to Francis, but he failed
to place him. "Notwithstanding all my precautions," Sir Timothy continued, "there,
fondly believing himself to be unnoticed, is an emissary of
Scotland Yard. Really, of all the obvious, the dry-as-dust,
hunt-your-criminal-by-rule-of-three kind of people I ever met, the class
of detective to which this man belongs can produce the most blatant
examples." "What are you going to do about him?" Francis asked. Sir Timothy shrugged his shoulders. "I have not yet made up my mind," he said. "I happen to know that he
has been laying his plans for weeks to get here, frequenting Soto's and
other restaurants, and scraping acquaintances with some of my friends. The Duke of Tadchester brought him--won a few hundreds from him at
baccarat, I suppose. His grace will never again find these doors open to
him." Francis' attention had wandered. He was gazing fixedly at the man whom
Sir Timothy had pointed out. "You still do not fully recognise our friend," the latter observed
carelessly. "He calls himself Manuel Loito, and he professes to be
a Cuban. His real name I understood, when you introduced us, to be
Shopland." "Great heavens, so it is!" Francis exclaimed. "Let us leave him to his precarious pleasures," Sir Timothy suggested. "I am free for a few moments. We will wander round together." They found Lady Cynthia and Wilmore, and looked in at the supper-room,
where people were waiting now for tables, a babel of sound and gaiety. The grounds and winter-gardens were crowded. Their guide led the way to
a large apartment on the other side of the hall, from which the sound of
music was proceeding. "My theatre," he said. "I wonder what is going on." They passed inside. There was a small stage with steps leading down to
the floor, easy-chairs and round tables everywhere, and waiters serving
refreshments. A girl was dancing. Sir Timothy watched her approvingly.