Barnes." "Why do you want to leave me?" Francis asked. "There isn't enough for me to do, sir." Francis lit his pipe. "It's probably just a lull, Fawsitt," he remarked. "I don't think so, sir." "The devil! You've been gossiping with some of these solicitors' clerks,
Fawsitt." "I shouldn't call it gossiping, sir. I am always interested to hear
anything that may concern our--my future. I have reason to believe, sir,
that we are being passed over for briefs." "The reason being?" "One can't pick and choose, sir. One shouldn't, anyway." Francis smiled. "You evidently don't approve of any measure of personal choice as to the
work which one takes up." "Certainly I do not, sir, in our profession. The only brief I would
refuse would be a losing or an ill-paid one. I don't conceive it to be
our business to prejudge a case." "I see," Francis murmured. "Go on, Fawsitt." "There's a rumour about," the young man continued, "that you are only
going to plead where the chances are that your client is innocent." "There's some truth in that," Francis admitted. "If I could leave a little before the three months, sir, I should be
glad," Fawsitt said. "I look at the matter from an entirely different
point of view." "You shall leave when you like, of course, Fawsitt, but tell me what
that point of view is?" "Just this, sir. The simplest-minded idiot who ever stammered through
his address, can get an innocent prisoner off if he knows enough of the
facts and the law. To my mind, the real triumph in our profession is to
be able to unwind the meshes of damning facts and force a verdict for an
indubitably guilty client." "How does the moral side of that appeal to you?" his senior enquired. "I didn't become a barrister to study morals, or even to consider them,"
was the somewhat caustic reply. "When once a brief is in my mind, it is
a matter of brain, cunning and resource. The guiltier a man, the greater
the success if you can get him off." "And turn him loose again upon Society?" "It isn't our job to consider that, sir. The moral question is only
confusing in the matter. Our job is to make use of the law for the
benefit of our client. That's what we're paid for. That's the measure of
our success or failure." Francis nodded. "Very reasonably put, Fawsitt," he conceded. "I'll give you a letter to
Barnes whenever you like." "I should be glad if you would do so, sir," the young man said. "I'm
only wasting my time here...."

Francis wrote a letter of recommendation to Barnes, the great K.C.,
considered a stray brief which had found its way in, and strolled up
towards the Milan as the hour approached luncheon-time. In the American
bar of that palatial hotel he found the young man he was looking for--a
flaxen-haired youth who was seated upon one of the small tables,
with his feet upon a chair, laying down the law to a little group of
acquaintances. He greeted Francis cordially but without that due measure
of respect which nineteen should accord to thirty-five. "Cheerio, my elderly relative!" he exclaimed. "Have a cocktail." Francis nodded assent. "Come into this corner with me for a moment, Charles," he invited. "I
have a word for your ear." The young man rose and sat by his uncle's side on a settee. "In my declining years," the latter began, "I find myself reverting to
the follies of youth. I require a letter of introduction from you to a
young lady of your acquaintance." "The devil! Not one of my own special little pets, I hope?" "Her name is Miss Daisy Hyslop," Francis announced. Lord Charles Southover pursed his lips and whistled. He glanced at
Francis sideways. "Is this the beginning of a campaign amongst the butterflies," he
enquired, "because, if so, I feel it my duty, uncle, to address to you a
few words of solemn warning. Miss Daisy Hyslop is hot stuff." "Look here, young fellow," Francis said equably, "I don't know what the
state of your exchequer is--"

"I owe you forty," Lord Charles interrupted. "Spring another tenner,
make it fifty, that is, and the letter of introduction I will write for
you will bring tears of gratitude to your eyes." "I'll spring the tenner," Francis promised, "but you'll write just what
I tell you--no more and no less." "Anything extra for keeping mum at home?" the young man ventured
tentatively. "You're a nice sort of nephew to have!" Francis declared. "Abandon
these futile attempts at blackmail and just come this way to the
writing-table." "You've got the tenner with you?" the young man asked anxiously. Francis produced a well-filled pocketbook. His nephew led the way to
a writing-table, lit a cigarette which he stuck into the corner of his
mouth, and in painstaking fashion wrote the few lines which Francis
dictated. The ten pounds changed hands. "Have one with me for luck?" the young man invited brightly. "No? Perhaps you're right," he added, in valedictory fashion. "You'd better
keep your head clear for Daisy!" CHAPTER XI


Miss Daisy Hyslop received Francis that afternoon, in the sitting-room
of her little suite at the Milan. Her welcoming smile was plaintive and
a little subdued, her manner undeniably gracious. She was dressed in
black, a wonderful background for her really gorgeous hair, and her
deportment indicated a recent loss. "How nice of you to come and see me," she murmured, with a lingering
touch of the fingers. "Do take that easy-chair, please, and sit down and
talk to me. Your roses were beautiful, but whatever made you send them
to me?" "Impulse," he answered. She laughed softly. "Then please yield to such impulses as often as you feel them," she
begged. "I adore flowers. Just now, too," she added, with a little sigh,
"anything is welcome which helps to keep my mind off my own affairs." "It was very good of you to let me come," he declared. "I can quite
understand that you don't feel like seeing many people just now." Francis' manner, although deferential and courteous, had nevertheless
some quality of aloofness in it to which she was unused and which she
was quick to recognise. The smile, faded from her face. She seemed
suddenly not quite so young. "Haven't I seen you before somewhere quite lately?" she asked, a little
sharply. "You saw me at Soto's, the night that Victor Bidlake was murdered," he
reminded her. "I stood quite close to you both while you were waiting
for your taxi." The animation evoked by this call from a presumably new admirer,
suddenly left her. She became nervous and constrained. She glanced again
at his card. "Don't tell me," she begged, "that you have come to ask me any questions
about that night! I simply could not bear it. The police have been here
twice, and I had nothing to tell them, absolutely nothing." "Quite right," he assented soothingly. "Police have such a clumsy way of
expecting valuable information for nothing. I'm always glad to hear of
their being disappointed." She studied her visitor for a moment carefully. Then she turned to the
table by her side, picked up a note and read it through. "Lord Southover tells me here," she said, "that you are just a pal of
his who wants to make my acquaintance. He doesn't say why." "Is that necessary?" Francis asked good-naturedly. She moved in her chair a little nervously, crossing and uncrossing her
legs more than once. Her white silk stockings underneath her black
skirt were exceedingly effective, a fact of which she never lost
consciousness, although at that moment she was scarcely inspired to play
the coquette. "I'd like to think it wasn't," she admitted frankly. "I've seen you repeatedly upon the stage," he told her, "and, though
musical comedy is rather out of my line, I have always admired you
immensely." She studied him once more almost wistfully. "You look very nice," she acknowledged, "but you don't look at all the
kind of man who admires girls who do the sort of rubbish I do on the
stage." "What do I look like?" he asked, smiling. "A man with a purpose," she answered. "I begin to think," he ventured, "that we shall get on. You are really a
very astute young lady." "You are quite sure you're not one of these amateur detectives one reads
about?" she demanded. "Certainly not," he assured her. "I will confess that I am interested
in Victor Bidlake's death, and I should like to discover the truth about
it, but I have a reason for that which I may tell you some day. It has
nothing whatever to do with the young man himself. To the best of my
belief, I never saw or heard of him before in my life. My interest lies
with another person. You have lost a great friend, I know. If you felt
disposed to tell me the whole story, it might make such a difference." She sighed. Her confidence was returning--also her self-pity. The latter
at once betrayed itself. "You see," she confided, "Victor and I were engaged to be married, so
naturally I let him help me a little. I shan't be able to stay on here
now. They are bothering me about their bill already," she added, with a
side-glance at an envelope which stood on a table by her side. He drew a little nearer to her. "Miss Hyslop--" he began. "Daisy," she interrupted. "Miss Daisy Hyslop, then," he continued, smiling, "I suggested just now
that I did not want to come and bother you for information without any
return. If I can be of any assistance to you in that matter," he added,
glancing towards the envelope, "I shall be very pleased." She sighed gratefully. "Just till Victor's people return to town," she said. "I know that they
mean to do something for me." "How much?" he asked. "Two hundred pounds would keep me going," she told him. He wrote out a cheque. Miss Hyslop drew a sigh of relief as she laid it
on one side with the envelope. Then she swung round in her chair to face
him where he sat at the writing-table. "I am afraid you will think that what I have to tell is very
insignificant," she confessed. "Victor was one of those boys who always
fancied themselves bored. He was bored with polo, bored with motoring,
bored with the country and bored with town. Then quite suddenly during
the last few weeks he seemed changed. All that he would tell me was
that he had found a new interest in life. I don't know what it was but
I don't think it was a nice one. He seemed to drop all his old friends,
too, and go about with a new set altogether--not a nice set at all. He
used to stay out all night, and he quite gave up going to dances
and places where he could take me. Once or twice he came here in the
afternoon, dead beat, without having been to bed at all, and before he
could say half-a-dozen words he was asleep in my easy-chair. He used to
mutter such horrible things that I had to wake him up." "Was he ever short of money?" Francis asked. She shook her head. "Not seriously," she answered. "He was quite well-off, besides what his
people allowed him. I was going to have a wonderful settlement as soon
as our engagement was announced. However, to go on with what I was
telling you, the very night before--it happened--he came in to see me,
looking like nothing on earth. He cried like a baby, behaved like a
lunatic, and called himself all manner of names. He had had a great deal
too much to drink, and I gathered that he had seen something horrible. It was then he asked me to dine with him the next night, and told me
that he was going to break altogether with his new friends. Something in
connection with them seemed to have given him a terrible fright." Francis nodded. He had the tact to abandon his curiosity at this precise
point. "The old story," he declared, "bad company and rotten habits. I suppose
some one got to know that the young man usually carried a great deal of
money about with him." "It was so foolish of him," she assented eagerly: "I warned him about it
so often. The police won't listen to it but I am absolutely certain that
he was robbed. I noticed when he paid the bill that he had a great wad
of bank-notes which were never discovered afterwards." Francis rose to his feet. "What are you doing to-night?" he enquired. "Nothing," she acknowledged eagerly. "Then let's dine somewhere and see the show at the Frivolity," he
suggested. "You dear man!" she assented with enthusiasm. "The one thing I wanted to
do, and the one person I wanted to do it with." CHAPTER XII


It was after leaving Miss Daisy Hyslop's flat that the event to which
Francis Ledsam had been looking forward more than anything else in the
world, happened. It came about entirely by chance. There were no taxis
in the Strand. Francis himself had finished work for the day, and
feeling disinclined for his usual rubber of bridge, he strolled
homewards along the Mall. At the corner of Green Park, he came face to
face with the woman who for the last few months had scarcely been out of
his thoughts. Even in that first moment he realised to his pain that she
would have avoided him if she could. They met, however, where the path
narrowed, and he left her no chance to avoid him. That curious impulse
of conventionality which opens a conversation always with cut and dried
banalities, saved them perhaps from a certain amount of embarrassment. Without any conscious suggestion, they found themselves walking side by
side. "I have been wanting to see you very much indeed," he said. "I even went
so far as to wonder whether I dared call." "Why should you?" she asked. "Our acquaintance began and ended in
tragedy. There is scarcely any purpose in carrying it further." He looked at her for a moment before replying. She was wearing black,
but scarcely the black of a woman who sorrows. She was still frigidly
beautiful, redolent, in all the details of her toilette, of that
almost negative perfection which he had learnt to expect from her. She
suggested to him still that same sense of aloofness from the actualities
of life. "I prefer not to believe that it is ended," he protested. "Have you so
many friends that you have no room for one who has never consciously
done you any harm?" She looked at him with some faint curiosity in her immobile features. "Harm? No! On the contrary, I suppose I ought to thank you for your
evidence at the inquest." "Some part of it was the truth," he replied. "I suppose so," she admitted drily. "You told it very cleverly." He looked her in the eyes. "My profession helped me to be a good witness," he said. "As for the
gist of my evidence, that was between my conscience and myself." "Your conscience?" she repeated. "Are there really men who possess such
things?" "I hope you will discover that for yourself some day," he answered. "Tell me your plans? Where are you living?" "For the present with my father in Curzon Street." "With Sir Timothy Brast?" She assented. "You know him?" she asked indifferently. "Very slightly," Francis replied. "We talked together, some nights ago,
at Soto's Restaurant. I am afraid that I did not make a very favourable
impression upon him. I gathered, too, that he has somewhat eccentric
tastes." "I do not see a great deal of my father," she said. "We met, a few
months ago, for the first time since my marriage, and things have been a
little difficult between us--just at first. He really scarcely ever puts
in an appearance at Curzon Street. I dare say you have heard that he
makes a hobby of an amazing country house which he has down the river." "The Walled House?" he ventured. She nodded. "I see you have heard of it. All London, they tell me, gossips about the
entertainments there." "Are they really so wonderful?" he asked. "I have never been to one," she replied. "As a matter of fact, I have
spent scarcely any time in England since my marriage. My husband, as I
remember he told you, was fond of travelling." Notwithstanding the warm spring air he was conscious of a certain
chilliness. Her level, indifferent tone seemed to him almost abnormally
callous. A horrible realisation flashed for a moment in his brain. She
was speaking of the man whom she had killed! "Your father overheard a remark of mine," Francis told her. "I was at
Soto's with a friend--Andrew Wilmore, the novelist--and to tell you the
truth we were speaking of the shock I experienced when I realised that
I had been devoting every effort of which I was capable, to saving the
life of--shall we say a criminal? Your father heard me say, in rather
a flamboyant manner, perhaps, that in future I declared war against all
crime and all criminals." She smiled very faintly, a smile which had in it no single element of
joy or humour. "I can quite understand my father intervening," she said. "He poses
as being rather a patron of artistically-perpetrated crime. Sue is his
favourite author, and I believe that he has exceedingly grim ideas as to
duelling and fighting generally. He was in prison once for six months
at New Orleans for killing a man who insulted my mother. Nothing in the
world would ever have convinced him that he had not done a perfectly
legitimate thing." "I am expecting to find him quite an interesting study, when I know him
better," Francis pronounced. "My only fear is that he will count me an
unfriendly person and refuse to have anything to do with me." "I am not at all sure," she said indifferently, "that it would not be
very much better for you if he did." "I cannot admit that," he answered, smiling. "I think that our paths
in life are too far apart for either of us to influence the other. You
don't share his tastes, do you?" "Which ones?" she asked, after a moment's silence. "Well, boxing for one," he replied. "They tell me that he is the
greatest living patron of the ring, both here and in America." "I have never been to a fight in my life," she confessed. "I hope that I
never may." "I can't go so far as that," he declared, "but boxing isn't altogether
one of my hobbies. Can't we leave your father and his tastes alone for
the present? I would rather talk about--ourselves. Tell me what you care
about most in life?" "Nothing," she answered listlessly. "But that is only a phase," he persisted. "You have had terrible trials,
I know, and they must have affected your outlook on life, but you are
still young, and while one is young life is always worth having." "I thought so once," she assented. "I don't now." "But there must be--there will be compensations," he assured her. "I
know that just now you are suffering from the reaction--after all you
have gone through. The memory of that will pass." "The memory of what I have gone through will never pass," she answered. There was a moment's intense silence, a silence pregnant with
reminiscent drama.