"Nadia Ellistoff," he told them. "She was in the last Russian ballet,
and she is waiting now for the rest of the company to start again at
Covent Garden. You see, it is Metzger who plays there. They improvise. Rather a wonderful performance, I think." They watched her breathlessly, a spirit in grey tulle, with great black
eyes now and then half closed. "It is 'Wind before Dawn,'" Lady Cynthia whispered. "I heard him play it
two days after he composed it, only there are variations now. She is the
soul of the south wind." The curtain went down amidst rapturous applause. The dancer had left the
stage, floating away into some sort of wonderfully-contrived nebulous
background. Within a few moments, the principal comedian of the day was
telling stories. Sir Timothy led them away. "But how on earth do you get all these people?" Lady Cynthia asked. "It is arranged for me," Sir Timothy replied. "I have an agent who sees
to it all. Every man or woman who is asked to perform, has a credit at
Cartier's for a hundred guineas. I pay no fees. They select some little
keepsake." Margaret laughed softly. "No wonder they call this place a sort of Arabian Nights!" she declared. "Well, there isn't much else for you to see," Sir Timothy said
thoughtfully. "My gymnasium, which is one of the principal features
here, is closed just now for a special performance, of which I will
speak in a moment. The concert hall I see they are using for an overflow
dance-room. What you have seen, with the grounds and the winter-garden,
comprises almost everything." They moved back through the hall with difficulty. People were now
crowding in. Lady Cynthia laughed softly. "Why, it is like a gala night at the Opera, Sir Timothy!" she exclaimed. "How dare you pretend that this is Bohemia!" "It has never been I who have described my entertainments," he reminded
her. "They have been called everything--orgies, debauches--everything
you can think of. I have never ventured myself to describe them." Their passage was difficult. Every now and then Sir Timothy was
compelled to shake hands with some of his newly-arriving guests. At
last, however, they reached the little sitting-room. Sir Timothy turned
back to Wilmore, who hesitated. "You had better come in, too, Mr. Wilmore, if you will," he invited. "You were with Ledsam, the first day we met, and something which I have
to say now may interest you." "If I am not intruding," Wilmore murmured. They entered the room, still jealously guarded. Sir Timothy closed the
door behind them. CHAPTER XXXIV


The apartment was one belonging to the older portion of the house,
and had been, in fact, an annex to the great library. The walls were
oak-panelled, and hung with a collection of old prints. There were some
easy-chairs, a writing-table, and some well-laden bookcases. There
were one or two bronze statues of gladiators, a wonderful study of two
wrestlers, no minor ornaments. Sir Timothy plunged at once into what he
had to say. "I promised you, Lady Cynthia, and you, Ledsam," he said, "to divulge
exactly the truth as regards these much-talked-of entertainments here. You, Margaret, under present circumstances, are equally interested. You,
Wilmore, are Ledsam's friend, and you happen to have an interest in this
particular party. Therefore, I am glad to have you all here together. The superficial part of my entertainment you have seen. The part which
renders it necessary for me to keep closed doors, I shall now explain. I give prizes here of considerable value for boxing contests which are
conducted under rules of our own. One is due to take place in a very few
minutes. The contests vary in character, but I may say that the chief
officials of the National Sporting Club are usually to be found here,
only, of course, in an unofficial capacity. The difference between the
contests arranged by me, and others, is that my men are here to fight. They use sometimes an illegal weight of glove and they sometimes hurt
one another. If any two of the boxing fraternity have a grudge against
one another, and that often happens, they are permitted here to fight
it out, under the strictest control as regards fairness, but practically
without gloves at all. You heard of the accident, for instance, to
Norris? That happened in my gymnasium. He was knocked out by Burgin. It
was a wonderful fight. "However, I pass on. There is another class of contest which frequently
takes place here. Two boxers place themselves unreservedly in my hands. The details of the match are arranged without their knowledge. They come
into the ring without knowing whom they are going to fight. Sometimes
they never know, for my men wear masks. Then we have private matches. There is one to-night. Lord Meadowson and I have a wager of a thousand
guineas. He has brought to-night from the East End a boxer who,
according to the terms of our bet, has never before engaged in
a professional contest. I have brought an amateur under the same
conditions. The weight is within a few pounds the same, neither has ever
seen the other, only in this case the fight is with regulation gloves
and under Queensberry rules." "Who is your amateur, Sir Timothy?" Wilmore asked harshly. "Your brother, Mr. Wilmore," was the prompt reply. "You shall see the
fight if I have your promise not to attempt in any way to interfere." Wilmore rose to his feet. "Do you mean to tell me," he demanded, "that my brother has been decoyed
here, kept here against his will, to provide amusement for your guests?" "Mr. Wilmore, I beg that you will be reasonable," Sir Timothy
expostulated. "I saw your brother box at his gymnasium in Holborn. My
agent made him the offer of this fight. One of my conditions had to
be that he came here to train and that whilst he was here he held no
communication whatever with the outside world. My trainer has ideas of
his own and this he insists upon. Your brother in the end acquiesced. He was at first difficult to deal with as regards this condition, and
he did, in fact, I believe, Mr. Ledsam, pay a visit to your office, with
the object of asking you to become an intermediary between him and his
relatives." "He began a letter to me," Francis interposed, "and then mysteriously
disappeared." "The mystery is easily explained," Sir Timothy continued. "My trainer,
Roger Hagon, a Varsity blue, and the best heavyweight of his year,
occupies the chambers above yours. He saw from the window the arrival of
Reginald Wilmore--which was according to instructions, as they were to
come down to Hatch End together--went down the stairs to meet him,
and, to cut a long story short, fetched him out of your office, Ledsam,
without allowing him to finish his letter. This absolute isolation
seems a curious condition, perhaps, but Hagon insists upon it, and I can
assure you that he knows his business. The mystery, as you have termed
it, of his disappearance that morning, is that he went upstairs with
Hagon for several hours to undergo a medical examination, instead of
leaving the building forthwith." "Queer thing I never thought of Hagon," Francis remarked. "As a matter
of fact, I never see him in the Temple, and I thought that he had left." "May I ask," Wilmore intervened, "when my brother will be free to return
to his home?" "To-night, directly the fight is over," Sir Timothy replied. "Should he
be successful, he will take with him a sum of money sufficient to start
him in any business he chooses to enter." Wilmore frowned slightly. "But surely," he protested, "that would make him a professional
pugilist?" "Not at all," Sir Timothy replied. "For one thing, the match is a
private one in a private house, and for another the money is a gift. There is no purse. If your brother loses, he gets nothing. Will you see
the fight, Mr. Wilmore?" "Yes, I will see it," was the somewhat reluctant assent. "You will give me your word not to interfere in any way?" "I shall not interfere," Wilmore promised. "If they are wearing
regulation gloves, and the weights are about equal, and the conditions
are what you say, it is the last thing I should wish to do." "Capital!" Sir Timothy exclaimed. "Now to pass on. There is one other
feature of my entertainments concerning which I have something to say--a
series of performances which takes place on my launch at odd times. There is one fixed for tonight. I can say little about it except that
it is unusual. I am going to ask you, Lady Cynthia, and you, Ledsam, to
witness it. When you have seen that, you know everything. Then you and
I, Ledsam, can call one another's hands. I shall have something else to
say to you, but that is outside the doings here." "Are we to see the fight in the gymnasium?" Lady Cynthia enquired. Sir Timothy shook his head. "I do not allow women there under any conditions," he said. "You and
Margaret had better stay here whilst that takes place. It will probably
be over in twenty minutes. It will be time then for us to find our way
to the launch. After that, if you have any appetite, supper. I will
order some caviare sandwiches for you," Sir Timothy went on, ringing the
bell, "and some wine." Lady Cynthia smiled. "It is really a very wonderful party," she murmured. Their host ushered the two men across the hall, now comparatively
deserted, for every one had settled down to his or her chosen
amusement--down a long passage, through a private door which he unlocked
with a Yale key, and into the gymnasium. There were less than fifty
spectators seated around the ring, and Francis, glancing at them
hastily, fancied that he recognised nearly every one of them. There was
Baker, a judge, a couple of actors, Lord Meadowson, the most renowned of
sporting peers, and a dozen who followed in his footsteps; a little man
who had once been amateur champion in the bantam class, and who was
now considered the finest judge of boxing in the world; a theatrical
manager, the present amateur boxing champion, and a sprinkling of
others. Sir Timothy and his companions took their chairs amidst a
buzz of welcome. Almost immediately, the man who was in charge of the
proceedings, and whose name was Harrison, rose from his place. "Gentlemen," he said, "this is a sporting contest, but one under usual
rules and usual conditions. An amateur, who tips the scales at twelve
stone seven, who has never engaged in a boxing contest in his life, is
matched against a young man from a different sphere of life, who intends
to adopt the ring as his profession, but who has never as yet fought in
public. Names, gentlemen, as you know, are seldom mentioned here. I will
only say that the first in the ring is the nominee of our friend and
host, Sir Timothy Brast; second comes the nominee of Lord Meadowson." Wilmore, notwithstanding his pre-knowledge, gave a little gasp. The
young man who stood now within a few yards of him, carelessly swinging
his gloves in his hand, was without a doubt his missing brother. He
looked well and in the pink of condition; not only well but entirely
confident and at his ease. His opponent, on the other hand, a sturdier
man, a few inches shorter, was nervous and awkward, though none the less
determined-looking. Sir Timothy rose and whispered in Harrison's
ear. The latter nodded. In a very few moments the preliminaries were
concluded, the fight begun. CHAPTER XXXV


Francis, glad of a moment or two's solitude in which to rearrange his
somewhat distorted sensations, found an empty space in the stern of the
launch and stood leaning over the rail. His pulses were still tingling
with the indubitable excitement of the last half-hour. It was all there,
even now, before his eyes like a cinematograph picture--the duel between
those two men, a duel of knowledge, of strength, of science, of courage. From beginning to end, there had been no moment when Francis had felt
that he was looking on at what was in any way a degrading or immoral
spectacle. Each man had fought in his way to win. Young Wilmore,
graceful as a panther, with a keen, joyous desire of youth for supremacy
written in his face and in the dogged lines of his mouth; the budding
champion from the East End less graceful, perhaps, but with even more
strength and at least as much determination, had certainly done his best
to justify his selection. There were no points to be scored. There
had been no undue feinting, no holding, few of the tricks of the
professional ring. It was a fight to a finish, or until Harrison gave
the word. And the better man had won. But even that knock-out blow which
Reggie Wilmore had delivered after a wonderful feint, had had little
that was cruel in it. There was something beautiful almost in the
strength and grace with which it had been delivered--the breathless
eagerness, the waiting, the end. Francis felt a touch upon his arm and looked around. A tall, sad-faced
looking woman, whom he had noticed with a vague sense of familiarity in
the dancing-room, was standing by his side. "You have forgotten me, Mr. Ledsam," she said. "For the moment," he admitted. "I am Isabel Culbridge," she told him, watching his face. "Lady Isabel?" Francis repeated incredulously. "But surely--"

"Better not contradict me," she interrupted. "Look again." Francis looked again. "I am very sorry," he said. "It is some time, is it not, since we met?" She stood by his side, and for a few moments neither of them spoke. The
little orchestra in the bows had commenced to play softly, but there
was none of the merriment amongst the handful of men and women generally
associated with a midnight river picnic. The moon was temporarily
obscured, and it seemed as though some artist's hand had so dealt with
the few electric lights that the men, with their pale faces and white
shirt-fronts, and the three or four women, most of them, as it happened,
wearing black, were like some ghostly figures in some sombre procession. Only the music kept up the pretence that this was in any way an ordinary
excursion. Amongst the human element there was an air of tenseness which
seemed rather to increase as they passed into the shadowy reaches of the
river. "You have been ill, I am afraid?" Francis said tentatively. "If you will," she answered, "but my illness is of the soul. I have
become one of a type," she went on, "of which you will find many
examples here. We started life thinking that it was clever to despise
the conventional and the known and to seek always for the daring and the
unknown. New experiences were what we craved for. I married a wonderful
husband. I broke his heart and still looked for new things. I had a
daughter of whom I was fond--she ran away with my chauffeur and left me;
a son whom I adored, and he was killed in the war; a lover who told
me that he worshipped me, who spent every penny I had and made me the
laughing-stock of town. I am still looking for new things." "Sir Timothy's parties are generally supposed to provide them," Francis
observed. The woman shrugged her shoulders. "So far they seem very much like anybody's else," she said. "The fight
might have been amusing, but no women were allowed. The rest was very
wonderful in its way, but that is all. I am still hoping for what we are
to see downstairs." They heard Sir Timothy's voice a few yards away, and turned to look at
him. He had just come from below, and had paused opposite a man who had
been standing a little apart from the others, one of the few who was
wearing an overcoat, as though he felt the cold. In the background were
the two servants who had guarded the gangway. "Mr. Manuel Loito," Sir Timothy said--"or shall I say Mr. Shopland?--my
invited guests are welcome. I have only one method of dealing with
uninvited ones." The two men suddenly stepped forward. Shopland made no protest,
attempted no struggle. They lifted him off his feet as though he were a
baby, and a moment later there was a splash in the water. They threw a
life-belt after him. "Always humane, you see," Sir Timothy remarked, as he leaned over the
side. "Ah! I see that even in his overcoat our friend is swimmer enough
to reach the bank. You find our methods harsh, Ledsam?" he asked,
turning a challenging gaze towards the latter. Francis, who had been watching Shopland come to the surface, shrugged
his shoulders. He delayed answering for a moment while he watched the
detective, disdaining the life-belt, swim to the opposite shore. "I suppose that under the circumstances," Francis said, "he was prepared
to take his risk." "You should know best about that," Sir Timothy rejoined. "I wonder
whether you would mind looking after Lady Cynthia? I shall be busy for a
few moments." Francis stepped across the deck towards where Lady Cynthia had been
sitting by her host's side. They had passed into the mouth of a
tree-hung strip of the river. The engine was suddenly shut off. A gong
was sounded. There was a murmur, almost a sob of relief, as the little
sprinkling of men and women rose hastily to their feet and made their
way towards the companion-way. Downstairs, in the saloon, with its white
satinwood panels and rows of swing chairs, heavy curtains were drawn
across the portholes, all outside light was shut out from the place. At
the further end, raised slightly from the floor, was a sanded circle. Sir Timothy made his way to one of the pillars by its side and turned
around to face the little company of his guests. His voice, though it
seemed scarcely raised above a whisper, was extraordinarily clear and
distinct. Even Francis, who, with Lady Cynthia, had found seats only
just inside the door, could hear every word he said. "My friends," he began, "you have often before been my guests at such
small fights as we have been able to arrange in as unorthodox a manner
as possible between professional boxers. There has been some novelty
about them, but on the last occasion I think it was generally
observed that they had become a little too professional, a little
ultra-scientific. There was something which they lacked. With that
something I am hoping to provide you to-night. Thank you, Sir Edgar," he
murmured, leaning down towards his neighbour. He held his cigarette in the flame of a match which the other had
kindled. Francis, who was watching intently, was puzzled at the
expression with which for a moment, as he straightened himself, Sir
Timothy glanced down the room, seeking for Lady Cynthia's eyes. In
a sense it was as though he were seeking for something he
needed--approbation, sympathy, understanding. "Our hobby, as you know, has been reality," he continued. "That is what
we have not always been able to achieve. Tonight I offer you reality. There are two men here, one an East End coster, the other an Italian
until lately associated with an itinerant vehicle of musical production. These two men have not outlived sensation as I fancy so many of us
have. They hate one another to the death. I forget their surnames,
but Guiseppe has stolen Jim's girl, is living with her at the present
moment, and proposes to keep her. Jim has sworn to have the lives of
both of them. Jim's career, in its way, is interesting to us. He has
spent already six years in prison for manslaughter, and a year for
a brutal assault upon a constable. Guiseppe was tried in his native
country for a particularly fiendish murder, and escaped, owing, I
believe, to some legal technicality. That, however, has nothing to do
with the matter. These men have sworn to fight to the death, and
the girl, I understand, is willing to return to Jim if he should be
successful, or to remain with Guiseppe if he should show himself able
to retain her. The fight between these men, my friends, has been
transferred from Seven Dials for your entertainment. It will take place
before you here and now." There was a little shiver amongst the audience. Francis, almost to his
horror, was unable to resist the feeling of queer excitement which stole
through his veins. A few yards away, Lady Isabel seemed to have become
transformed. She was leaning forward in her chair, her eyes glowing,
her lips parted, rejuvenated, dehumanised. Francis' immediate companion,
however, rather surprised him. Her eyes were fixed intently upon Sir
Timothy's. She seemed to have been weighing every word he had spoken. There was none of that hungry pleasure in her face which shone from the
other woman's and was reflected in the faces of many of the others. She
seemed to be bracing herself for a shock. Sir Timothy looked over his
shoulder towards the door which opened upon the sanded space. "You can bring your men along," he directed. One of the attendants promptly made his appearance. He was holding
tightly by the arm a man of apparently thirty years of age, shabbily
dressed, barefooted, without collar or necktie, with a mass of black
hair which looked as though it had escaped the care of any barber for
many weeks. His complexion was sallow; he had high cheekbones and a
receding chin, which gave him rather the appearance of a fox. He shrank
a little from the lights as though they hurt his eyes, and all the time
he looked furtively back to the door, through which in a moment or two
his rival was presently escorted. The latter was a young man of stockier
build, ill-conditioned, and with the brutal face of the lowest of his
class. Two of his front teeth were missing, and there was a livid mark
on the side of his cheek. He looked neither to the right nor to the
left. His eyes were fixed upon the other man, and they looked death. "The gentleman who first appeared," Sir Timothy observed, stepping up
into the sanded space but still half facing the audience, "is Guiseppe,
the Lothario of this little act. The other is Jim, the wronged
husband. You know their story. Now, Jim," he added, turning towards
the Englishman, "I put in your trousers pocket these notes, two hundred
pounds, you will perceive. I place in the trousers pocket of Guiseppe
here notes to the same amount. I understand you have a little quarrel to
fight out. The one who wins will naturally help himself to the other's
money, together with that other little reward which I imagine was the
first cause of your quarrel. Now... let them go." Sir Timothy resumed his seat and leaned back in leisurely fashion. The
two attendants solemnly released their captives. There was a moment's
intense silence. The two men seemed fencing for position. There was
something stealthy and horrible about their movements as they crept
around one another. Francis realised what it was almost as the little
sobbing breath from those of the audience who still retained any
emotion, showed him that they, too, foresaw what was going to happen. Both men had drawn knives from their belts. It was murder which had been
let loose. Francis found himself almost immediately upon his feet. His whole being
seemed crying out for interference. Lady Cynthia's death-white face and
pleading eyes seemed like the echo of his own passionate aversion to
what was taking place. Then he met Sir Timothy's gaze across the room
and he remembered his promise. Under no conditions was he to protest
or interfere. He set his teeth and resumed his seat. The fight went
on.