"I am
quite sure that mine come because I find it so hard to be amused. I am
sure I am most enterprising. I try whatever comes along, but nothing
satisfies me." "Why not try being in love with one of these men who've been in love
with you all their lives?" She laughed bitterly. "The men who have cared for me and have been worth caring about," she
said, "gave me up years ago. I mocked at them when they were in earnest,
scoffed at sentiment, and told them frankly that when I married it would
only be to find a refuge for broader life. The right sort wouldn't have
anything to say to me after that, and I do not blame them. And here is
the torture of it. I can't stand the wrong sort near me--physically, I
mean. Mind, I believe I'm attracted towards people with criminal tastes
and propensities. I believe that is what first led me towards Sir
Timothy. Every taste I ever had in life seems to have become besmirched. I'm all the time full of the craving to do horrible things, but all the
same I can't bear to be touched. That's the torment of it. I wonder if
you can understand?" "I think I can," he answered. "Your trouble lies in having the wrong
friends and in lack of self-discipline. If you were my sister, I'd take
you away for a fortnight and put you on the road to being cured." "Then I wish I were your sister," she sighed. "Don't think I'm unsympathetic," he went on, "because I'm not. Wait till
we've got into the main road here and I'll try and explain." They were passing along a country lane, so narrow that twigs from the
hedges, wreathed here and there in wild roses, brushed almost against
their cheeks. On their left was the sound of a reaping-machine and the
perfume of new-mown hay. The sun was growing stronger at every moment. A
transitory gleam of pleasure softened her face. "It is ages since I smelt honeysuckle," she confessed, "except in a
perfumer's shop. I was wondering what it reminded me of." "That," he said, as they turned out into the broad main road, with its
long vista of telegraph poles, "is because you have been neglecting the
real for the sham, flowers themselves for their artificially distilled
perfume. What I was going to try and put into words without sounding too
priggish, Lady Cynthia," he went on, "is this. It is just you people who
are cursed with a restless brain who are in the most dangerous position,
nowadays. The things which keep us healthy and normal physically--games,
farces, dinner-parties of young people, fresh air and exercise--are
the very things which after a time fail to satisfy the person with
imagination. You want more out of life, always the something you don't
understand, the something beyond. And so you keep on trying new things,
and for every new thing you try, you drop an old one. Isn't it something
like that?" "I suppose it is," she admitted wearily. "Drugs take the place of wholesome wine," he went on, warming to his
subject. "The hideous fascination of flirting with the uncouth or the
impossible some way or another, stimulates a passion which simple means
have ceased to gratify. You seek for the unusual in every way--in food,
in the substitution of absinthe for your harmless Martini, of cocaine
for your stimulating champagne. There is a horrible wave of all this
sort of thing going on to-day in many places, and I am afraid," he
concluded, "that a great many of our very nicest young women are caught
up in it." "Guilty," she confessed. "Now cure me." "I could point out the promised land, but how, could I lead you to it?" he answered. "You don't like me well enough," she sighed. "I like you better than you believe," he assured her, slackening his
speed a little. "We have met, I suppose, a dozen times in our lives. I
have danced with you here and there, talked nonsense once, I remember,
at a musical reception--"

"I tried to flirt with you then," she interrupted. He nodded. "I was in the midst of a great case," he said, "and everything that
happened to me outside it was swept out of my mind day by day. What I
was going to say is that I have always liked you, from the moment when
your mother presented me to you at your first dance." "I wish you'd told me so," she murmured. "It wouldn't have made any difference," he declared. "I wasn't in a
position to think of a duke's daughter, in those days. I don't suppose I
am now." "Try," she begged hopefully. He smiled back at her. The reawakening of her sense of humour was
something. "Too late," he regretted. "During the last month or so the thing has
come to me which we all look forward to, only I don't think fate has
treated me kindly. I have always loved normal ways and normal people,
and the woman I care for is different." "Tell me about her?" she insisted. "You will be very surprised when I tell you her name," he said. "It is
Margaret Hilditch." She looked at him for a moment in blank astonishment. "Heavens!" she exclaimed. "Oliver Hilditch's wife!" "I can't help that," he declared, a little doggedly. "She's had a
miserable time, I know. She was married to a scamp. I'm not quite
sure that her father isn't as bad a one. Those things don't make any
difference." "They wouldn't with you," she said softly. "Tell me, did you say
anything to her last night?" "I did," he replied. "I began when we were out alone together. She gave
me no encouragement to speak of, but at any rate she knows." Lady Cynthia leaned a little forward in her place. "Do you know where she is now?" He was a little startled. "Down at the cottage, I suppose. The butler told me that she never rose
before midday." "Then for once the butler was mistaken," his companion told him. "Margaret Hilditch left at six o'clock this morning. I saw her in
travelling clothes get into the car and drive away." "She left the cottage this morning before us?" Francis repeated, amazed. "I can assure you that she did," Lady Cynthia insisted. "I never sleep,
amongst my other peculiarities," she went on bitterly, "and I was lying
on a couch by the side of the open window when the car came for her. She
stopped it at the bend of the avenue--so that it shouldn't wake us up, I
suppose. I saw her get in and drive away." Francis was silent for several moments. Lady Cynthia watched him
curiously. "At any rate," she observed, "in whatever mood she went away this
morning, you have evidently succeeded in doing what I have never seen
any one else do--breaking through her indifference. I shouldn't
have thought that anything short of an earthquake would have stirred
Margaret, these days." "These days?" he repeated quickly. "How long have you known her?" "We were at school together for a short time," she told him. "It was
while her father was in South America. Margaret was a very different
person in those days." "However was she induced to marry a person like Oliver Hilditch?" Francis speculated. His companion shrugged her shoulders. "Who knows?" she answered indifferently. "Are you going to drop me?" "Wherever you like." "Take me on to Grosvenor Square, if you will, then," she begged, "and
deposit me at the ancestral mansion. I am really rather annoyed about
Margaret," she went on, rearranging her veil. "I had begun to have hopes
that you might have revived my taste for normal things." "If I had had the slightest intimation--" he murmured. "It would have made no difference," she interrupted dolefully. "Now I
come to think of it, the Margaret whom I used to know--and there must be
plenty of her left yet--is just the right type of woman for you." They drew up outside the house in Grosvenor Square. Lady Cynthia held
out her hand. "Come and see me one afternoon, will you?" she invited. "I'd like to very much," he replied. She lingered on the steps and waved her hand to him--a graceful,
somewhat insolent gesture. "All the same, I think I shall do my best to make you forget Margaret,"
she called out. "Thanks for the lift up. A bientot!" CHAPTER XX


Francis drove direct from Grosvenor Square to his chambers in the
Temple, and found Shopland, his friend from Scotland Yard, awaiting his
arrival. "Any news?" Francis enquired. "Nothing definite, I am sorry, to say," was the other's reluctant
admission. Francis hung up his hat, threw himself into his easy-chair and lit a
cigarette. "The lad's brother is one of my oldest friends, Shopland," he said. "He
is naturally in a state of great distress." The detective scratched his chin thoughtfully. "I said 'nothing definite' just now, sir," he observed. "As a rule,
I never mention suspicions, but with you it is a different matter. I
haven't discovered the slightest trace of Mr. Reginald Wilmore, or
the slightest reason for his disappearance. He seems to have been a
well-conducted young gentleman, a little extravagant, perhaps, but able
to pay his way and with nothing whatever against him. Nothing whatever,
that is to say, except one almost insignificant thing." "And that?" "A slight tendency towards bad company, sir. I have heard of his being
about with one or two whom we are keeping our eye upon." "Bobby Fairfax's lot, by any chance?" Shopland nodded. "He was with Jacks and Miss Daisy Hyslop, a night or two before he
disappeared. I am not sure that a young man named Morse wasn't of the
party, too." "What do you make of that lot?" Francis asked curiously. "Are they
gamesters, dope fiends, or simply vicious?" The detective was silent. He was gazing intently at his rather
square-toed shoes. "There are rumours, sir," he said, presently, "of things going on in the
West End which want looking into very badly--very badly indeed. You will
remember speaking to me of Sir Timothy Brast?" "I remember quite well," Francis acknowledged. "I've nothing to go on," the other continued. "I am working almost on
your own lines, Mr. Ledsam, groping in the dark to find a clue, as it
were, but I'm beginning to have ideas about Sir Timothy Brast, just
ideas." "As, for instance?" "Well, he stands on rather queer terms with some of his acquaintances,
sir. Now you saw, down at Soto's Bar, the night we arrested Mr. Fairfax,
that not one of those young men there spoke to Sir Timothy as though
they were acquainted, nor he to them. Yet I happened to find out that
every one of them, including Mr. Fairfax himself, was present at a
party Sir Timothy Brast gave at his house down the river a week or two
before." "I'm afraid there isn't much in that," Francis declared. "Sir Timothy
has the name of being an eccentric person everywhere, especially in this
respect--he never notices acquaintances. I heard, only the other day,
that while he was wonderfully hospitable and charming to all his guests,
he never remembered them outside his house." Shopland nodded. "A convenient eccentricity," he remarked, a little drily. "I have heard
the same thing myself. You spent the night at his country cottage, did
you not, Mr. Ledsam? Did he offer to show you over The Walled House?" "How the dickens did you know I was down there?" Francis demanded, with
some surprise. "I was just thinking as I drove up that I hadn't left my
address either here or at Clarges Street." "Next time you visit Sir Timothy," the detective observed, "I should
advise you to do so. I knew you were there, Mr. Ledsam, because I was
in the neighbourhood myself. I have been doing a little fishing, and
keeping my eye on that wonderful estate of Sir Timothy's." Francis was interested. "Shopland," he said, "I believe that our intelligences, such as they
are, are akin." "What do you suspect Sir Timothy of?" the detective asked bluntly. "I suspect him of nothing," Francis replied. "He is simply, to my mind,
an incomprehensible, somewhat sinister figure, who might be capable of
anything. He may have very excellent qualities which he contrives to
conceal, or he may be an arch-criminal. His personality absolutely
puzzles me." There was a knock at the door and Angrave appeared. Apparently he had
forgotten Shopland's presence, for he ushered in another visitor. "Sir Timothy Brast to see you, sir," he announced. The moment was one of trial to every one, admirably borne. Shopland
remained in his chair, with only a casual glance at the newcomer. Francis rose to his feet with a half-stifled expression of anger at the
clumsiness of his clerk. Sir Timothy, well-shaven and groomed, attired
in a perfectly-fitting suit of grey flannel, nodded to Francis in
friendly fashion and laid his Homburg hat upon the table with the air of
a familiar. "My dear Ledsam," he said, "I do hope that you will excuse this early
call. I could only have been an hour behind you on the road. I dare
say you can guess what I have come to see you about. Can we have a word
together?" "Certainly," was the ready reply. "You remember my friend Shopland, Sir
Timothy? It was Mr. Shopland who arrested young Fairfax that night at
Soto's." "I remember him perfectly," Sir Timothy declared. "I fancied, directly I
entered, that your face was familiar," he added, turning to Shopland. "I am rather ashamed of myself about that night. My little outburst
must have sounded almost ridiculous to you two. To tell you the truth,
I quite failed at that time to give Mr. Ledsam credit for gifts which I
have since discovered him to possess." "Mr. Shopland and I are now discussing another matter," Francis went on,
pushing a box of cigarettes towards Sir Timothy, who was leaning against
the table in an easy attitude. "Don't go, Shopland, for a minute. We
were consulting together about the disappearance of a young man, Reggie
Wilmore, the brother of a friend of mine--Andrew Wilmore, the novelist." "Disappearance?" Sir Timothy repeated, as he lit a cigarette. "That is
rather a vague term." "The young man has been missing from home for over a week," Francis
said, "and left no trace whatever of his whereabouts. He was not in
financial trouble, he does not seem to have been entangled with any
young woman, he had not quarrelled with his people, and he seems to have
been on the best of terms with the principal at the house of business
where he was employed. His disappearance, therefore, is, to say the
least of it, mysterious." Sir Timothy assented gravely. "The lack of motive to which you allude," he pointed out, "makes the
case interesting. Still, one must remember that London is certainly the
city of modern mysteries. If a new 'Arabian Nights' were written, it
might well be about London. I dare say Mr. Shopland will agree with
me," he continued, turning courteously towards the detective,
"that disappearances of this sort are not nearly so uncommon as the
uninitiated would believe. For one that is reported in the papers,
there are half-a-dozen which are not. Your late Chief Commissioner,
by-the-bye," he added meditatively, "once a very intimate friend of
mine, was my informant." "Where do you suppose they disappear to?" Francis enquired. "Who can tell?" was the speculative reply. "For an adventurous youth
there are a thousand doors which lead to romance. Besides, the lives of
none of us are quite so simple as they seem. Even youth has its
secret chapters. This young man, for instance, might be on his way to
Australia, happy in the knowledge that he has escaped from some murky
chapter of life which will now never be known. He may write to his
friends, giving them a hint. The whole thing will blow over." "There may be cases such as you suggest, Sir Timothy," the detective
said quietly. "Our investigations, so far as regards the young man in
question, however, do not point that way." Sir Timothy turned over his cigarette to look at the name of the maker. "Excellent tobacco," he murmured. "By-the-bye, what did you say the
young man's name was?" "Reginald Wilmore," Francis told him. "A good name," Sir Timothy murmured. "I am sure I wish you both every
good fortune in your quest. Would it be too much to ask you now, Mr.
Ledsam, for that single minute alone?" "By no means," Francis answered. "I'll wait in the office, if I may," Shopland suggested, rising to his
feet. "I want to have another word with you before I go." "My business with Mr. Ledsam is of a family nature," Sir Timothy said
apologetically, as Shopland passed out. "I will not keep him for more
than a moment." Shopland closed the door behind him. Sir Timothy waited until he heard
his departing footsteps. Then he turned back to Francis. "Mr. Ledsam," he said, "I have come to ask you if you know anything of
my daughter's whereabouts?" "Nothing whatever," Francis replied. "I was on the point of ringing you
up to ask you the same question." "Did she tell you that she was leaving The Sanctuary?" "She gave me not the slightest intimation of it," Francis assured his
questioner, "in fact she invited me to meet her in the rose garden last
night. When I arrived there, she was gone. I have heard nothing from her
since." "You spent the evening with her?" "To my great content." "What happened between you?" "Nothing happened. I took the opportunity, however, of letting your
daughter understand the nature of my feelings for her." "Dear me! May I ask what they are?" "I will translate them into facts," Francis replied. "I wish your
daughter to become my wife." "You amaze me!" Sir Timothy exclaimed, with the old mocking smile at his
lips. "How can you possibly contemplate association with the daughter of
a man whom you suspect and distrust as you do me?" "If I suspect and distrust you, it is your own fault," Francis reminded
him. "You have declared yourself to be a criminal and a friend of
criminals. I am inclined to believe that you have spoken the truth. I
care for that fact just as little as I care for the fact that you are a
millionaire, or that Margaret has been married to a murderer. I intend
her to become my wife." "Did you encourage her to leave me?" "I did not. I had not the slightest idea that she had left The Sanctuary
until Lady Cynthia told me, halfway to London this morning." Sir Timothy was silent for several moments. "Have you any idea in your own mind," he persisted, "as to where she has
gone and for what purpose?" "Not the slightest in the world," Francis declared. "I am just as
anxious to hear from her; and to know where she is, as you seem to be." Sir Timothy sighed. "I am disappointed," he admitted. "I had hoped to obtain some
information from you. I must try in another direction." "Since you are here, Sir Timothy," Francis said, as his visitor prepared
to depart, "may I ask whether you have any objection to my marrying your
daughter?" Sir Timothy frowned. "The question places me in a somewhat difficult position," he replied
coldly. "In a certain sense I have a liking for you. You are not quite
the ingenuous nincompoop I took you for on the night of our first
meeting. On the other hand, you have prejudices against me. My harmless
confession of sympathy with criminals and their ways seems to have
stirred up a cloud of suspicion in your mind. You even employ a
detective to show the world what a fool he can look, sitting in a punt
attempting to fish, with one eye on the supposed abode of crime." "I have nothing whatever to do with the details of Shopland's
investigations," Francis protested. "He is in search of Reggie Wilmore." "Does he think I have secret dungeons in my new abode," Sir Timothy
demanded, "or oubliettes in which I keep and starve brainless youths for
some nameless purpose? Be reasonable, Mr. Ledsam. What the devil benefit
could accrue to me from abducting or imprisoning or in any way laying my
criminal hand upon this young man?" "None whatever that we have been able to discover as yet," Francis
admitted.