I have never listened to so
horrible a recital in my life." "And yet they are here together, dining tete-a-tete, on a night when it
must have needed more than ordinary courage for either of them to have
been seen in public at all," Wilmore pointed out. "It is as astounding to me as it is to you," Francis confessed. "From
the way she spoke, I should never have dreamed that they were living
together." "And from his appearance," Wilmore remarked, as he called the waiter
to bring some cigarettes, "I should never have imagined that he was
anything else save a high-principled, well-born, straightforward sort of
chap. I never saw a less criminal type of face." They each in turn glanced at the subject of their discussion. Oliver
Hilditch's good-looks had been the subject of many press comments during
the last few days. They were certainly undeniable. His face was a little
lined but his hair was thick and brown. His features were regular, his
forehead high and thoughtful, his mouth a trifle thin but straight and
shapely. Francis gazed at him like a man entranced. The hours seemed to
have slipped away. He was back in the tea-shop, listening to the woman
who spoke of terrible things. He felt again his shivering abhorrence of
her cold, clearly narrated story. Again he shrank from the horrors from
which with merciless fingers she had stripped the coverings. He seemed
to see once more the agony in her white face, to hear the eternal pain
aching and throbbing in her monotonous tone. He rose suddenly to his
feet. "Andrew," he begged, "tell the fellow to bring the bill outside. We'll
have our coffee and liqueurs there." Wilmore acquiesced willingly enough, but even as they turned towards
the door Francis realised what was in store for him. Oliver Hilditch had
risen to his feet. With a courteous little gesture he intercepted the
passer-by. Francis found himself standing side by side with the man for
whose life he had pleaded that afternoon, within a few feet of the woman
whose terrible story seemed to have poisoned the very atmosphere he
breathed, to have shown him a new horror in life, to have temporarily,
at any rate, undermined every joy and ambition he possessed. "Mr. Ledsam," Hilditch said, speaking with quiet dignity, "I hope that
you will forgive the liberty I take in speaking to you here. I looked
for you the moment I was free this afternoon, but found that you had
left the Court. I owe you my good name, probably my life. Thanks are
poor things but they must be spoken." "You owe me nothing at all," Francis replied, in a tone which even he
found harsh. "I had a brief before me and a cause to plead. It was a
chapter out of my daily work." "That work can be well done or ill," the other reminded him gently. "In your case, my presence here proves how well it was done. I wish to
present you to my wife, who shares my gratitude." Francis bowed to the woman, who now, at her husband's words, raised her
eyes. For the first time he saw her smile. It seemed to him that the
effort made her less beautiful. "Your pleading was very wonderful, Mr. Ledsam," she said, a very subtle
note of mockery faintly apparent in her tone. "We poor mortals find
it difficult to understand that with you all that show of passionate
earnestness is merely--what did you call it?--a chapter in your day's
work? It is a great gift to be able to argue from the brain and plead as
though from the heart." "We will not detain Mr. Ledsam," Oliver Hilditch interposed, a little
hastily. "He perhaps does not care to be addressed in public by a client
who still carries with him the atmosphere of the prison. My wife and I
wondered, Mr. Ledsam, whether you would be good enough to dine with us
one night. I think I could interest you by telling you more about
my case than you know at present, and it would give us a further
opportunity, and a more seemly one, for expressing our gratitude." Francis had recovered himself by this time. He was after all a man of
parts, and though he still had the feeling that he had been through one
of the most momentous days of his life, his savoir faire was making its
inevitable reappearance. He knew very well that the idea of that dinner
would be horrible to him. He also knew that he would willingly cancel
every engagement he had rather than miss it. "You are very kind," he murmured. "Are we fortunate enough to find you disengaged," Hilditch suggested,
"to-morrow evening?" "I am quite free," was the ready response. "That suits you, Margaret?" Hilditch asked, turning courteously to his
wife. For a single moment her eyes were fixed upon those of her prospective
guest. He read their message which pleaded for his refusal, and he
denied it. "To-morrow evening will suit me as well as any other," she acquiesced,
after a brief pause. "At eight o'clock, then--number 10 b, Hill Street," Hilditch concluded. Francis bowed and turned away with a murmured word of polite assent. Outside, he found Wilmore deep in the discussion of the merits of
various old brandies with an interested maitre d'hotel. "Any choice, Francis?" his host enquired. "None whatever," was the prompt reply, "only, for God's sake, give me a
double one quickly!" The two men were on the point of departure when Oliver Hilditch and his
wife left the restaurant. As though conscious that they had become
the subject of discussion, as indeed was the case, thanks to the busy
whispering of the various waiters, they passed without lingering through
the lounge into the entrance hall, where Francis and Andrew Wilmore were
already waiting for a taxicab. Almost as they appeared, a new arrival
was ushered through the main entrance, followed by porters carrying
luggage. He brushed past Francis so closely that the latter looked into
his face, half attracted and half repelled by the waxen-like complexion,
the piercing eyes, and the dignified carriage of the man whose arrival
seemed to be creating some stir in the hotel. A reception clerk and a
deputy manager had already hastened forward. The newcomer waved them
back for a moment. Bareheaded, he had taken Margaret Hilditch's hands in
his and raised them to his lips. "I came as quickly as I could," he said. "There was the usual delay, of
course, at Marseilles, and the trains on were terrible. So all has ended
well." Oliver Hilditch, standing by, remained speechless. It seemed for a
moment as though his self-control were subjected to a severe strain. "I had the good fortune," he interposed, in a low tone, "to be
wonderfully defended. Mr. Ledsam here--"

He glanced around. Francis, with some idea of what was coming, obeyed an
imaginary summons from the head-porter, touched Andrew Wilmore upon
the shoulder, and hastened without a backward glance through the
swing-doors. Wilmore turned up his coat-collar and looked doubtfully up
at the rain. "I say, old chap," he protested, "you don't really mean to walk?" Francis thrust his hand through his friend's arm and wheeled him round
into Davies Street. "I don't care what the mischief we do, Andrew," he confided, "but
couldn't you see what was going to happen? Oliver Hilditch was going to
introduce me as his preserver to the man who had just arrived!" "Are you afflicted with modesty, all of a sudden?" Wilmore grumbled. "No, remorse," was the terse reply. CHAPTER V


Indecision had never been one of Francis Ledsam's faults, but four times
during the following day he wrote out a carefully worded telegraphic
message to Mrs. Oliver Hilditch, 10 b, Hill Street, regretting his
inability to dine that night, and each time he destroyed it. He carried
the first message around Richmond golf course with him, intending to
dispatch his caddy with it immediately on the conclusion of the round. The fresh air, however, and the concentration required by the game,
seemed to dispel the nervous apprehensions with which he had anticipated
his visit, and over an aperitif in the club bar he tore the telegram
into small pieces and found himself even able to derive a certain
half-fearful pleasure from the thought of meeting again the woman who,
together with her terrible story, had never for one moment been out of
his thoughts. Andrew Wilmore, who had observed his action, spoke of it
as they settled down to lunch. "So you are going to keep your engagement tonight, Francis?" he
observed. The latter nodded. "After all, why not?" he asked, a little defiantly. "It ought to be
interesting." "Well, there's nothing of the sordid criminal, at any rate, about Oliver
Hilditch," Wilmore declared. "Neither, if one comes to think of it, does
his wife appear to be the prototype of suffering virtue. I wonder if you
are wise to go, Francis?" "Why not?" the man who had asked himself that question a dozen times
already, demanded. "Because," Wilmore replied coolly, "underneath that steely hardness
of manner for which your profession is responsible, you have a vein
of sentiment, of chivalrous sentiment, I should say, which some day or
other is bound to get you into trouble. The woman is beautiful enough
to turn any one's head. As a matter of fact, I believe that you are more
than half in love with her already." Francis Ledsam sat where the sunlight fell upon his strong, forceful
face, shone, too, upon the table with its simple but pleasant
appointments, upon the tankard of beer by his side, upon the plate of
roast beef to which he was already doing ample justice. He laughed with
the easy confidence of a man awakened from some haunting nightmare,
relieved to find his feet once more firm upon the ground. "I have been a fool to take the whole matter so seriously, Andrew,"
he declared. "I expect to walk back to Clarges Street to-night,
disillusioned. The man will probably present me with a gold pencil-case,
and the woman--"

"Well, what about the woman?" Wilmore asked, after a brief pause. "Oh, I don't know!" Francis declared, a little impatiently. "The woman
is the mystery, of course. Probably my brain was a little over-excited
when I came out of Court, and what I imagined to be an epic was nothing
more than a tissue of exaggerations from a disappointed wife. I'm sure
I'm doing the right thing to go there.... What about a four-ball this
afternoon, Andrew?" The four-ball match was played and won in normal fashion. The two men
returned to town together afterwards, Wilmore to the club and Francis to
his rooms in Clarges Street to prepare for dinner. At a few minutes to
eight he rang the bell of number 10 b, Hill Street, and found his host
and hostess awaiting him in the small drawing-room into which he was
ushered. It seemed to him that the woman, still colourless, again
marvellously gowned, greeted him coldly. His host, however, was almost
too effusive. There was no other guest, but the prompt announcement of
dinner dispelled what might have been a few moments of embarrassment
after Oliver Hilditch's almost too cordial greeting. The woman laid her
fingers upon her guest's coat-sleeve. The trio crossed the little hall
almost in silence. Dinner was served in a small white Georgian dining-room, with every
appurtenance of almost Sybaritic luxury. The only light in the room
was thrown upon the table by two purple-shaded electric lamps, and the
servants who waited seemed to pass backwards and forwards like shadows
in some mysterious twilight--even the faces of the three diners
themselves were out of the little pool of light until they leaned
forward. The dinner was chosen with taste and restraint, the wines were
not only costly but rare. A watchful butler, attended now and then by
a trim parlour-maid, superintended the service. Only once, when she
ordered a bowl of flowers removed from the table, did their mistress
address either of them. Conversation after the first few amenities
speedily became almost a monologue. One man talked whilst the others
listened, and the man who talked was Oliver Hilditch. He possessed the
rare gift of imparting colour and actuality in a few phrases to the
strange places of which he spoke, of bringing the very thrill of strange
happenings into the shadowy room. It seemed that there was scarcely a
country of the world which he had not visited, a country, that is to
say, where men congregate, for he admitted from the first that he was a
city worshipper, that the empty places possessed no charm for him. "I am not even a sportsman," he confessed once, half apologetically, in
reply to a question from his guest. "I have passed down the great rivers
of the world without a thought of salmon, and I have driven through the
forest lands and across the mountains behind a giant locomotive, without
a thought of the beasts which might be lurking there, waiting to be
killed. My only desire has been to reach the next place where men and
women were." "Irrespective of nationality?" Francis queried. "Absolutely. I have never minded much of what race--I have the trick
of tongues rather strangely developed--but I like the feeling of human
beings around me. I like the smell and sound and atmosphere of a great
city. Then all my senses are awake, but life becomes almost turgid in my
veins during the dreary hours of passing from one place to another." "Do you rule out scenery as well as sport from amongst the joys of
travel?" Francis enquired. "I am ashamed to make such a confession," his host answered, "but I
have never lingered for a single unnecessary moment to look at the most
wonderful landscape in the world. On the other hand, I have lounged for
hours in the narrowest streets of Pekin, in the markets of Shanghai,
along Broadway in New York, on the boulevards in Paris, outside the
Auditorium in Chicago. These are the obvious places where humanity
presses the thickest, but I know of others. Some day we will talk of
them." Francis, too, although that evening, through sheer lack of sympathy,
he refused to admit it, shared to some extent Hilditch's passionate
interest in his fellow-creatures, and notwithstanding the strange
confusion of thought into which he had been thrown during the last
twenty-four hours, he felt something of the pungency of life, the thrill
of new and appealing surroundings, as he sat in his high-backed chair,
sipping his wonderful wine, eating almost mechanically what was set
before him, fascinated through all his being by his strange company. For three days he had cast occasional glances at this man, seated in
the criminal dock with a gaoler on either side of him, his fine,
nervous features gaining an added distinction from the sordidness of his
surroundings. Now, in the garb of civilisation, seated amidst luxury to
which he was obviously accustomed, with a becoming light upon his face
and this strange, fascinating flow of words proceeding always from his
lips, the man, from every external point of view, seemed amongst the
chosen ones of the world. The contrast was in itself amazing. And then
the woman! Francis looked at her but seldom, and when he did it was with
a curious sense of mental disturbance; poignant but unanalysable. It was amazing to see her here, opposite the man of whom she had told
him that ghastly story, mistress of his house, to all appearance his
consort, apparently engrossed in his polished conversation, yet with
that subtle withholding of her real self which Francis rather imagined
than felt, and which somehow seemed to imply her fierce resentment of
her husband's re-entry into the arena of life. It was a situation so
strange that Francis, becoming more and more subject to its influence,
was inclined to wonder whether he had not met with some accident on
his way from the Court, and whether this was not one of the heated
nightmares following unconsciousness. "Tell me," he asked his host, during one of the brief pauses in the
conversation, "have you ever tried to analyse this interest of yours
in human beings and crowded cities, this hatred of solitude and empty
spaces?" Oliver Hilditch smiled thoughtfully, and gazed at a salted almond which
he was just balancing between the tips of his fingers. "I think," he said simply, "it is because I have no soul." CHAPTER VI


The three diners lingered for only a short time over their dessert. Afterwards, they passed together into a very delightful library on the
other side of the round, stone-paved hall. Hilditch excused himself for
a moment. "I have some cigars which I keep in my dressing-room," he explained,
"and which I am anxious for you to try. There is an electric stove there
and I can regulate the temperature." He departed, closing the door behind him. Francis came a little further
into the room. His hostess, who had subsided into an easy-chair and was
holding a screen between her face and the fire, motioned him to,
seat himself opposite. He did so without words. He felt curiously and
ridiculously tongue-tied. He fell to studying the woman instead of
attempting the banality of pointless speech. From the smooth gloss of
her burnished hair, to the daintiness of her low, black brocaded shoes,
she represented, so far as her physical and outward self were concerned,
absolute perfection. No ornament was amiss, no line or curve of her
figure other than perfectly graceful. Yet even the fire's glow which
she had seemed to dread brought no flush of colour to her cheeks. Her
appearance of complete lifelessness remained. It was as though some sort
of crust had formed about her being, a condition which her very physical
perfection seemed to render the more incomprehensible. "You are surprised to see me here living with my husband, after what
I told you yesterday afternoon?" she said calmly, breaking at last the
silence which had reigned between them. "I am," he admitted. "It seems unnatural to you, I suppose?" "Entirely." "You still believe all that I told you?" "I must." She looked at the door and raised her head a little, as though either
listening or adjudging the time before her husband would return. Then
she glanced across at him once more. "Hatred," she said, "does not always drive away. Sometimes it attracts. Sometimes the person who hates can scarcely bear the other out of his
sight. That is where hate and love are somewhat alike." The room was warm but Francis was conscious of shivering. She raised
her finger warningly. It seemed typical of the woman, somehow, that the
message could not be conveyed by any glance or gesture. "He is coming," she whispered. Oliver Hilditch reappeared, carrying cigars wrapped in gold foil which
he had brought with him from Cuba, the tobacco of which was a revelation
to his guest. The two men smoked and sipped their coffee and brandy. The
woman sat with half-closed eyes. It was obvious that Hilditch was still
in the mood for speech. "I will tell you, Mr. Ledsam," he said, "why I am so happy to have you
here this evening. In the first place, I desire to tender you once more
my thanks for your very brilliant efforts on my behalf. The very fact
that I am able to offer you hospitality at all is without a doubt due to
these." "I only did what I was paid to do," Francis insisted, a little harshly. "You must remember that these things come in the day's work with us." His host nodded. "Naturally," he murmured. "There was another reason, too, why I was
anxious to meet you, Mr. Ledsam," he continued. "You have gathered
already that I am something of a crank. I have a profound detestation
of all sentimentality and affected morals. It is a relief to me to
come into contact with a man who is free from that bourgeois incubus to
modern enterprise--a conscience." "Is that your estimate of me?" Francis asked. "Why not? You practise your profession in the criminal courts, do you
not?" "That is well-known," was the brief reply. "What measure of conscience can a man have," Oliver Hilditch argued
blandly, "who pleads for the innocent and guilty alike with the same
simulated fervour? Confess, now, Mr. Ledsam--there is no object in being
hypocritical in this matter--have you not often pleaded for the guilty
as though you believed them innocent?" "That has sometimes been my duty," Francis acknowledged. Hilditch laughed scornfully. "It is all part of the great hypocrisy of society," he proclaimed. "You have an extra glass of champagne for dinner at night and are
congratulated by your friends because you have helped some poor devil
to cheat the law, while all the time you know perfectly well, and so
do your high-minded friends, that your whole attitude during those two
hours of eloquence has been a lie. That is what first attracted me to
you, Mr. Ledsam." "I am sorry to hear it," Francis commented coldly. "The ethics of my
profession--"

His host stopped him with a little wave of the hand. "Spare me that," he begged. "While we are on the subject, though, I have
a question to ask you. My lawyer told me, directly after he had briefed
you, that, although it would make no real difference to your pleading,
it would be just as well for me to keep up my bluff of being innocent,
even in private conversation with you. Why was that?" "For the very obvious reason," Francis told him, "that we are not
all such rogues and vagabonds as you seem to think. There is more
satisfaction to me, at any rate, in saving an innocent man's life than a
guilty one's." Hilditch laughed as though amused. "Come," he threatened, "I am going to be ill-natured. You have shown
signs of smugness, a quality which I detest. I am going to rob you of
some part of your self-satisfaction. Of course I killed Jordan. I killed
him in the very chair in which you are now sitting." There was a moment's intense silence. The woman was still fanning
herself lazily. Francis leaned forward in his place. "I do not wish to hear this!" he exclaimed harshly. "Don't be foolish," his host replied, rising to his feet and strolling
across the room. "You know the whole trouble of the prosecution. They
couldn't discover the weapon, or anything like it, with which the deed
was done. Now I'll show you something ingenious." Francis followed the other's movements with fascinated eyes. The woman
scarcely turned her head. Hilditch paused at the further end of the
room, where there were a couple of gun cases, some fishing rods and a
bag, of golf clubs. From the latter he extracted a very ordinary-looking
putter, and with it in his hands strolled back to them. "Do you play golf, Ledsam?" he asked. "What do you think of that?" Francis took the putter into his hand. It was a very ordinary club,
which had apparently seen a good deal of service, so much, indeed, that
the leather wrapping at the top was commencing to unroll. The maker's
name was on the back of the blade, also the name of the professional
from whom it had been purchased. Francis swung the implement
mechanically with his wrists. "There seems to be nothing extraordinary about the club," he pronounced. "It is very much like a cleek I putt with myself." "Yet it contains a secret which would most certainly have hanged me,"
Oliver Hilditch declared pleasantly. "See!" He held the shaft firmly in one hand and bent the blade away from it. In a moment or two it yielded and he commenced to unscrew it. A little
exclamation escaped from Francis' lips. The woman looked on with tired
eyes. "The join in the steel," Hilditch pointed out, "is so fine as to be
undistinguishable by the naked eye. Yet when the blade comes off, like
this, you see that although the weight is absolutely adjusted, the
inside is hollow. The dagger itself is encased in this cotton wool to
avoid any rattling. I put it away in rather a hurry the last time I used
it, and as you see I forgot to clean it." Francis staggered back and gripped at the mantelpiece. His eyes were
filled with horror. Very slowly, and with the air of one engaged upon
some interesting task, Oliver Hilditch had removed the blood-stained
sheath of cotton wool from around the thin blade of a marvellous-looking
stiletto, on which was also a long stain of encrusted blood. "There is a handle," he went on, "which is perhaps the most ingenious
thing of all. You touch a spring here, and behold!" He pressed down two tiny supports which opened upon hinges about four
inches from the top of the handle. There was now a complete hilt. "With this little weapon," he explained, "the point is so sharpened
and the steel so wonderful that it is not necessary to stab. It has the
perfection of a surgical instrument. You have only to lean it against
a certain point in a man's anatomy, lunge ever so little and the whole
thing is done. Come here, Mr. Ledsam, and I will show you the exact
spot." Francis made no movement. His eyes were fixed upon the weapon. "If I had only known!" he muttered. "My dear fellow, if you had," the other protested soothingly, "you know
perfectly well that it would not have made the slightest difference. Perhaps that little break in your voice would not have come quite so
naturally, the little sweep of your arm towards me, the man whom a
moment's thoughtlessness might sweep into Eternity, would have been a
little stiffer, but what matter? You would still have done your best and
you would probably still have succeeded. You don't care about trifling
with Eternity, eh? Very well, I will find the place for you." Hilditch's fingers strayed along his shirt-front until he found a
certain spot. Then he leaned the dagger against it, his forefinger and
second finger pressed against the hilt. His eyes were fixed upon his
guest's. He seemed genuinely interested. Francis, glancing away for a
moment, was suddenly conscious of a new horror. The woman had leaned
a little forward in her easy-chair until she had attained almost a
crouching position. Her eyes seemed to be measuring the distance from
where she sat to that quivering thread of steel. "You see, Ledsam," his host went on, "that point driven now at that
angle would go clean through the vital part of my heart.