Do you
understand that?" "It isn't easy," he admitted. There was a knock at the door. Margaret glanced at the clock. "Surely dinner can't be served already!" she exclaimed. "Come in." Very much to their surprise, it was Sir Timothy himself who entered. He
was in evening dress and wearing several orders, one of which Francis
noted with surprise. "My apologies," he said. "Hedges told me that there were cocktails
here, and as I am on my way to a rather weary dinner, I thought I might
inflict myself upon you for a moment." Margaret rose at once to her feet. "I am a shocking hostess," she declared. "Hedges brought the things in
twenty minutes ago." She took up the silver receptacle, shook it vigorously and filled three
glasses. Sir Timothy accepted his and bowed to them both. "My best wishes," he said. "Really, when one comes to think of it,
however much it may be against my inclinations I scarcely see how I
shall be able to withhold my consent. I believe that you both have at
heart the flair for domesticity. This little picture, and the thought of
your tete-a-tete dinner, almost touches me." "Don't make fun of us, father," Margaret begged. "Tell us where you are
going in all that splendour?" Sir Timothy shrugged his shoulders. "A month or so ago," he explained, "I was chosen to induct a scion of
Royalty into the understanding of fighting as it is indulged in at the
National Sporting Club. This, I suppose, is my reward--an invitation to
something in the nature of a State dinner, which, to tell you the truth,
I had forgotten until my secretary pointed it out to me this afternoon. I have grave fears of being bored or of misbehaving myself. I have, as
Ledsam here knows, a distressing habit of truthfulness, especially
to new acquaintances. However, we must hope for the best. By-the-bye,
Ledsam, in case you should have forgotten, I have spoken to Hedges about
the '99 Cliquot." "Shall we see you here later?" Margaret asked, after Francis had
murmured his thanks. "I shall probably return direct to Hatch End," Sir Timothy replied. "There are various little matters down there which are interesting me
just now preparations for my party. Au revoir! A delicious cocktail, but
I am inclined to resent the Angostura." He sauntered out, after a glance at the clock. They heard his footsteps
as he descended the stairs. "Tell me, what manner of a man is your father?" Francis asked
impulsively. "I am his daughter and I do not know," Margaret answered. "Before he
came, I was going to speak to you of a strange misunderstanding which
has existed between us and which has just been removed. Now I have a
fancy to leave it until later. You will not mind?" "When you choose," Francis assented. "Nothing will make any difference. We are past the days when fathers or even mothers count seriously in
the things that exist between two people like you and me, who have felt
life. Whatever your father may be, whatever he may turn out to be, you
are the woman I love--you are the woman who is going to be my wife." She leaned towards him for a moment. "You have an amazing gift," she whispered, "of saying just the thing one
loves to hear in the way that convinces." Dinner was served to them in the smaller of the two dining-rooms, an
exquisite meal, made more wonderful still by the wine, which Hedges
himself dispensed with jealous care. The presence of servants, with its
restraining influence upon conversation, was not altogether unwelcome
to Francis. He and Margaret had had so little opportunity for general
conversation that to discuss other than personal subjects in this
pleasant, leisurely way had its charm. They spoke of music, of which
she knew far more than he; of foreign travel, where they met on common
ground, for each had only the tourist's knowledge of Europe, and each
was anxious for a more individual acquaintance with it. She had tastes
in books which delighted him, a knowledge of games which promised a
common resource. It was only whilst they were talking that he realised
with a shock how young she was, how few the years that lay between her
serene school-days and the tempestuous years of her married life. Her
school-days in Naples were most redolent of delightful memories. She
broke off once or twice into the language, and he listened with delight
to her soft accent. Finally the time came when dessert was set upon the
table. "I have ordered coffee up in the little sitting-room again," she said, a
little shyly. "Do you mind, or would you rather have it here?" "I much prefer it there," he assured her. They sat before an open window, looking out upon some elm trees in the
boughs of which town sparrows twittered, and with a background of roofs
and chimneys. Margaret's coffee was untasted, even her cigarette lay
unlit by her side. There was a touch of the old horror upon her face. The fingers which he drew into his were as cold as ice. "You must have wondered sometimes," she began, "why I ever married
Oliver Hilditch." "You were very young," he reminded her, with a little shiver, "and very
inexperienced. I suppose he appealed to you in some way or another." "It wasn't that," she replied. "He came to visit, me at Eastbourne,
and he certainly knew all the tricks of making himself attractive and
agreeable. But he never won my heart--he never even seriously took my
fancy. I married him because I believed that by doing so I was obeying
my father's wishes." "Where was your father at the time, then?" Francis asked. "In South America. Oliver Hilditch was nothing more than a discharged
employé of his, discharged for dishonesty. He had to leave South
America; within a week to escape prosecution, and on the way to Europe
he concocted the plot which very nearly ruined my life. He forged a
letter from my father, begging me, if I found it in any way possible, to
listen to Oliver Hilditch's proposals, and hinting guardedly at a very
serious financial crisis which it was in his power to avert. It never
occurred to me or to my chaperon to question his bona fides. He had
lived under the same roof as my father, and knew all the intimate
details of his life. He was very clever and I suppose I was a fool. I
remember thinking I was doing quite a heroic action when I went to the
registrar with him. What it led to you know." There was a moment's throbbing silence. Francis, notwithstanding his
deep pity, was conscious of an overwhelming sensation of relief. She had
never cared for Oliver Hilditch! She had never pretended to! He put the
thought into words. "You never cared for him, then?" "I tried to," she replied simply, "but I found it impossible. Within a
week of our marriage I hated him." Francis leaned back, his eyes half closed. In his ears was the sonorous
roar of Piccadilly, the hooting of motor-cars, close at hand the
rustling of a faint wind in the elm trees. It was a wonderful moment. The nightmare with which he had grappled so fiercely, which he had
overthrown, but whose ghost still sometimes walked by his side, had
lost its chief and most poignant terror. She had been tricked into the
marriage. She had never cared or pretended to care. The primal horror
of that tragedy which he had figured so often to himself, seemed to have
departed with the thought. Its shadow must always remain, but in time
his conscience would acquiesce in the pronouncement of his reason. It
was the hand of justice, not any human hand, which had slain Oliver
Hilditch. "What did your father say when he discovered the truth?" he asked. "He did not know it until he came to England--on the day that Oliver
Hilditch was acquitted. My husband always pretended that he had a
special mail bag going out to South America, so he took away all the
letters I wrote to my father, and he took care that I received none
except one or two which I know now were forgeries. He had friends
in South America himself who helped him--one a typist in my father's
office, of whom I discovered afterwards--but that really doesn't matter. He was a wonderful master of deceit." Francis suddenly took her hands. He had an overwhelming desire to
escape from the miasma of those ugly days, with their train of attendant
thoughts and speculations. "Let us talk about ourselves," he whispered. After that, the evening glided away incoherently, with no sustained
conversation, but with an increasing sense of well-being, of soothed
nerves and happiness, flaming seconds of passion, sign-posts of the
wonderful world which lay before them. They sat in the cool silence
until the lights of the returning taxicabs and motor-cars became more
frequent, until the stars crept into the sky and the yellow arc of
the moon stole up over the tops of the houses. Presently they saw Sir
Timothy's Rolls-Royce glide up to the front door below and Sir Timothy
himself enter the house, followed by another man whose appearance was
somehow familiar. "Your father has changed his mind," Francis observed. "Perhaps he has called for something," she suggested, "or he may want to
change his clothes before he goes down to the country." Presently, however, there was a knock at the door. Hedges made his
diffident appearance. "I beg your pardon, sir," he began, addressing Francis. "Sir Timothy has
been asking if you are still here. He would be very glad if you could
spare him a moment in the library." Francis rose at once to his feet. "I was just leaving," he said. "I will look in at the library and see
Sir Timothy on my way out." CHAPTER XXV


Sir Timothy was standing upon the hearthrug of the very wonderful
apartment which he called his library. By his side, on a black marble
pedestal, stood a small statue by Rodin. Behind him, lit by a shielded
electric light, was a Vandyck, "A Portrait of a Gentleman Unknown," and
Francis, as he hesitated for a moment upon the threshold, was struck
by a sudden quaint likeness between the face of the man in the picture,
with his sunken cheeks, his supercilious smile, his narrowed but
powerful eyes, to the face of Sir Timothy himself. There was something
of the same spirit there--the lawless buccaneer, perhaps the criminal. "You asked for me, Sir Timothy," Francis said. Sir Timothy smiled. "I was fortunate to find that you had not left," he answered. "I want
you to be present at this forthcoming interview. You are to a certain
extent in the game. I thought it might amuse you." Francis for the first time was aware that his host was not alone. The
room, with its odd splashes of light, was full of shadows, and he saw
now that in an easy-chair a little distance away from Sir Timothy, a
girl was seated. Behind her, still standing, with his hat in his hand,
was a man. Francis recognised them both with surprise. "Miss Hyslop!" he exclaimed. She nodded a little defiantly. Sir Timothy smiled. "Ah!" he said. "You
know the young lady, without a doubt. Mr. Shopland, your coadjutor in
various works of philanthropy, you recognise, of course? I do not mind
confessing to you, Ledsam, that I am very much afraid of Mr. Shopland. I am not at all sure that he has not a warrant for my arrest in his
pocket." The detective came a little further into the light. He was attired in
an ill-fitting dinner suit, a soft-fronted shirt of unpleasing design,
a collar of the wrong shape, and a badly arranged tie. He seemed,
nevertheless, very pleased with himself. "I came on here, Mr. Ledsam, at Sir Timothy's desire," he said. "I
should like you to understand," he added, with a covert glance of
warning, "that I have been devoting every effort, during the last few
days, to the discovery of your friend's brother, Mr. Reginald Wilmore." "I am very glad to hear it," Francis replied shortly. "The boy's brother
is one of my greatest friends." "I have come to the conclusion," the detective pronounced, "that the
young man has been abducted, and is being detained at The Walled House
against his will for some illegal purpose." "In other respects," Sir Timothy said, stretching out his hand towards
a cedar-wood box of cigarettes and selecting one, "this man seems quite
sane. I have watched him very closely on the way here, but I could see
no signs of mental aberration. I do not think, at any rate, that he is
dangerous." "Sir Timothy," Shopland explained, with some anger in his tone,
"declines to take me seriously. I can of course apply for a search
warrant, as I shall do, but it occurred to me to be one of those
cases which could be better dealt with, up to a certain point, without
recourse to the extremities of the law." Sir Timothy, who had lit his cigarette, presented a wholly undisturbed
front. "What I cannot quite understand," he said, "is the exact meaning of
that word 'abduction.' Why should I be suspected of forcibly removing
a harmless and worthy young man from his regular avocation, and, as
you term it, abducting him, which I presume means keeping him bound and
gagged and imprisoned? I do not eat young men. I do not even care for
the society of young men. I am not naturally a gregarious person, but I
think I would go so far," he added, with a bow towards Miss Hyslop, "as
to say that I prefer the society of young women. Satisfy my curiosity,
therefore, I beg of you. For what reason do you suppose that I have been
concerned in the disappearance of this Mr. Reginald Wilmore?" Francis opened his lips, but Shopland, with a warning glance,
intervened. "I work sometimes as a private person, sir," he said, "but it is not to
be forgotten that I am an officer of the law. It is not for us to state
motives or even to afford explanations for our behaviour. I have watched
your house at Hatch End, Sir Timothy, and I have come to the conclusion
that unless you are willing to discuss this matter with me in a
different spirit, I am justified in asking the magistrates for a search
warrant." Sir Timothy sighed. "Mr. Ledsam," he said, "I think, after all, that yours is the most
interesting end of this espionage business. It is you who search for
motives, is it not, and pass them on to our more automatic friend, who
does the rest. May I ask, have you supplied the motive in the present
case?" "I have failed to discover any motive at all for Reginald Wilmore's
disappearance," Francis admitted, "nor have I at any time been able to
connect you with it. Mr. Shopland's efforts, however, although he has
not seen well to take me into his entire confidence, have my warmest
approval and sympathy. Although I have accepted your very generous
hospitality, Sir Timothy, I think there has been no misunderstanding
between us on this matter." "Most correct," Sir Timothy murmured. "The trouble seems to be, so
far as I am concerned, that no one will tell me exactly of what I am
suspected? I am to give Mr. Shopland the run of my house, or he will
make his appearance in the magistrate's court and the evening papers
will have placards with marvellous headlines at my expense. How will it
run, Mr. Shopland--

  "'MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCE OF A YOUNG GENTLEMAN. MILLIONAIRE'S HOUSE TO BE SEARCHED.'" "We do not necessarily acquaint the press with our procedure," Shopland
rejoined. "Nevertheless," Sir Timothy continued, "I have known awkward
consequences arise from a search warrant too rashly applied for or
granted. However, we are scarcely being polite. So far, Miss Hyslop has
had very little to say." The young lady was not altogether at her ease. "I have had very little to say," she repeated, "because I did not expect
an audience." Sir Timothy drew a letter from his pocket, opened it and adjusted his
eyeglass. "Here we are," he said. "After leaving my dinner-party tonight, I called
at the club and found this note. Quite an inviting little affair, you
see young lady's writing, faint but very delicate perfume, excellent
stationery, Milan Court--the home of adventures!" "DEAR SIR TIMOTHY BRAST:

  "Although I am not known to you personally, there is a
certain matter concerning which information has come into my possession,
which I should like to discuss with you. Will you call and see me as
soon as possible?" Sincerely yours,
                                 "DAISY HYSLOP." "On receipt of this note," Sir Timothy continued, folding it up, "I
telephoned to the young lady and as I was fortunate enough to find her
at home I asked her to come here. I then took the liberty of introducing
myself to Mr. Shopland, whose interest in my evening has been unvarying,
and whose uninvited company I have been compelled to bear with, and
suggested that, as I was on my way back to Curzon Street, he had better
come in and have a drink and tell me what it was all about. I arranged
that he should find Miss Hyslop here, and for a person of observation,
which I flatter myself to be, it was easy to discover the interesting
fact that Mr. Shopland and Miss Daisy Hyslop were not strangers. "Now tell me, young lady," Sir Timothy went on. "You see, I have placed
myself entirely in your hands. Never mind the presence of these two
gentlemen. Tell me exactly what you wanted to say to me?" "The matter is of no great importance," Miss Hyslop declared, "in any
case I should not discuss it before these two gentlemen." "Don't go for a moment, please," Sir Timothy begged, as she showed signs
of departure. "Listen. I want to make a suggestion to you. There is an
impression abroad that I was interested in the two young men, Victor
Bidlake and Fairfax, and that I knew something of their quarrel. You were an intimate friend of young Bidlake's and presumably in his
confidence. It occurs to me, therefore, that Mr. Shopland might very
well have visited you in search of information, linking me up with that
unfortunate affair. Hence your little note to me." Miss Hyslop rose to her feet. She had the appearance of being very angry
indeed. "Do you mean to insinuate--" she began. "Madam, I insinuate nothing," Sir Timothy interrupted sternly. "I only
desire to suggest this. You are a young lady whose manner of living, I
gather, is to a certain extent precarious. It must have seemed to you a
likelier source of profit to withhold any information you might have to
give at the solicitation of a rich man, than to give it free gratis and
for nothing to a detective. Now am I right?" Miss Hyslop turned towards the door. She had the air of a person who had
been entirely misunderstood. "I wrote you out of kindness, Sir Timothy," she said in an aggrieved
manner. "I shall have nothing more to say on the matter--to you, at any
rate." Sir Timothy sighed. "You see," he said, turning to the others, "I have lost my chance of
conciliating a witness. My cheque-book remains locked up and she has
gone over to your side." She turned around suddenly. "You know that you made Bobby Fairfax kill Victor!" she almost shouted. Sir Timothy smiled in triumph. "My dear young lady," he begged, "let us now be friends again. I desired
to know your trump card. For that reason I fear that I have been a
little brutal. Now please don't hurry away. You have shot your bolt. Already Mr. Shopland is turning the thing over in his mind. Was I
lurking outside that night, Mr. Shopland, to guide that young man's
flabby arm? He scarcely seemed man enough for a murderer, did he, when
he sat quaking on that stool in Soto's Bar while Mr. Ledsam tortured
him? I beg you again not to hurry, Miss Hyslop. At any rate wait while
my servants fetch you a taxi. It was clouding over when I came in. We
may even have a thunderstorm." "I want to get out of this house," Daisy Hyslop declared. "I think you
are all horrible. Mr. Ledsam did behave like a gentleman when he came to
see me, and Mr. Shopland asked questions civilly. But you--" she added,
turning round to Sir Timothy. "Hush, my dear," he interrupted, holding out his hand. "Don't abuse me. I am not angry with you--not in the least--and I am going to prove it. I
shall oppose any search warrant which you might apply for, Mr. Shopland,
and I think I can oppose it with success. But I invite you two, Miss
Hyslop and Mr. Ledsam, to my party on Thursday night. Once under my roof
you shall have carte blanche. You can wander where you please, knock
the walls for secret hiding-places, stamp upon the floor for oubliettes. Upstairs or down, the cellars and the lofts, the grounds and the park,
the whole of my domain is for you from midnight on Thursday until four
o'clock. What do you say, Mr. Shopland? Does my offer satisfy you?" The detective hesitated. "I should prefer an invitation for myself," he declared bluntly. Sir Timothy shook his head. "Alas, my dear Mr. Shopland," he regretted, "that is impossible! If I
had only myself to consider I would not hesitate. Personally I like
you. You amuse me more than any one I have met for a long time. But
unfortunately I have my guests to consider! You must be satisfied with
Mr. Ledsam's report." Shopland stroked his stubbly moustache. It was obvious that he was not
in the least disconcerted. "There are three days between now and then," he reflected. "During those three days, of course," Sir Timothy said drily, "I shall
do my best to obliterate all traces of my various crimes. Still, you
are a clever detective, and you can give Mr. Ledsam a few hints. Take my
advice. You won't get that search warrant, and if you apply for it none
of you will be at my party." "I accept," Shopland decided. Sir Timothy crossed the room, unlocked the drawer of a magnificent
writing-table, and from a little packet drew out two cards of
invitation. They were of small size but thick, and the colour was a
brilliant scarlet. On one he wrote the name of Francis, the other he
filled in for Miss Hyslop. "Miss Daisy Hyslop," he said, "shall we drink a glass of wine together
on Thursday evening, and will you decide that although, perhaps, I am
not a very satisfactory correspondent, I can at least be an amiable
host?" The girl's eyes glistened. She knew very well that the possession of
that card meant that for the next few days she would be the envy of
every one of her acquaintances. "Thank you, Sir Timothy," she replied eagerly. "You have quite
misunderstood me but I should like to come to your party." Sir Timothy handed over the cards. He rang for a servant and bowed the
others out. Francis he detained for a moment. "Our little duel, my friend, marches," he said. "After Thursday night we
will speak again of this matter concerning Margaret. You will know then
what you have to face." Margaret herself opened the door and looked in. "What have those people been doing here?" she asked. "What is
happening?" Her father unlocked his drawer once more and drew out another of the red
cards.