The little room rose up before his memory--the
woman's hopeless, hating eyes, the quivering thread of steel, the dead
man's mocking words. He seemed at that moment to see into the recesses
of her mind. Was it remorse that troubled her, he wondered? Did she lack
strength to realise that in that half-hour at the inquest he had placed
on record for ever his judgment of her deed? Even to think of it now was
morbid. Although he would never have confessed it even to himself, there
was growing daily in his mind some idea of reward. She had never thanked
him--he hoped that she never would--but he had surely a right to claim
some measure of her thoughts, some light place in her life. "Please look at me," he begged, a little abruptly. She turned her head in some surprise. Francis was almost handsome in the
clear Spring sunlight, his face alight with animation, his deep-set
grey eyes full of amused yet anxious solicitude. Even as she appreciated
these things and became dimly conscious of his eager interest, her
perturbation seemed to grow. "Well?" she ventured. "Do I look like a person who knew what he was talking about?" he asked. "On the whole, I should say that you did," she admitted. "Very well, then," he went on cheerfully, "believe me when I say that
the shadow which depresses you all the time now will pass. I say this
confidently," he added, his voice softening, "because I hope to be
allowed to help. Haven't you guessed that I am very glad indeed to see
you again?" She came to a sudden standstill. They had just passed through Lansdowne
Passage and were in the quiet end of Curzon Street. "But you must not talk to me like that!" she expostulated. "Why not?" he demanded. "We have met under strange and untoward
circumstances, but are you so very different from other women?" For a single moment she seemed infinitely more human, startled, a
little nervous, exquisitely sympathetic to an amazing and unexpected
impression. She seemed to look with glad but terrified eyes towards the
vision of possible things--and then to realise that it was but a trick
of the fancy and to come shivering back to the world of actualities. "I am very different," she said quietly. "I have lived my life. What I
lack in years has been made up to me in horror. I have no desire now
but to get rid of this aftermath of years as smoothly and quickly as
possible. I do not wish any man, Mr. Ledsam, to talk to me as you are
doing." "You will not accept my friendship?" "It is impossible," she replied. "May I be allowed to call upon you?" he went on, doggedly. "I do not receive visitors," she answered. They were walking slowly up Curzon Street now. She had given him every
opportunity to leave her, opportunities to which he was persistently
blind. Her obstinacy had been a shock to him. "I am sorry," he said, "but I cannot accept my dismissal like this. I
shall appeal to your father. However much he may dislike me, he has at
least common-sense." She looked at him with a touch of the old horror in her
coldly-questioning eyes. "In your way you have been kind to me," she admitted. "Let me in return
give you a word of advice. Let me beg you to have nothing whatever to
do with my father, in friendship or in enmity. Either might be equally
disastrous. Either, in the long run, is likely to cost you dear." "If that is your opinion of your father, why do you live with him?" he
asked. She had become entirely callous again. Her smile, with its mocking
quality, reminded him for a moment of the man whom they were discussing. "Because I am a luxury and comfort-loving parasite," she answered
deliberately, "because my father gladly pays my accounts at Lucille and
Worth and Reville, because I have never learnt to do without things. And please remember this. My father, so far as I am concerned, has no
faults. He is a generous and courteous companion. Nevertheless, number
70 b, Curzon Street is no place for people who desire to lead normal
lives." And with that she was gone. Her gesture of dismissal was so complete
and final that he had no courage for further argument. He had lost her
almost as soon as he had found her. CHAPTER XIII


Four men were discussing the verdict at the adjourned inquest upon
Victor Bidlake, at Soto's American Bar about a fortnight later. They
were Robert Fairfax, a young actor in musical comedy, Peter Jacks, a
cinema producer, Gerald Morse, a dress designer, and Sidney Voss, a
musical composer and librettist, all habitues of the place and members
of the little circle towards which the dead man had seemed, during the
last few weeks of his life, to have become attracted. At a table a short
distance away, Francis Ledsam was seated with a cocktail and a dish of
almonds before him. He seemed to be studying an evening paper and to be
taking but the scantiest notice of the conversation at the bar. "It just shows," Peter Jacks declared, "that crime is the easiest
game in the world. Given a reasonable amount of intelligence, and a
murderer's business is about as simple as a sandwich-man's." "The police," Gerald Morse, a pale-faced, anaemic-looking youth,
declared, "rely upon two things, circumstantial evidence and motive. In
the present case there is no circumstantial evidence, and as to motive,
poor old Victor was too big a fool to have an enemy in the world." Sidney Voss, who was up for the Sheridan Club and had once been there,
glanced respectfully across at Francis. "You ought to know something about crime and criminals, Mr. Ledsam," he
said. "Have you any theory about the affair?" Francis set down the glass from which he had been drinking, and, folding
up the evening paper, laid it by the side of him. "As a matter of fact," he answered calmly, "I have." The few words, simply spoken, yet in their way charged with menace,
thrilled through the little room. Fairfax swung round upon his stool, a
tall, aggressive-looking youth whose good-looks were half eaten up with
dissipation. His eyes were unnaturally bright, the cloudy remains in his
glass indicated absinthe. "Listen, you fellows!" he exclaimed. "Mr. Francis Ledsam, the great
criminal barrister, is going to solve the mystery of poor old Victor's
death for us!" The three other young men all turned around from the bar. Their eyes and
whole attention seemed rivetted upon Francis. No one seemed to notice
the newcomer who passed quietly to a chair in the background, although
he was a person of some note and interest to all of them. Imperturbable
and immaculate as ever, Sir Timothy Brast smiled amiably upon the little
gathering, summoned a waiter and ordered a Dry Martini. "I can scarcely promise to do that," Francis said slowly, his eyes
resting for a second or two upon each of the four faces. "Exact
solutions are a little out of my line. I think I can promise to give you
a shock, though, if you're strong enough to stand it." There was another of those curiously charged silences. The bartender
paused with the cocktail shaker still in his hand. Voss began to beat
nervously upon the counter with his knuckles. "We can stand anything but suspense," he declared. "Get on with your
shock-giving." "I believe that the person responsible for the death of Victor Bidlake
is in this room at the present moment," Francis declared. Again the silence, curious, tense and dramatic. Little Jimmy, the
bartender, who had leaned forward to listen, stood with his mouth
slightly open and the cocktail-shaker which was in his hand leaked drops
upon the counter. The first conscious impulse of everybody seemed to be
to glance suspiciously around the room. The four young men at the bar,
Jimmy and one waiter, Francis and Sir Timothy Brast, were its only
occupants. "I say, you know, that's a bit thick, isn't it?" Sidney Voss stammered
at last. "I wasn't in the place at all, I was in Manchester, but it's a
bit rough on these other chaps, Victor's pals." "I was dining at the Cafe Royal," Jacks declared, loudly. Morse drew a little breath. "Every one knows that I was at Brighton," he muttered. "I went home directly the bar here closed," Jimmy said, in a still dazed
tone. "I heard nothing about it till the next morning." "Alibis by the bushel," Fairfax laughed harshly. "As for me, I was doing
my show--every one knows that. I was never in the place at all." "The murder was not committed in the place," Francis commented calmly. Fairfax slid off his stool. A spot of colour blazed in his pale cheeks,
the glass which he was holding snapped in his fingers. He seemed
suddenly possessed. "I say, what the hell are you getting at?" he cried. "Are you accusing
me--or any of us Victor's pals?" "I accuse no one," Francis replied, unperturbed. "You invited a
statement from me and I made it." Sir Timothy Brast rose from his place and made his way to the end of the
counter, next to Fairfax and nearest Francis. He addressed the former. There was an inscrutable smile upon his lips, his manner was reassuring. "Young gentleman," he begged, "pray do not disturb yourself. I will
answer for it that neither you nor any of your friends are the objects
of Mr. Leadsam's suspicion. Without a doubt, it is I to whom his
somewhat bold statement refers." They all stared at him, immersed in another crisis, bereft of speech. He
tapped a cigarette upon the counter and lit it. Fairfax, whose glass
had just been refilled by the bartender, was still ghastly pale, shaking
with nervousness and breathing hoarsely. Francis, tense and alert in his
chair, watched the speaker but said nothing. "You see," Sir Timothy continued, addressing himself to the four young
men at the bar, "I happen to have two special aversions in life. One is
sweet champagne and the other amateur detectives--their stories, their
methods and everything about them. I chanced to sit upstairs in the
restaurant, within hearing of Mr. Ledsam and his friend Mr. Wilmore,
the novelist, the other night, and I heard Mr. Ledsam, very much to my
chagrin, announce his intention of abandoning a career in which he
has, if he will allow me to say so,"--with a courteous bow to
Francis--"attained considerable distinction, to indulge in the
moth-eaten, flamboyant and melodramatic antics of the lesser Sherlock
Holmes. I fear that I could not resist the opportunity of--I think you
young men call it--pulling his leg." Every one was listening intently, including Shopland, who had just
drifted into the room and subsided into a chair near Francis. "I moved my place, therefore," Sir Timothy continued, "and I whispered
in Mr. Ledsam's ear some rodomontade to the effect that if he were
planning to be the giant crime-detector of the world, I was by ambition
the arch-criminal--or words to that effect. And to give emphasis to my
words, I wound up by prophesying a crime in the immediate vicinity of
the place within a few hours." "A somewhat significant prophecy, under the circumstances," Francis
remarked, reaching out for a dish of salted almonds and drawing them
towards him. Sir Timothy shrugged his shoulders deprecatingly. "I will confess," he admitted, "that I had not in my mind an affair of
such dimensions. My harmless remark, however, has produced cataclysmic
effects. The conversation to which I refer took place on the night of
young Bidlake's murder, and Mr. Ledsam, with my somewhat, I confess,
bombastic words in his memory, has pitched upon me as the bloodthirsty
murderer." "Hold on for a moment, sir," Peter Jacks begged, wiping the perspiration
from his forehead. "We've got to have another drink quick. Poor old
Bobby here looks knocked all of a heap, and I'm kind of jumpy myself. You'll join us, sir?" "I thank you," was the courteous reply. "I do not as a rule indulge to
the extent of more than one cocktail, but I will recognise the present
as an exceptional occasion. To continue, then," he went on, after the
glasses had been filled, "I have during the last few weeks experienced
the ceaseless and lynx-eyed watch of Mr. Ledsam and presumably his
myrmidons. I do not know whether you are all acquainted with my name,
but in case you are not, let me introduce myself. I am Sir Timothy
Brast, Chairman, as I dare say you know, of the United Transvaal Gold
Mines, Chairman, also, of two of the principal hospitals in London, Vice
President of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, a
patron of sport in many forms, a traveller in many countries, and a
recipient of the honour of knighthood from His Majesty, in recognition
of my services for various philanthropic works. These facts, however,
have availed me nothing now that the bungling amateur investigator into
crime has pointed the finger of suspicion towards me. My servants and
neighbours have alike been plagued to death with cunning questions as to
my life and habits. I have been watched in the streets and watched in
my harmless amusements. My simple life has been peered into from
every perspective and direction. In short, I am suspect. Mr. Ledsam's
terrifying statement a few minutes ago was directed towards me and me
only." There were murmurs of sympathy from the four young men, who each in his
own fashion appeared to derive consolation from Sir Timothy's frank and
somewhat caustic statement. Francis, who had listened unmoved to this
flow of words, glanced towards the door behind which dark figures seemed
to be looming. "That is all you have to say, Sir Timothy?" he asked politely. "For the present, yes," was the guarded reply. "I trust that I have
succeeded in setting these young gentlemen's minds at ease." "There is one of them," Francis said gravely, "whose mind not even your
soothing words could lighten." Shopland had risen unobtrusively to his feet. He laid his hand suddenly
on Fairfax's shoulder and whispered in his ear. Fairfax, after his first
start, seemed cool enough. He stretched out his hand towards the glass
which as yet he had not touched; covered it with his fingers for a
moment and drained its contents. The gently sarcastic smile left Sir
Timothy's lips. His eyebrows met in a quick frown, his eyes glittered. "What is the meaning of this?" he demanded sharply. A policeman in plain clothes had advanced from the door. The manager
hovered in the background. Shopland saw that all was well. "It means," he announced, "that I have just arrested Mr. Robert Fairfax
here on a charge of wilful murder. There is a way out through the
kitchens, I believe. Take his other arm, Holmes. Now, gentlemen, if you
please." There were a few bewildered exclamations--then a dramatic hush. Fairfax
had fallen forward on his stool. He seemed to have relapsed into a
comatose state. Every scrap of colour was drained from his sallow
cheeks, his eyes were covered with a film and he was breathing heavily. The detective snatched up the glass from which the young man had been
drinking, and smelt it. "I saw him drop a tablet in just now," Jimmy faltered. "I thought it was
one of the digestion pills he uses sometimes." Shopland and the policeman placed their hands underneath the armpits of
the unconscious man. "He's done, sir," the former whispered to Francis. "We'll try and get
him to the station if we can." CHAPTER XIV


The greatest tragedies in the world, provided they happen to other
people, have singularly little effect upon the externals of our own
lives. There was certainly not a soul in Soto's that night who did
not know that Bobby Fairfax had been arrested in the bar below for the
murder of Victor Bidlake, had taken poison and died on the way to the
police station. Yet the same number of dinners were ordered and eaten,
the same quantity of wine drunk. The management considered that they had
shown marvellous delicacy of feeling by restraining the orchestra
from their usual musical gymnastics until after the service of dinner. Conversation, in consequence, buzzed louder than ever. One speculation
in particular absorbed the attention of every single person in the
room--why had Bobby Fairfax, at the zenith of a very successful career,
risked the gallows and actually accepted death for the sake of killing
Victor Bidlake, a young man with whom, so far as anybody knew, he had
no cause of quarrel whatever? There were many theories, many people who
knew the real facts and whispered them into a neighbour's ear, only to
have them contradicted a few moments later. Yet, curiously enough, the
two men who knew most about it were the two most silent men in the room,
for each was dining alone. Francis, who had remained only in the hope
that something of the sort might happen, was conscious of a queer sense
of excitement when, with the service of coffee, Sir Timothy, glass in
hand, moved up from a table lower down and with a word of apology took
the vacant place by his side. It was what he had desired, and yet he
felt a thrill almost of fear at Sir Timothy's murmured words. He felt
that he was in the company of one who, if not an enemy, at any rate had
no friendly feeling towards him. "My congratulations, Mr. Ledsam," Sir Timothy said quietly. "You appear
to have started your career with a success." "Only a partial one," Francis acknowledged, "and as a matter of fact I
deny that I have started in any new career. It was easy enough to make
use of a fluke and direct the intelligence of others towards the right
person, but when the real significance of the thing still eludes you,
one can scarcely claim a triumph." Sir Timothy gently knocked the ash from the very fine cigar which he was
smoking. "Still, your groundwork was good," he observed. Francis shrugged his shoulders. "That," he admitted, "was due to chance." "Shall we exchange notes?" Sir Timothy suggested gently. "It might be
interesting." "As you will," Francis assented. "There is no particular secret in the
way I stumbled upon the truth. I was dining here that night, as you
know, with Andrew Wilmore, and while he was ordering the dinner and
talking to some friends, I went down to the American Bar to have a
cocktail. Miss Daisy Hyslop and Fairfax were seated there alone and
talking confidentially. Fairfax was insisting that Miss Hyslop should do
something which puzzled her. She consented reluctantly, and Fairfax then
hurried off to the theatre. Later on, Miss Hyslop and the unfortunate
young man occupied a table close to ours, and I happened to notice that
she made a point of leaving the restaurant at a particular time. While
they were waiting in the vestibule she grew very impatient. I was
standing behind them and I saw her glance at the clock just before she
insisted upon her companion's going out himself to look for a taxicab. Ergo, one enquires at Fairfax's theatre. For that exact three-quarters
of an hour he is off the stage. At that point my interest in the matter
ceases. Scotland Yard was quite capable of the rest." "Disappointing," Sir Timothy murmured. "I thought at first that you were
over-modest. I find that I was mistaken. It was chance alone which set
you on the right track." "Well, there is my story, at any rate," Francis declared. "With how much
of your knowledge of the affair are you going to indulge me?" Sir Timothy slowly revolved his brandy glass. "Well," he said, "I will tell you this. The two young men concerned,
Bidlake and Fairfax, were both guests of mine recently at my country
house. They had discovered for one another a very fierce and reasonable
antipathy. With that recurrence to primitivism with which I have always
been a hearty sympathiser, they agreed, instead of going round their
little world making sneering remarks about each other, to fight it out." "At your suggestion, I presume?" Francis interposed. "Precisely," Sir Timothy assented. "I recommended that course, and I
offered them facilities for bringing the matter to a crisis. The fight,
indeed, was to have come off the day after the unfortunate episode which
anticipated it." "Do you mean to tell me that you knew--" Francis began. Sir Timothy checked him quietly but effectively. "I knew nothing," he said, "except this. They were neither of them young
men of much stomach, and I knew that the one who was the greater coward
would probably try to anticipate the matter by attacking the other first
if he could. I knew that Fairfax was the greater coward--not that there
was much to choose between them--and I also knew that he was the injured
person. That is really all there is about it. My somewhat theatrical
statement to you was based upon probability, and not upon any certain
foreknowledge. As you see, it came off." "And the cause of their quarrel?" Francis asked. "There might have been a hundred reasons," Sir Timothy observed. "As a
matter of fact, it was the eternal one. There is no need to mention a
woman's name, so we will let it go at that." There was a moment's silence--a strange, unforgettable moment for
Francis Ledsam, who seemed by some curious trick of the imagination to
have been carried away into an impossible and grotesque world. The
hum of eager conversation, the popping of corks, the little trills
of feminine laughter, all blended into one sensual and not unmusical
chorus, seemed to fade from his ears. He fancied himself in some
subterranean place of vast dimensions, through the grim galleries of
which men and women with evil faces crept like animals. And towering
above them, unreal in size, his scornful face an epitome of sin, the
knout which he wielded symbolical and ghastly, driving his motley flock
with the leer of the evil shepherd, was the man from whom he had already
learnt to recoil with horror. The picture came and went in a flash. Francis found himself accepting a courteously offered cigar from his
companion. "You see, the story is very much like many others," Sir Timothy
murmured, as he lit a fresh Cigar himself and leaned back with the
obvious enjoyment of the cultivated smoker. "In every country of the
world, the animal world as well as the human world, the male resents his
female being taken from him. Directly he ceases to resent it, he becomes
degenerate. Surely you must agree with me, Mr. Leddam?" "It comes to this, then," Francis pronounced deliberately, "that you
stage-managed the whole affair." Sir Timothy smiled. "It is my belief, Mr. Ledsam," he said, "that you grow more and more
intelligent every hour." Sir Timothy glanced presently at his thin gold watch and put it back in
his pocket regretfully. "Alas!" he sighed, "I fear that I must tear myself away. I particularly
want to hear the last act of 'Louise.' The new Frenchwoman sings, and my
daughter is alone. You will excuse me." Francis nodded silently. His companion's careless words had brought a
sudden dazzling vision into his mind. Sir Timothy scrawled his name at
the foot of his bill. "It is one of my axioms in life, Mr. Ledsam," he continued, "that there
is more pleasure to be derived from the society of one's enemies than
one's friends. If I thought you sufficiently educated in the outside
ways of the world to appreciate this, I would ask if you cared to
accompany me?" Francis did not hesitate for a moment. "Sir Timothy," he said, "I have the greatest detestation for you, and I
am firmly convinced that you represent all the things in life abhorrent
to me. On the other hand, I should very much like to hear the last act
of 'Louise,' and it would give me the greatest pleasure to meet your
daughter. So long as there is no misunderstanding." Sir Timothy laughed. "Come," he said, "we will get our hats. I am becoming more and more
grateful to you, Mr. Ledsam. You are supplying something in my life
which I have lacked. You appeal alike to my sense of humour and my
imagination. We will visit the opera together." CHAPTER XV


The two men left Soto's together, very much in the fashion of two
ordinary acquaintances sallying out to spend the evening together. Sir
Timothy's Rolls-Royce limousine was in attendance, and in a few minutes
they were threading the purlieus of Covent Garden. It was here that an
incident occurred which afforded Francis considerable food for thought
during the next few days. It was a Friday night, and one or two waggons laden with vegetable
produce were already threading their way through the difficult
thoroughfares. Suddenly Sir Timothy, who was looking out of the
window, pressed the button of the car, which was at once brought to a
standstill. Before the footman could reach the door Sir Timothy was out
in the street.