If so, it
was but a passing weakness, for a moment later the half good-natured,
half cynical smile was back again upon the man's lips. "If so, I am at least a buffoon of parts," was the prompt rejoinder. "I
will, if you choose, prove myself." There was a moment's silence. Wilmore was leaning forward in his place,
studying the newcomer earnestly. An impatient invective was somehow
stifled upon Francis' lips. "Within a few yards of this place, sometime before the closing hour
to-night," the intruder continued, earnestly yet with a curious absence
of any human quality in his hard tone, "there will be a disturbance,
and probably what you would call a crime will be committed. Will you use
your vaunted gifts to hunt down the desperate criminal, and, in your own
picturesque phraseology, set your heel upon his neck? Success may bring
you fame, and the trail may lead--well, who knows where?" Afterwards, both Francis and Andrew Wilmore marvelled at themselves,
unable at any time to find any reasonable explanation of their conduct,
for they answered this man neither with ridicule, rudeness nor civility. They simply stared at him, impressed with the convincing arrogance
of his challenge and unable to find words of reply. They received
his mocking farewell without any form of reciprocation or sign of
resentment. They watched him leave the room, a dignified, distinguished
figure, sped on his way with marks of the deepest respect by waiters,
maitres d'hotels and even the manager himself. They behaved, indeed, as
they both admitted afterwards, like a couple of moonstruck idiots. When
he had finally disappeared, however, they looked at one another and the
spell was broken. "Well, I'm damned!" Francis exclaimed. "Soto, come here at once." The manager hastened smilingly to their table. "Soto," Francis invoked, "tell us quickly--tell us the name of the
gentleman who has just gone out, and who he is?" Soto was amazed. "You don't know Sir Timothy Brast, sir?" he exclaimed. "Why, he is
supposed to be one of the richest men in the world! He spends money like
water. They say that when he is in England, his place down the river
alone costs a thousand pounds a week. When he gives a party here, we can
find nothing good enough. He is our most generous client." "Sir Timothy Brast," Wilmore repeated. "Yes, I have heard of him." "Why, everybody knows Sir Timothy," Soto went on eloquently. "He is
the greatest living patron of boxing. He found the money for the last
international fight." "Does he often come in alone like this?" Francis asked curiously. "Either alone," Soto replied, "or with a very large party. He entertains
magnificently." "I've seen his name in the paper in connection with something or other,
during the last few weeks," Wilmore remarked reflectively. "Probably about two months ago, sir," Soto suggested. "He gave a
donation of ten thousand pounds to the Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals, and they made him a Vice President.... In one
moment, sir." The manager hurried away to receive a newly-arrived guest. Francis and
his friend exchanged a wondering glance. "Father of Oliver Hilditch's wife," Wilmore observed, "the most
munificent patron of boxing in the world, Vice President of the
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and self-confessed
arch-criminal! He pulled our legs pretty well!" "I suppose so," Francis assented absently. Wilmore glanced at his watch. "What about moving on somewhere?" he suggested. "We might go into the
Alhambra for half-an-hour, if you like. The last act of the show is the
best." Francis shook his head. "We've got to see this thing out," he replied. "Have you forgotten that
our friend promised us a sensation before we left?" Wilmore began to laugh a little derisively. Then, suddenly aware of
some lack of sympathy between himself and his friend, he broke off and
glanced curiously at the latter. "You're not taking him seriously, are you?" he enquired. Francis nodded. "Certainly I am," he confessed. "You don't believe that he was getting at us?" "Not for a moment." "You believe that something is going to happen here in this place, or
quite close?" "I am convinced of it," was the calm reply. Wilmore was silent. For a moment he was troubled with his old fears as
to his friend's condition. A glance, however, at Francis' set face and
equable, watchful air, reassured him. "We must see the thing through, of course, then," he assented. "Let us
see if we can spot the actors in the coming drama." CHAPTER IX


It happened that the two men, waiting in the vestibule of the restaurant
for Francis' car to crawl up to the entrance through the fog which
had unexpectedly rolled up, heard the slight altercation which was
afterwards referred to as preceding the tragedy. The two young people
concerned were standing only a few feet away, the girl pretty, a little
peevish, an ordinary type; her companion, whose boyish features were
marred with dissipation, a very passable example of the young man about
town going a little beyond his tether. "It's no good standing here, Victor!" the girl exclaimed, frowning. "The
commissionaire's been gone ages already, and there are two others before
us for taxis." "We can't walk," her escort replied gloomily. "It's a foul night. Nothing to do but wait, what? Let's go back and have another drink." The girl stamped her satin-shod foot impatiently. "Don't be silly," she expostulated. "You know I promised Clara we'd be
there early." "All very well," the young man grumbled, "but what can we do? We shall
have to wait our turn." "Why can't you slip out and look for a taxi yourself?" she suggested. "Do, Victor," she added, squeezing his arm. "You're so clever at picking
them up." He made a little grimace, but lit a cigarette and turned up his coat
collar. "I'll do my best," he promised. "Don't go on without me." "Try up towards Charing Cross Road, not the other way," she advised
earnestly. "Right-oh!" he replied, which illuminative form of assent, a word spoken
as he plunged unwillingly into the thick obscurity on the other side of
the revolving doors, was probably the last he ever uttered on earth. Left alone, the girl began to shiver, as though suddenly cold. She
turned around and glanced hurriedly back into the restaurant. At that
moment she met the steady, questioning scrutiny of Francis' eyes. She
stood as though transfixed. Then came the sound which every one talked
of for months afterwards, the sound which no one who heard it ever
forgot--the death cry of Victor Bidlake, followed a second afterwards by
a muffled report. A strain of frenzied surprise seemed mingled with the
horror. Afterwards, silence. There was the sound of some commotion outside, the sound of hurried
footsteps and agitated voices. Then a terrible little procession
appeared. Something--it seemed to be a shapeless heap of clothes--was
carried in and laid upon the floor, in the little space between the
revolving doors and the inner entrance. Two blue-liveried attendants
kept back the horrified but curious crowd. Francis, vaguely recognised
as being somehow or other connected with the law, was one of the
few people allowed to remain whilst a doctor, fetched out from the
dancing-room, kneeled over the prostrate form. He felt that he knew
beforehand the horrible verdict which the latter whispered in his ear
after his brief examination. "Quite dead! A ghastly business!" Francis gazed at the hole in the shirt-front, disfigured also by a
scorching stain. "A bullet?" he asked. The doctor nodded. "Fired within a foot of the poor fellow's heart," he whispered. "The
murderer wasn't taking any chances, whoever he was." "Have the police been sent for?" The head-porter stepped forward. "There was a policeman within a few yards of the spot, sir," he replied. "He's gone down to keep every one away from the place where we found the
body. We've telephoned to Scotland Yard for an inspector." The doctor rose to his feet. "Nothing more can be done," he pronounced. "Keep the people out of here
whilst I go and fetch my hat and coat. Afterwards, I'll take the body to
the mortuary when the ambulance arrives." An attendant pushed his way through the crowd of people on the inner
side of the door. "Miss Daisy Hyslop, young lady who was with Mr. Bidlake, has just
fainted in the ladies' room, sir," he announced. "Could you come?" "I'll be there immediately," the doctor promised. The rest of the proceedings followed a normal course. The police
arrived, took various notes, the ambulance followed a little later, the
body was removed, and the little crowd of guests, still infected with a
sort of awed excitement, were allowed to take their leave. Francis and
Wilmore drove almost in silence to the former's rooms in Clarges Street. "Come up and have a drink, Andrew," Francis invited. "I need it," was the half-choked response. Francis led the way in silence up the two flights of stairs into his
sitting-room, mixed whiskies and sodas from the decanter and syphon
which stood upon the sideboard, and motioned his friend to an
easy-chair. Then he gave form to the thought which had been haunting
them both. "What about our friend Sir Timothy Brast?" he enquired. "Do you believe
now that he was pulling our legs?" Wilmore dabbed his forehead with his handkerchief. It was a chilly
evening, but there were drops of perspiration still standing there. "Francis," he confessed, "it's horrible! I don't think realism like this
attracts me. It's horrible! What are we going to do?" "Nothing for the present," was the brief reply. "If we were to tell our
story, we should only be laughed at. What there is to be done falls to
my lot." "Had the police anything to say about it?" Wilmore asked. "Only a few words," Francis replied. "Shopland has it in hand. A good
man but unimaginative. I've come across him in one or two cases lately. You'll find a little bit like this in the papers to-morrow: 'The murder
is believed to have been committed by one of the gang of desperadoes who
have infested the west-end during the last few months.' You remember the
assault in the Albany Court Yard, and the sandbagging in Shepherd Market
only last week?" "That seems to let Sir Timothy out," Wilmore remarked. "There are many motives for crime besides robbery," Francis declared. "Don't be afraid, Andrew, that I am going to turn amateur detective and
make the unravelment of this case all the more difficult for Scotland
Yard. If I interfere, it will be on a certainty. Andrew, don't think I'm
mad but I've taken up the challenge our great philanthropist flung at
me to-night. I've very little interest in who killed this boy Victor
Bidlake, or why, but I'm convinced of one thing--Brast knew about it,
and if he is posing as a patron of crime on a great scale, sooner or
later I shall get him. He may think himself safe, and he may have the
courage of Beelzebub--he seems rather that type--but if my presentiment
about him--comes true, his number's up. I can almost divine the meaning
of his breaking in upon our conversation to-night. He needs an enemy--he
is thirsting for danger. He has found it!" Wilmore filled his pipe thoughtfully. At the first whiff of tobacco he
began to feel more normal. "After all, Francis," he said, "aren't we a little overstrung to-night? Sir Timothy Brast is no adventurer. He is a prince in the city, a
persona grata wherever he chooses to go. He isn't a hanger-on in
Society. He isn't even dependent upon Bohemia for his entertainment. You can't seriously imagine that a man with his possessions is likely
to risk his life and liberty in becoming the inspiration of a band of
cutthroats?" Francis smiled. He, too, had lit his pipe and had thrown himself into
his favourite chair. He smiled confidently across at his friend. "A millionaire with brains," he argued, "is just the one person in the
world likely to weary of all ordinary forms of diversion. I begin to
remember things about him already. Haven't you heard about his wonderful
parties down at The Walled House?" Wilmore struck the table by his side with his clenched fist. "By George, that's it!" he exclaimed. "Who hasn't!" "I remember Baker talking about one last year," Francis continued,
"never any details, but all kinds of mysterious hints--a sort of mixture
between a Roman orgy and a chapter from the 'Arabian Nights'--singers
from Petrograd, dancers from Africa and fighting men from Chicago." "The fellow's magnificent, at any rate," Wilmore remarked. His host smoked furiously for a moment. "That's the worst of these multi-millionaires," he declared. "They think
they can rule the world, traffic in human souls, buy morals, mock at the
law. We shall see!" "Do you know the thing that I found most interesting about him?" Wilmore
asked. "His black opals," the other suggested. "You're by the way of being a
collector, aren't you?" Wilmore shook his head. "The fact that he is the father of Oliver Hilditch's widow." Francis sat quite still for a moment. There was a complete change in his
expression. He looked like a man who has received a shock. "I forgot that," he muttered. CHAPTER X


Francis met Shopland one morning about a week later, on his way from
Clarges Street to his chambers in the Temple. The detective raised his
hat and would have passed on, but Francis accosted him. "Any progress, Mr. Shopland?" he enquired. The detective fingered his small, sandy moustache. He was an
insignificant-looking little man, undersized, with thin frame and watery
eyes. His mouth, however, was hard, and there were some tell-tale little
lines at its corners. "None whatever, I am sorry to say, Mr. Ledsam," he admitted. "At present
we are quite in the dark." "You found the weapon, I hear?" Shopland nodded. "It was just an ordinary service revolver, dating from the time of the
war, exactly like a hundred thousand others. The enquiries we were able
to make from it came to nothing." "Where was it picked up?" "In the middle of the waste plot of ground next to Soto's. The murderer
evidently threw it there the moment he had discharged it. He must have
been wearing rubber-soled shoes, for not a soul heard him go." Francis nodded thoughtfully. "I wonder," he said, after a slight pause, "whether it ever occurred to
you to interview Miss Daisy Hyslop, the young lady who was with Bidlake
on the night of his murder?" "I called upon her the day afterwards," the detective answered. "She had nothing to say?" "Nothing whatever." "Indirectly, of course," Francis continued, "the poor girl was the cause
of his death. If she had not insisted upon his going out for a taxicab,
the man who was loitering about would probably have never got hold of
him." The detective glanced up furtively at the speaker. He seemed to reflect
for a moment. "I gathered," he said, "in conversation with the commissionaire, that
Miss Hyslop was a little impatient that night. It seems, however,
that she was anxious to get to a ball which was being given down in
Kensington." "There was a ball, was there?" Francis asked. "Without a doubt," the detective replied. "It was given by a Miss Clara
Bultiwell. She happens to remember urging Miss Hyslop to come on as
early as possible." "So that's that," Francis observed. "Just so, Mr. Ledsam," the detective murmured. They were walking along the Mall now, eastwards. The detective, who
seemed to have been just a saunterer, had accommodated himself to
Francis' destination. "Let me see, there was nothing stolen from the young man's person, was
there?" Francis asked presently. "Apparently nothing at all, sir." "And I gather that you have made every possible enquiry as to the young
man's relations with his friends?" "So far as one can learn, sir, they seem to have been perfectly
amicable." "Of course," Francis remarked presently, "this may have been quite a
purposeless affair. The deed may have been committed by a man who was
practically a lunatic, without any motive or reason whatever." "Precisely so, sir," the detective agreed. "But, all the same, I don't think it was." "Neither do I, sir." Francis smiled slightly. "Shopland," he said, "if there is no further external evidence to be
collected, I suggest that there is only one person likely to prove of
assistance to you." "And that one person, sir?" "Miss Daisy Hyslop." "The young lady whom I have already seen?" Francis nodded. "The young lady whom you have already seen," he assented. "At the
same time, Mr. Shopland, we must remember this. If Miss Hyslop has any
knowledge of the facts which are behind Mr. Bidlake's murder, it is more
likely to be to her interest to keep them to herself, than to give them
away to the police free gratis and for nothing. Do you follow me?" "Precisely, sir." "That being so," Francis continued, "I am going to make a proposition
to you for what it is worth. Where were you going when I met you this
morning, Shopland?" "To call upon you in Clarges Street, sir." "What for?" "I was going to ask you if you would be so kind as to call upon Miss
Daisy Hyslop, sir." Francis smiled. "Great minds," he murmured. "I will see the young lady this afternoon,
Shopland." The detective raised his hat. They had reached the spot where his
companion turned off by the Horse Guards Parade. "I may hope to hear from you, then, sir?" "Within the course of a day or two, perhaps earlier," Francis promised. Francis continued his walk along the Embankment to his chambers in the
Temple. He glanced in the outer office as he passed to his consulting
room. "Anything fresh, Angrave?" he asked his head-clerk. "Nothing whatever, sir," was the quiet reply. He passed on to his own den--a bare room with long windows looking out
over the gardens. He glanced at the two or three letters which lay on
his desk, none of them of the least interest, and leaning back in
his chair commenced to fill his pipe. There was a knock at the door. Fawsitt, a young beginner at the bar, in whom he had taken some interest
and who deviled for him, presented himself. "Can I have a word with you, Mr. Ledsam?" he asked. "By all means," was the prompt response. "Sit down." Fawsitt seated himself on the other side of the table. He had a long,
thin face, dark, narrow eyes, unwholesome complexion, a slightly hooked
nose, and teeth discoloured through constant smoking. His fingers, too,
bore the tell-tale yellow stains. "Mr. Ledsam," he said, "I think, with your permission, I should like to
leave at the end of my next three months." Francis glanced across at him. "Sorry to hear that, Fawsitt. Are you going to work for any one else?" "I haven't made arrangements yet, sir," the young man replied. "I
thought of offering myself to Mr.