His furtive manner was
against him. On the other hand, that might have arisen from nervousness. "I shall be in at half-past three, number 13 b, Clarges Street," Francis
told him. "I can get off for half-an-hour then, sir," the man replied. "I shall be
very glad to come. I must apologise for having troubled you, sir." Francis went slowly back to his trio of guests. All the way down the
carpeted vestibule he was haunted by the grim shadow of a spectral fear. The frozen horror of that ghastly evening was before him like a hateful
tableau. Hilditch's mocking words rang in his cars: "My death is the
one thing in the world which would make my wife happy." The Court scene,
with all its gloomy tragedy, rose before his eyes--only in the dock,
instead of Hilditch, he saw another! CHAPTER XXIX


There were incidents connected with that luncheon which Francis always
remembered. In the first place, Sir Timothy was a great deal more silent
than usual. A certain vein of half-cynical, half-amusing comment upon
things and people of the moment, which seemed, whenever he cared to
exert himself, to flow from his lips without effort, had deserted him. He sat where the rather brilliant light from the high windows fell upon
his face, and Francis wondered more than once whether there were not
some change there, perhaps some prescience of trouble to come, which had
subdued him and made him unusually thoughtful. Another slighter but more
amusing feature of the luncheon was the number of people who stopped
to shake hands with Sir Timothy and made more or less clumsy efforts to
obtain an invitation to his coming entertainment. Sir Timothy's reply
to these various hints was barely cordial. The most he ever promised was
that he would consult with his secretary and see if their numbers were
already full. Lady Cynthia, as a somewhat blatant but discomfited Peer
of the Realm took his awkward leave of them, laughed softly. "Of course, I think they all deserve what they get," she declared. "I
never heard such brazen impudence in my life--from people who ought to
know better, too." Lord Meadowson, a sporting peer, who was one of Sir Timothy's few
intimates, came over to the table. He paid his respects to the two
ladies and Francis, and turned a little eagerly to Sir Timothy. "Well?" he asked. Sir Timothy nodded. "We shall be quite prepared for you," he said. "Better bring your
cheque-book." "Capital!" the other exclaimed. "As I hadn't heard anything, I was
beginning to wonder whether you would be ready with your end of the
show." "There will be no hitch so far as we are concerned," Sir Timothy assured
him. "More mysteries?" Margaret enquired, as Meadowson departed with a smile
of satisfaction. Her father shrugged his shoulders. "Scarcely that," he replied. "It is a little wager between Lord
Meadowson and myself which is to be settled to-morrow." Lady Torrington, a fussy little woman, her hostess of the night before,
on her way down the room stopped and shook hands with Lady Cynthia. "Why, my dear," she exclaimed, "wherever did you vanish to last night? Claude told us all that, in the middle of a dance with him, you excused
yourself for a moment and he never saw you again. I quite expected to
read in the papers this morning that you had eloped." "Precisely what I did," Lady Cynthia declared. "The only trouble was
that my partner had had enough of me before the evening was over,
and deposited me once more in Grosvenor Square. It is really very
humiliating," she went on meditatively, "how every one always returns
me." "You talk such nonsense, Cynthia!" Lady Torrington exclaimed, a little
pettishly. "However, you found your way home all right?" "Quite safely, thank you. I was going to write you a note this
afternoon. I went away on an impulse. All I can say is that I am sorry. Do forgive me." "Certainly!" was the somewhat chilly reply. "Somehow or other, you seem
to have earned the right to do exactly as you choose. Some of my young
men whom you had promised to dance with, were disappointed, but after
all, I suppose that doesn't matter." "Not much," Lady Cynthia assented sweetly. "I think a few
disappointments are good for most of the young men of to-day." "What did you do last night, Cynthia?" Margaret asked her presently,
when Lady Torrington had passed on. "I eloped with your father," Lady Cynthia confessed, smiling across
at Sir Timothy. "We went for a little drive together and I had a most
amusing time. The only trouble was, as I have been complaining to that
tiresome woman, he brought me home again." "But where did you go to?" Margaret persisted. "It was an errand of charity," Sir Timothy declared. "It sounds very mysterious," Francis observed. "Is that all we are to be
told?" "I am afraid," Sir Timothy complained, "that very few people sympathise
with my hobbies or my prosecution of them. That is why such little
incidents as last night's generally remain undisclosed. If you really
wish to know what happened," he went on, after a moment's pause, "I will
tell you. As you know, I have a great many friends amongst the boxing
fraternity, and I happened to hear of a man down in the East End who has
made himself a terror to the whole community in which he lives. I took
Peter Fields, my gymnasium instructor, down to the East End last night,
and Peter Fields--dealt with him." "There was a fight?" Margaret exclaimed, with a little shudder. "There was a fight," Sir Timothy repeated, "if you can call it such. Fields gave him some part of the punishment he deserved." "And you were there, Cynthia?" "I left Lady Cynthia in the car," Sir Timothy explained. "She most
improperly bribed my chauffeur to lend her his coat and hat, and
followed me." "You actually saw the fight, then?" Francis asked. "I did," Lady Cynthia admitted. "I saw it from the beginning to the
end." Margaret looked across the table curiously. It seemed to her that her
friend had turned a little paler. "Did you like it?" she asked simply. Lady Cynthia was silent for a moment. She glanced at Sir Timothy. He,
too, was waiting for her answer with evident interest. "I was thrilled," she acknowledged. "That was the pleasurable part of it
I have been so, used to looking on at shows that bored me, listening
to conversations that wearied me, attempting sensations which were
repellent, that I just welcomed feeling, when it came--feeling of any
sort. I was excited. I forgot everything else. I was so fascinated that
I could not look away. But if you ask me whether I liked it, and I have
to answer truthfully, I hated it! I felt nothing of the sort at the
time, but when I tried to sleep I found myself shivering. It was
justice, I know, but it was ugly." She watched Sir Timothy, as she made her confession, a little wistfully. He said nothing, but there was a very curious change in his expression. He smiled at her in an altogether unfamiliar way. "I suppose," she said, appealing to him, "that you are very disappointed
in me?" "On the contrary," he answered, "I am delighted." "You mean that?" she asked incredulously. "I do," he declared. "Companionship between our sexes is very delightful
so far as it goes, but the fundamental differences between a man's
outlook and tastes and a woman's should never be bridged over. I myself
do not wish to learn to knit. I do not care for the womenkind in whom I
am interested to appreciate and understand fighting." Margaret looked across the table in amazement. "You are most surprising this morning, father," she declared. "I am perhaps misunderstood," he sighed, "perhaps have acquired a
reputation for greater callousness than I possess. Personally, I love
fighting. I was born a fighter, and I should find no happier way of
ending my life than fighting, but, to put it bluntly, fighting is a
man's job." "What about women going to see fights at the National Sporting Club?" Lady Cynthia asked curiously. "It is their own affair, but if you ask my opinion I do not approve of
it," Sir Timothy replied. "I am indifferent upon the subject, because
I am indifferent upon the subject of the generality of your sex," he
added, with a little smile, "but I simply hold that it is not a taste
which should be developed in women, and if they do develop it, it is at
the expense of those very qualities which make them most attractive." Lady Cynthia took a cigarette from her case and leaned over to Francis
for a light. "The world is changing," she declared. "I cannot bear many more shocks. I fancied that I had written myself for ever out of Sir Timothy's good
books because of my confession just now." He smiled across at her. His words were words of courteous badinage, but
Lady Cynthia was conscious of a strange little sense of pleasure. "On the contrary," he assured her, "you found your way just a little
further into my heart." "It seems to me, in a general sort of way," Margaret observed, leaning
back in her chair, "that you and my father are becoming extraordinarily
friendly, Cynthia." "I am hopefully in love with your father," Lady Cynthia confessed. "It
has been coming on for a long time. I suspected it the first time I ever
met him. Now I am absolutely certain." "It's quite a new idea," Margaret remarked. "Shall we like her in the
family, Francis?" "No airs!" Lady Cynthia warned her. "You two are not properly engaged
yet. It may devolve upon me to give my consent." "In that case," Francis replied, "I hope that we may at least count upon
your influence with Sir Timothy?" "If you'll return the compliment and urge my suit with him," Lady
Cynthia laughed. "I am afraid he can't quite make up his mind about me,
and I am so nice. I haven't flirted nearly so much as people think, and
my instincts are really quite domestic." "My position," Sir Timothy remarked, as he made an unsuccessful attempt
to possess himself of the bill which Francis had called for, "is
becoming a little difficult." "Not really difficult," Lady Cynthia objected, "because the real
decision rests in your hands." "Just listen to the woman!" Margaret exclaimed. "Do you realise, father,
that Cynthia is making the most brazen advances to you? And I was going
to ask her if she'd like to come back to The Sanctuary with us this
evening!" Lady Cynthia was suddenly eager. Margaret glanced across at her father. Sir Timothy seemed almost imperceptibly to stiffen a little. "Margaret has carte blanche at The Sanctuary as regards her visitors,"
he said. "I am afraid that I shall be busy over at The Walled House." "But you'd come and dine with us?" Sir Timothy hesitated. An issue which had been looming in his mind for
many hours seemed to be suddenly joined. "Please!" Lady Cynthia begged. Sir Timothy followed the example of the others and rose to his feet. He
avoided Lady Cynthia's eyes. He seemed suddenly a little tired. "I will come and dine," he assented quietly. "I am afraid that I cannot
promise more than that. Lady Cynthia, as she knows, is always welcome at
The Sanctuary." CHAPTER XXX


Punctual to his appointment that afternoon, the man who had sought an
interview with Francis was shown into the latter's study in Clarges
Street. He wore an overcoat over his livery, and directly he entered the room
Francis was struck by his intense pallor. He had been trying feverishly
to assure himself that all that the man required was the usual sort of
help, or assistance into a hospital. Yet there was something furtive in
his visitor's manner, something which suggested the bearer of a guilty
secret. "Please tell me what you want as quickly as you can," Francis begged. "I
am due to start down into the country in a few minutes." "I won't keep you long, sir," the man replied. "The matter is rather a
serious one." "Are you ill?" "Yes, sir!" "You had better sit down." The man relapsed gratefully into a chair. "I'll leave out everything that doesn't count, sir," he said. "I'll be
as brief as I can. I want you to go back to the night I waited upon
you at dinner the night Mr. Oliver Hilditch was found dead. You gave
evidence. The jury brought it in 'suicide.' It wasn't suicide at all,
sir. Mr. Hilditch was murdered." The sense of horror against which he had been struggling during the
last few hours, crept once more through the whole being of the man who
listened. He was face to face once more with that terrible issue. Had he
perjured himself in vain? Was the whole structure of his dreams about to
collapse, to fall about his ears? "By whom?" he faltered. "By Sir Timothy Brast, sir." Francis, who had been standing with his hand upon the table, felt
suddenly inclined to laugh. Facile though his brain was, the change of
issues was too tremendous for him to readily assimilate it. He picked
up a cigarette from an open box, with shaking fingers, lit it, and threw
himself into an easy-chair. He was all the time quite unconscious of
what he was doing. "Sir Timothy Brast?" he repeated. "Yes, sir," the man reiterated. "I wish to tell you the whole story." "I am listening," Francis assured him. "That evening before dinner, Sir Timothy Brast called to see Mr.
Hilditch, and a very stormy interview took place. I do not know the
rights of that, sir. I only know that there was a fierce quarrel. Mrs.
Hilditch came in and Sir Timothy left the house. His last words to Mr.
Hilditch were, 'You will hear from me again.' As you know, sir--I mean
as you remember, if you followed the evidence--all the servants slept at
the back of the house. I slept in the butler's room downstairs, next to
the plate pantry. I was awake when you left, sitting in my easy-chair,
reading. Ten minutes after you had left, there was a sound at the front
door as though some one had knocked with their knuckles. I got up, to
open it but Mr. Hilditch was before me. He admitted Sir Timothy. They
went back into the library together. It struck me that Mr. Hilditch had
had a great deal to drink, and there was a queer look on Sir Timothy's
face that I didn't understand. I stepped into the little room which
communicates with the library by folding doors. There was a chink
already between the two. I got a knife from the pantry and widened it
until I could see through. I heard very little of the conversation but
there was no quarrel. Mr. Hilditch took up the weapon which you
know about, sat in a chair and held it to his heart. I heard him say
something like this. 'This ought to appeal to you, Sir Timothy. You're a
specialist in this sort of thing. One little touch, and there you are.' Mrs. Hilditch said something about putting it away. My master turned
to Sir Timothy and said something in a low tone. Suddenly Sir Timothy
leaned over. He caught hold of Mr. Hilditch's hand which held the hilt
of the dagger, and and--well, he just drove it in, sir. Then he stood
away. Mrs. Hilditch sprang up and would have screamed, but Sir Timothy
placed his hand over her mouth. In a moment I heard her say, 'What have
you done?' Sir Timothy looked at Mr. Hilditch quite calmly. 'I have
ridded the world of a verminous creature,' he said. My knees began to
shake. My nerves were always bad. I crept back into my room, took off my
clothes and got into bed. I had just put the light out when they called
for me." Francis was himself again. There was an immense relief, a joy in his
heart. He had never for a single moment blamed Margaret, but he had
never for a single moment forgotten. It was a closed chapter but the
stain was on its pages. It was wonderful to tear it out and scatter the
fragments. "I remember you at the inquest," he said. "Your name is John Walter." "Yes, sir." "Your evidence was very different." "Yes, sir." "You kept all this to yourself." "I did, sir. I thought it best." "Tell me what has happened since?" The man looked down at the table. "I have always been a poor man, sir," he said. "I have had bad luck
whenever I've made a try to start at anything. I thought there seemed a
chance for me here. I went to Sir Timothy and I told him everything." "Well?" "Sir Timothy never turned a hair, sir. When I had finished he was very
short with me, almost curt. 'You have behaved like a man of sense,
Walter,' he said. 'How much?' I hesitated for some time. Then I could
see he was getting impatient. I doubled what I had thought of first. 'A
thousand pounds, sir,' I said. Sir Timothy he went to a safe in the
wall and he counted out a thousand pounds in notes, there and then. He brought them over to me. 'Walter,' he said, 'there is your thousand
pounds. For that sum I understand you promise to keep what you saw to
yourself?' 'Yes, sir,' I agreed. 'Take it, then,' he said, 'but I want
you to understand this. There have been many attempts but no one yet
has ever succeeded in blackmailing me. No one ever will. I give you this
thousand pounds willingly. It is what you have asked for. Never let me
see your face again. If you come to me starving, it will be useless. I
shall not part with another penny.'" The man's simple way of telling his story, his speech, slow and uneven
on account of his faltering breath, seemed all to add to the dramatic
nature of his disclosure. Francis found himself sitting like a child who
listens to a fairy story. "And then?" he asked simply. "I went off with the money," Walter continued, "and I had cruel bad
luck. I put it into a pub. I was robbed a little, I drank a little, my
wife wasn't any good. I lost it all, sir. I found myself destitute. I
went back to Sir Timothy." "Well?" The man shifted his feet nervously. He seemed to have come to the
difficult part of his story. "Sir Timothy was as hard as nails," he said slowly. "He saw me. The
moment I had finished, he rang the bell. 'Hedges,' he said to the
manservant who came in, 'this man has come here to try and blackmail me. Throw him out.