And it needs no
force, either--just the slow pressure of these two fingers. What did you
say, Margaret?" he enquired, breaking off abruptly. The woman was seated upon the very edge of her chair, her eyes rivetted
upon the dagger. There was no change in her face, not a tremor in her
tone. "I said nothing," she replied. "I did not speak at all. I was just
watching." Hilditch turned back to his guest. "These two fingers," he repeated, "and a flick of the wrist--very little
more than would be necessary for a thirty yard putt right across the
green." Francis had recovered himself, had found his bearings to a certain
extent. "I am sorry that you have told me this, Mr. Hilditch," he said, a little
stiffly. "Why?" was the puzzled reply. "I thought you would be interested." "I am interested to this extent," Francis declared, "I shall accept no
more cases such as yours unless I am convinced of my client's innocence. I look upon your confession to me as being in the worst possible taste,
and I regret very much my efforts on your behalf." The woman was listening intently. Hilditch's expression was one of
cynical wonder. Francis rose to his feet and moved across to his
hostess. "Mrs. Hilditch," he said, "will you allow me to make my apologies? Your
husband and I have arrived at an understanding--or perhaps I should
say a misunderstanding--which renders the acceptance of any further
hospitality on my part impossible." She held out the tips of her fingers. "I had no idea," she observed, with gentle sarcasm, "that you barristers
were such purists morally. I thought you were rather proud of being the
last hope of the criminal classes." "Madam," Francis replied, "I am not proud of having saved the life of a
self-confessed murderer, even though that man may be your husband." Hilditch was laughing softly to himself as he escorted his departing
guest to the door. "You have a quaint sense of humour," Francis remarked. "Forgive me," Oliver Hilditch begged, "but your last few words rather
appealed to me. You must be a person of very scanty perceptions if you
could spend the evening here and not understand that my death is the one
thing in the world which would make my wife happy." Francis walked home with these last words ringing in his ears. They
seemed with him even in that brief period of troubled sleep which came
to him when he had regained his rooms and turned in. They were there in
the middle of the night when he was awakened, shivering, by the shrill
summons of his telephone bell. He stood quaking before the instrument
in his pajamas. It was the voice which, by reason of some ghastly
premonition, he had dreaded to hear--level, composed, emotionless. "Mr. Ledsam?" she enquired. "I am Francis Ledsam," he assented. "Who wants me?" "It is Margaret Hilditch speaking," she announced. "I felt that I must
ring up and tell you of a very strange thing which happened after you
left this evening." "Go on," he begged hoarsely. "After you left," she went on, "my husband persisted in playing with
that curious dagger. He laid it against his heart, and seated himself
in the chair which Mr. Jordan had occupied, in the same attitude. It was
what he called a reconstruction. While he was holding it there, I think
that he must have had a fit, or it may have been remorse, we shall never
know. He called out and I hurried across the room to him. I tried to
snatch the dagger away--I did so, in fact--but I must have been too
late. He had already applied that slight movement of the fingers which
was necessary. The doctor has just left. He says that death must have
been instantaneous." "But this is horrible!" Francis cried out into the well of darkness. "A person is on the way from Scotland Yard," the voice continued,
without change or tremor. "When he has satisfied himself, I am going to
bed. He is here now. Good-night!" Francis tried to speak again but his words beat against a wall of
silence. He sat upon the edge of the bed, shivering. In that moment
of agony he seemed to hear again the echo of Oliver Hilditch's mocking
words:

"My death is the one thing in the world which would make my wife happy!" CHAPTER VII


There was a good deal of speculation at the Sheridan Club, of which he
was a popular and much envied member, as to the cause for the complete
disappearance from their midst of Francis Ledsam since the culmination
of the Hilditch tragedy. "Sent back four topping briefs, to my knowledge, last week," one of the
legal luminaries of the place announced to a little group of friends and
fellow-members over a before-dinner cocktail. "Griggs offered him the defence of William Bull, the Chippenham
murderer, and he refused it," another remarked. "Griggs wrote him
personally, and the reply came from the Brancaster Golf Club! It isn't
like Ledsam to be taking golfing holidays in the middle of the session." "There's nothing wrong with Ledsam," declared a gruff voice from the
corner. "And don't gossip, you fellows, at the top of your voices like a
lot of old women. He'll be calling here for me in a moment or two." They all looked around. Andrew Wilmore rose slowly to his feet and
emerged from behind the sheets of an evening paper. He laid his hand
upon the shoulder of a friend, and glanced towards the door. "Ledsam's had a touch of nerves," he confided. "There's been nothing
else the matter with him. We've been down at the Dormy House at
Brancaster and he's as right as a trivet now. That Hilditch affair did
him in completely." "I don't see why," one of the bystanders observed. "He got Hilditch off
all right. One of the finest addresses to a jury I ever heard." "That's just the point," Wilmore explained "You see, Ledsam had no idea
that Hilditch was really guilty, and for two hours that afternoon he
literally fought for his life, and in the end wrested a verdict from the
jury, against the judge's summing up, by sheer magnetism or eloquence
or whatever you fellows like to call it. The very night after, Hilditch
confesses his guilt and commits suicide." "I still don't see where Ledsam's worry comes in," the legal luminary
remarked. "The fact that the man was guilty is rather a feather in the
cap of his counsel. Shows how jolly good his pleading must have been." "Just so," Wilmore agreed, "but Ledsam, as you know, is a very
conscientious sort of fellow, and very sensitive, too. The whole thing
was a shock to him." "It must have been a queer experience," a novelist remarked from the
outskirts of the group, "to dine with a man whose life you have juggled
away from the law, and then have him explain his crime to you, and
the exact manner of its accomplishment. Seems to bring one amongst the
goats, somehow." "Bit of a shock, no doubt," the lawyer assented, "but I still don't
understand Ledsam's sending back all his briefs. He's not going to chuck
the profession, is he?" "Not by any means," Wilmore declared. "I think he has an idea, though,
that he doesn't want to accept any briefs unless he is convinced that
the person whom he has to represent is innocent, and lawyers don't like
that sort of thing, you know. You can't pick and choose, even when you
have Leadsam's gifts." "The fact of it is," the novelist commented, "Francis Ledsam isn't
callous enough to be associated with you money-grubbing dispensers of
the law. He'd be all right as Public Prosecutor, a sort of Sir Galahad
waving the banner of virtue, but he hates to stuff his pockets at the
expense of the criminal classes." "Who the mischief are the criminal classes?" a police court magistrate
demanded. "Personally, I call war profiteering criminal, I call a good
many Stock Exchange deals criminal, and," he added, turning to a member
of the committee who was hovering in the background, "I call it criminal
to expect us to drink French vermouth like this." "There is another point of view," the latter retorted. "I call it
a crime to expect a body of intelligent men to administer without
emolument to the greed of such a crowd of rotters. You'll get the right
stuff next week." The hall-porter approached and addressed Wilmore. "Mr. Ledsam is outside in a taxi, sir," he announced. "Outside in a taxi?" the lawyer repeated. "Why on earth can't he come
in?" "I never heard such rot," another declared. "Let's go and rope him in." "Mr. Ledsam desired me to say, sir," the hall porter continued, "to
any of his friends who might be here, that he will be in to lunch
to-morrow." "Leave him to me till then," Wilmore begged. "He'll be all right
directly. He's simply altering his bearings and taking his time about
it. If he's promised to lunch here to-morrow, he will. He's as near as
possible through the wood. Coming up in the train, he suggested a little
conversation to-night and afterwards the normal life. He means it, too. There's nothing neurotic about Ledsam." The magistrate nodded. "Run along, then, my merry Andrew," he said, "but see that Ledsam keeps
his word about to-morrow." Andrew Wilmore plunged boldly into the forbidden subject later on that
evening, as the two men sat side by side at one of the wall tables in
Soto's famous club restaurant. They had consumed an excellent dinner. An empty champagne bottle had just been removed, double liqueur brandies
had taken its place. Francis, with an air of complete and even exuberant
humanity, had lit a huge cigar. The moment seemed propitious. "Francis," his friend began, "they say at the club that you refused to
be briefed in the Chippenham affair." "Quite true," was the calm reply. "I told Griggs that I wouldn't have
anything to do with it." Wilmore knew then that all was well. Francis' old air of strength and
decision had returned. His voice was firm, his eyes were clear and
bright. His manner seemed even to invite questioning. "I think I know why," Wilmore said, "but I should like you to tell me in
your own words." Francis glanced around as though to be sure that they were not
overheard. "Because," he replied, dropping his voice a little but still speaking
with great distinctness, "William Bull is a cunning and dangerous
criminal whom I should prefer to see hanged." "You know that?" "I know that." "It would be a great achievement to get him off," Wilmore persisted. "The evidence is very weak in places." "I believe that I could get him off," was the confident reply. "That
is why I will not touch the brief. I think," Francis continued, "that
I have already conveyed it to you indirectly, but here you are in plain
words, Andrew. I have made up my mind that I will defend no man in
future unless I am convinced of his innocence." "That means--"

"It means practically the end of my career at the bar," Francis
admitted. "I realise that absolutely: Fortunately, as you know, I am not
dependent upon my earnings, and I have had a wonderful ten years." "This is all because of the Hilditch affair, I suppose?" "Entirely." Wilmore was still a little puzzled. "You seem to imagine that you have something on your conscience as
regards that business," he said boldly. "I have," was the calm reply. "Come," Wilmore protested, "I don't quite follow your line of thought. Granted that Hilditch was a desperate criminal whom by the exercise
of your special gifts you saved from the law, surely his tragic death
balanced the account between you and Society?" "It might have done," Francis admitted, "if he had really committed
suicide." Wilmore was genuinely startled. He looked at his companion curiously. "What the devil do you mean, old chap?" he demanded. "Your own evidence
at the inquest was practically conclusive as to that." Francis glanced around him with apparent indifference but in reality
with keen and stealthy care. On their right was a glass division,
through which the sound of their voices could not possibly penetrate. On their left was an empty space, and a table beyond was occupied by a
well-known cinema magnate engaged in testing the attractions in daily
life of a would-be film star. Nevertheless, Francis' voice was scarcely
raised above a whisper. "My evidence at the coroner's inquest," he confided, "was a subtly
concocted tissue of lies. I committed perjury freely. That is the real
reason why I've been a little on the nervy side lately, and why I took
these few months out of harness." "Good God!" Wilmore exclaimed, setting down untasted the glass of brandy
which he had just raised to his lips. "I want to finish this matter up," Francis continued calmly, "by making
a clean breast of it to you, because from to-night I am starting afresh,
with new interests in my life, what will practically amount to a new
career. That is why I preferred not to dine at the club to-night,
although I am looking forward to seeing them all again. I wanted instead
to have this conversation with you. I lied at the inquest when I said
that the relations between Oliver Hilditch and his wife that night
seemed perfectly normal. I lied when I said that I knew of no cause for
ill-will between them. I lied when I said that I left them on friendly
terms. I lied when I said that Oliver Hilditch seemed depressed and
nervous. I lied when I said that he expressed the deepest remorse for
what he had done. There was every indication that night, of the hate
which I happen to know existed between the woman and the man. I have not
the faintest doubt in my mind but that she murdered him. In my judgment,
she was perfectly justified in doing so." There followed a brief but enforced silence as some late arrivals
passed their table. The room was well-ventilated but Andrew Wilmore felt
suddenly hot and choking. A woman, one of the little group of newcomers,
glanced towards Francis curiously. "Francis Ledsam, the criminal barrister," her companion whispered,--"the
man who got Oliver Hilditch off. The man with him is Andrew Wilmore, the
novelist. Discussing a case, I expect." CHAPTER VIII


The little party of late diners passed on their way to the further end
of the room, leaving a wave of artificiality behind, or was it, Andrew
Wilmore wondered, in a moment of half-dazed speculation, that it was
they and the rest of the gay company who represented the real things,
and he and his companion who were playing a sombre part in some unreal
and gloomier world. Francis' voice, however, when he recommenced his
diatribe, was calm and matter-of-fact enough. "You see," he continued, argumentatively, "I was morally and actually
responsible for the man's being brought back into Society. And far worse
than that, I was responsible for his being thrust back again upon his
wife. Ergo, I was also responsible for what she did that night. The
matter seems as plain as a pikestaff to me. I did what I could to atone,
rightly or wrongly it doesn't matter, because it is over and done with. There you are, old fellow, now you know what's been making me nervy. I've committed wholesale perjury, but I acted according to my conscience
and I think according to justice. The thing has worried me, I admit, but
it has passed, and I'm glad it's off my chest. One more liqueur, Andrew,
and if you want to we'll talk about my plans for the future." The brandy was brought. Wilmore studied his friend curiously, not
without some relief. Francis had lost the harassed and nervous
appearance upon which his club friends had commented, which had been
noticeable, even, to a diminishing extent, upon the golf course at
Brancaster. He was alert and eager. He had the air of a man upon the
threshold of some enterprise dear to his heart. "I have been through a queer experience," Francis continued presently,
as he sipped his second liqueur. "Not only had I rather less than twelve
hours to make up my mind whether I should commit a serious offence
against the law, but a sensation which I always hoped that I might
experience, has come to me in what I suppose I must call most
unfortunate fashion." "The woman?" Wilmore ventured. Francis assented gloomily. There was a moment's silence. Wilmore, the
metaphysician, saw then a strange thing. He saw a light steal across his
friend's stern face. He saw his eyes for a moment soften, the hard mouth
relax, something incredible, transforming, shine, as it were, out of
the man's soul in that moment of self-revelation. It was gone like the
momentary passing of a strange gleam of sunshine across a leaden sea,
but those few seconds were sufficient. Wilmore knew well enough what had
happened. "Oliver Hilditch's wife," Francis went on, after a few minutes' pause,
"presents an enigma which at present I cannot hope to solve. The fact
that she received her husband back again, knowing what he was and
what he was capable of, is inexplicable to me. The woman herself is a
mystery. I do not know what lies behind her extraordinary immobility. Feeling she must have, and courage, or she would never have dared to
have ridded herself of the scourge of her life. But beyond that my
judgment tells me nothing. I only know that sooner or later I shall seek
her out. I shall discover all that I want to know, one way or the other. It may be for happiness--it may be the end of the things that count." "I guessed this," Wilmore admitted, with a little shiver which he was
wholly unable to repress. Francis nodded. "Then keep it to yourself, my dear fellow," he begged, "like everything
else I am telling you tonight. I have come out of my experience changed
in many ways," he continued, "but, leaving out that one secret chapter,
this is the dominant factor which looms up before me. I bring into life
a new aversion, almost a passion, Andrew, born in a tea-shop in the
city, and ministered to by all that has happened since. I have lost that
sort of indifference which my profession engenders towards crime. I am
at war with the criminal, sometimes, I hope, in the Courts of Justice,
but forever out of them. I am no longer indifferent as to whether men do
good or evil so long as they do not cross my path. I am a hunter of
sin. I am out to destroy. There's a touch of melodrama in this for
you, Andrew," he concluded, with a little laugh, "but, my God, I'm in
earnest!" "What does this mean so far as regards the routine of your daily life?" Wilmore asked curiously. "Well, it brings us to the point we discussed down at Brancaster,"
Francis replied. "It will affect my work to this extent. I shall not
accept any brief unless, after reading the evidence, I feel convinced
that the accused is innocent." "That's all very well," Wilmore observed, "but you know what it will
mean, don't you? Lawyers aren't likely to single you out for a brief
without ever feeling sure whether you will accept it or not." "That doesn't worry me," Francis declared. "I don't need the fees,
fortunately, and I can always pick up enough work to keep me going by
attending Sessions. One thing I can promise you--I certainly shall not
sit in my rooms and wait for things to happen. Mine is a militant spirit
and it needs the outlet of action." "Action, yes, but how?" Wilmore queried. "You can't be always hanging
about the courts, waiting for the chance of defending some poor devil
who's been wrongfully accused--there aren't enough of them, for one
thing. On the other hand, you can't walk down Regent Street, brandishing
a two-edged sword and hunting for pickpockets." Francis smiled. "Nothing so flamboyant, I can assure you, Andrew," he replied; "nor
shall I play the amateur detective with his mouth open for mysteries. But listen," he went on earnestly. "I've had some experience, as you
know, and, notwithstanding the Oliver Hilditch's of the world, I can
generally tell a criminal when I meet him face to face. There are plenty
of them about, too, Andrew--as many in this place as any other. I am not
going to be content with a negative position as regards evildoers. I am
going to set my heel on as many of the human vermin of this city as I
can find." "A laudable, a most exhilarating and delightful pursuit! `human vermin,'
too, is excellent. It opens up a new and fascinating vista for the
modern sportsman. My congratulations!" It was an interruption of peculiar and wonderful significance, but
Francis did not for the moment appreciate the fact. Turning his head, he
simply saw a complete stranger seated unaccountably at the next table,
who had butted into a private conversation and whose tone of gentle
sarcasm, therefore, was the more offensive. "Who the devil are you, sir," he demanded, "and where did you come
from?" The newcomer showed no resentment at Francis' little outburst. He simply
smiled with deprecating amiability--a tall, spare man, with lean, hard
face, complexion almost unnaturally white; black hair, plentifully
besprinkled with grey; a thin, cynical mouth, notwithstanding its
distinctly humourous curve, and keen, almost brilliant dark eyes. He was
dressed in ordinary dinner garb; his linen and jewellery was indeed in
the best possible taste. Francis, at his second glance, was troubled
with a vague sense of familiarity. "Let me answer your last question first, sir," the intruder begged. "I
was seated alone, several tables away, when the couple next to you went
out, and having had pointed out to me the other evening at Claridge's
Hotel, and knowing well by repute, the great barrister, Mr. Francis
Ledsam, and his friend the world-famed novelist, Mr. Andrew Wilmore,
I--er--unobtrusively made my way, half a yard at a time, in your
direction--and here I am. I came stealthily, you may object? Without
a doubt. If I had come in any other fashion, I should have disturbed a
conversation in which I was much interested." "Could you find it convenient," Francis asked, with icy politeness, "to
return to your own table, stealthily or not, as you choose?" The newcomer showed no signs of moving. "In after years," he declared, "you would be the first to regret
the fact if I did so. This is a momentous meeting. It gives me an
opportunity of expressing my deep gratitude to you, Mr. Ledsam, for
the wonderful evidence you tendered at the inquest upon the body of my
son-in-law, Oliver Hilditch." Francis turned in his place and looked steadily at this unsought-for
companion, learning nothing, however, from the half-mocking smile and
imperturbable expression. "Your son-in-law?" he repeated. "Do you mean to say that you are the
father of--of Oliver Hilditch's wife?" "Widow," the other corrected gently. "I have that honour. You
will understand, therefore, that I feel myself on this, the first
opportunity, compelled to tender my sincere thanks for evidence so
chivalrously offered, so flawlessly truthful." Francis was a man accustomed to self-control, but he clenched his hands
so that his finger nails dug into his flesh. He was filled with an
insane and unreasoning resentment against this man whose words were
biting into his conscience. Nevertheless, he kept his tone level. "I do not desire your gratitude," he said, "nor, if you will permit me
to say so, your further acquaintance." The stranger shook his head regretfully. "You are wrong," he protested. "We were bound, in any case, to know one
another. Shall I tell you why? You have just declared yourself anxious
to set your heel upon the criminals of the world. I have the distinction
of being perhaps the most famous patron of that maligned class now
living--and my neck is at your service." "You appear to me," Francis said suavely, "to be a buffoon." It might have been fancy, but Francis could have sworn that he saw the
glitter of a sovereign malevolence in the other's dark eyes.