If he gives any trouble, send for the police. If he shows
himself here again, send for the police."' "What happened then?" "Well, I nearly blurted out the whole story," the man confessed, "and
then I remembered that wouldn't do me any good, so I went away. I got a
job at the Ritz, but I was took ill a few days afterwards. I went to see
a doctor. From him I got my death-warrant, sir." "Is it heart?" "It's heart, sir," the man acknowledged. "The doctor told me I might
snuff out at any moment. I can't live, anyway, for more than a year. I've got a little girl." "Now just why have you come to see me?" Francis asked. "For just this, sir," the man replied. "Here's my account of what
happened," he went on, drawing some sheets of foolscap from his
pocket. "It's written in my own hand and there are two witnesses to my
signature--one a clergyman, sir, and the other a doctor, they thinking
it was a will or something. I had it in my mind to send that to Scotland
Yard, and then I remembered that I hadn't a penny to leave my little
girl. I began to wonder--think as meanly of me as you like, sir--how
I could still make some money out of this. I happened to know that you
were none too friendly disposed towards Sir Timothy. This confession of
mine, if it wouldn't mean hanging, would mean imprisonment for the rest
of his life. You could make a better bargain with him than me, sir. Do
you want to hold him in your power? If so, you can have this confession,
all signed and everything, for two hundred pounds, and as I live, sir,
that two hundred pounds is to pay for my funeral, and the balance for my
little girl." Francis took the papers and glanced them through. "Supposing I buy this document from you," he said, "what is its actual
value? You could write out another confession, get that signed, and
sell it to another of Sir Timothy's enemies, or you could still go to
Scotland Yard yourself." "I shouldn't do that, sir, I assure you," the man declared nervously,
"not on my solemn oath. I want simply to be quit of the whole matter and
have a little money for the child." Francis considered for a moment. "There is only one way I can see," he said, "to make this document worth
the money to me. If you will sign a confession that any statement you
have made as to the death of Mr. Hilditch is entirely imaginary, that
you did not see Sir Timothy in the house that night, that you went to
bed at your usual time and slept until you were awakened, and that you
only made this charge for the purpose of extorting money--if you will
sign a confession to that effect and give it me with these papers, I
will pay you the two hundred pounds and I will never use the confession
unless you repeat the charge." "I'll do it, sir," the man assented. Francis drew up a document, which his visitor read through and signed. Then he wrote out an open cheque. "My servant shall take you to the bank in a taxi," he said. "They would
scarcely pay you this unless you were identified. We understand one
another?" "Perfectly, sir!" Francis rang the bell, gave his servant the necessary orders, and
dismissed the two men. Half-an-hour later, already changed into
flannels, he was on his way into the country. CHAPTER XXXI


Sir Timothy walked that evening amongst the shadows. Two hours ago,
the last of the workmen from the great furnishing and catering
establishments who undertook the management of his famous
entertainments, had ceased work for the day and driven off in the
motor-brakes hired to take them to the nearest town. The long, low
wing whose use no one was able absolutely to divine, was still full of
animation, but the great reception-rooms and stately hall were silent
and empty. In the gymnasium, an enormous apartment as large as an
ordinary concert hall, two or three electricians were still at work,
directed by the man who had accompanied Sir Timothy to the East End on
the night before. The former crossed the room, his footsteps awaking
strange echoes. "There will be seating for fifty, sir, and standing room for fifty," he
announced. "I have had the ring slightly enlarged, as you suggested,
and the lighting is being altered so that the start is exactly north and
south." Sir Timothy nodded thoughtfully. The beautiful oak floor of the place
was littered with sawdust and shavings of wood. Several tiers of
seats had been arranged on the space usually occupied by swings,
punching-balls and other artifices. On a slightly raised dais at the
further end was an exact replica of a ring, corded around and with
sawdust upon the floor. Upon the walls hung a marvellous collection of
weapons of every description, from the modern rifle to the curved and
terrible knife used by the most savage of known tribes. "How are things in the quarters?" Sir Timothy asked. "Every one is well, sir. Doctor Ballantyne arrived this afternoon. His
report is excellent." Sir Timothy nodded and turned away. He looked into the great gallery,
its waxen floors shining with polish, ready for the feet of the dancers
on the morrow; looked into a beautiful concert-room, with an organ that
reached to the roof; glanced into the banquetting hall, which extended
far into the winter-garden; made his way up the broad stairs, turned
down a little corridor, unlocked a door and passed into his own suite. There was a small dining-room, a library, a bedroom, and a bathroom
fitted with every sort of device. A man-servant who had heard him enter,
hurried from his own apartment across the way. "You are not dining here, sir?" he enquired. Sir Timothy shook his head. "No, I am dining late at The Sanctuary," he replied. "I just strolled
over to see how the preparations were going on. I shall be sleeping over
there, too. Any prowlers?" "Photographer brought some steps and photographed the horses in the
park from the top of the wall this afternoon, sir," the man announced. "Jenkins let him go. Two or three pressmen sent in their cards to you,
but they were not allowed to pass the lodge." Sir Timothy nodded. Soon he left the house and crossed the park towards
The Sanctuary. He was followed all the way by horses, of which there
were more than thirty in the great enclosure. One mare greeted him with
a neigh of welcome and plodded slowly after him. Another pressed her
nose against his shoulder and walked by his side, with his hand upon her
neck. Sir Timothy looked a little nervously around, but the park itself
lay almost like a deep green pool, unobserved, and invisible from
anywhere except the house itself. He spoke a few words to each of the
horses, and, producing his key, passed through the door in the wall
into The Sanctuary garden, closing it quickly as he recognised Francis
standing under the cedar-tree. "Has Lady Cynthia arrived yet?" he enquired. "Not yet," Francis replied. "Margaret will be here in a minute. She told
me to say that cocktails are here and that she has ordered dinner served
on the terrace." "Excellent!" Sir Timothy murmured. "Let me try one of your cigarettes." "Everything ready for the great show to-morrow night?" Francis asked, as
he served the cocktails. "Everything is in order. I wonder, really," Sir Timothy went on, looking
at Francis curiously, "what you expect to see?" "I don't think we any of us have any definite idea," Francis replied. "We have all, of course, made our guesses." "You will probably be disappointed," Sir Timothy warned him. "For some
reason or other--perhaps I have encouraged the idea--people look upon
my parties as mysterious orgies where things take place which may not
be spoken of. They are right to some extent. I break the law, without a
doubt, but I break it, I am afraid, in rather a disappointing fashion." A limousine covered in dust raced in at the open gates and came to a
standstill with a grinding of brakes. Lady Cynthia stepped lightly out
and came across the lawn to them. "I am hot and dusty and I was disagreeable," she confided, "but the
peace of this wonderful place, and the sight of that beautiful silver
thing have cheered me. May I have a cocktail before I go up to change? I am a little late, I know," she went on, "but that wretched
garden-party! I thought my turn would never come to receive my few
words. Mother would have been broken-hearted if I had left without them. What slaves we are to royalty! Now shall I hurry and change? You men
have the air of wanting your dinner, and I am rather that way myself. You look tired, dear host," she added, a little hesitatingly. "The heat," he answered. "Why you ever leave this spot I can't imagine," she declared, as she
turned away, with a lingering glance around. "It seems like Paradise to
come here and breathe this air. London is like a furnace." The two men were alone again. In Francis' pocket were the two documents,
which he had not yet made up his mind how to use. Margaret came out to
them presently, and he strolled away with her towards the rose garden. "Margaret," he said, "is it my fancy or has there been a change in your
father during the last few days?" "There is a change of some sort," she admitted. "I cannot describe it. I
only know it is there. He seems much more thoughtful and less hard. The
change would be an improvement," she went on, "except that somehow or
other it makes me feel uneasy. It is as though he were grappling with
some crisis." They came to a standstill at the end of the pergola, where the masses
of drooping roses made the air almost faint with their perfume. Margaret
stretched out her hand, plucked a handful of the creamy petals and held
them against her cheek. A thrush was singing noisily. A few yards away
they heard the soft swish of the river. "Tell me," she asked curiously, "my father still speaks of you as being
in some respects an enemy. What does he mean?" "I will tell you exactly," he answered. "The first time I ever spoke to
your father I was dining at Soto's. I was talking to Andrew Wilmore. It was only a short time after you had told me the story of Oliver
Hilditch, a story which made me realise the horror of spending one's
life keeping men like that out of the clutch of the law." "Go on, please," she begged. "Well, I was talking to Andrew. I told him that in future I should
accept no case unless I not only believed in but was convinced of the
innocence of my client. I added that I was at war with crime. I think,
perhaps, I was so deeply in earnest that I may have sounded a little
flamboyant. At any rate, your father, who had overheard me, moved up to
our table. I think he deduced from what I was saying that I was going to
turn into a sort of amateur crime-investigator, a person who I gathered
later was particularly obnoxious to him. At any rate, he held out a
challenge. 'If you are a man who hates crime,' he said, or something
like it, 'I am one who loves it.' He then went on to prophesy that a
crime would be committed close to where we were, within an hour or so,
and he challenged me to discover the assassin. That night Victor Bidlake
was murdered just outside Soto's." "I remember! Do you mean to tell me, then," Margaret went on, with a
little shiver, "that father told you this was going to happen?" "He certainly did," Francis replied. "How his knowledge came I am not
sure--yet. But he certainly knew." "Have you anything else against him?" she asked. "There was the disappearance of Andrew Wilmore's younger brother,
Reginald Wilmore. I have no right to connect your father with that, but
Shopland, the Scotland Yard detective, who has charge of the case, seems
to believe that the young man was brought into this neighbourhood, and
some other indirect evidence which came into my hands does seem to point
towards your father being concerned in the matter. I appealed to him at
once but he only laughed at me. That matter, too, remains a mystery." Margaret was thoughtful for a moment. Then she turned towards the house. They heard the soft ringing of the gong. "Will you believe me when I tell you this?" she begged, as they passed
arm in arm down the pergola. "I am terrified of my father, though in
many ways he is almost princely in his generosity and in the broad view
he takes of things. Then his kindness to all dumb animals, and the way
they love him, is the most amazing thing I ever knew. If we were alone
here to-night, every animal in the house would be around his chair. He
has even the cats locked up if we have visitors, so that no one shall
see it. But I am quite honest when I tell you this--I do not believe
that my father has the ordinary outlook upon crime. I believe that there
is a good deal more of the Old Testament about him than the New." "And this change which we were speaking about?" he asked, lowering his
voice as they reached the lawn. "I believe that somehow or other the end is coming," she said. "Francis,
forgive me if I tell you this--or rather let me be forgiven--but I know
of one crime my father has committed, and it makes me fear that there
may be others. And I have the feeling, somehow, that the end is close at
hand and that he feels it, just as we might feel a thunder-storm in the
air." "I am going to prove the immemorial selfishness of my sex," he
whispered, as they drew near the little table. "Promise me one thing
and I don't care if your father is Beelzebub himself. Promise me that,
whatever happens, it shall not make any difference to us?" She smiled at him very wonderfully, a smile which had to take the place
of words, for there were servants now within hearing, and Sir Timothy
himself was standing in the doorway. CHAPTER XXXII


Lady Cynthia and Sir Timothy strolled after dinner to the bottom of the
lawn and watched the punt which Francis was propelling turn from the
stream into the river. "Perfectly idyllic," Lady Cynthia sighed. "We have another punt," her companion suggested. She shook her head. "I am one of those unselfish people," she declared, "whose idea of
repose is not only to rest oneself but to see others rest. I think these
two chairs, plenty of cigarettes, and you in your most gracious and
discoursive mood, will fill my soul with content." "Your decision relieves my mind," her companion declared, as he arranged
the cushions behind her back. "I rather fancy myself with a pair of
sculls, but a punt-pole never appealed to me. We will sit here and enjoy
the peace. To-morrow night you will find it all disturbed--music and
raucous voices and the stampede of my poor, frightened horses in the
park. This is really a very gracious silence." "Are those two really going to marry?" Lady Cynthia asked, moving her
head lazily in the direction of the disappearing punt. "I imagine so." "And you? What are you going to do then?" "I am planning a long cruise. I telegraphed to Southampton to-day. I
am having my yacht provisioned and prepared. I think I shall go over to
South America." She was silent for a moment. "Alone?" she asked presently. "I am always alone," he answered. "That is rather a matter of your own choice, is it not?" "Perhaps so. I have always found it hard to make friends. Enemies seem
to be more in my line." "I have not found it difficult to become your friend," she reminded him. "You are one of my few successes," he replied. She leaned back with half-closed eyes. There was nothing new about their
environment--the clusters of roses, the perfume of the lilies in
the rock garden, the even sweeter fragrance of the trim border of
mignonette. Away in the distance, the night was made momentarily ugly by
the sound of a gramophone on a passing launch, yet this discordant
note seemed only to bring the perfection of present things closer. Back
across the velvety lawn, through the feathery strips of foliage, the
lights of The Sanctuary, shaded and subdued, were dimly visible. The
dining-table under the cedar-tree had already been cleared. Hedges,
newly arrived from town to play the major domo, was putting the
finishing touches to a little array of cool drinks. And beyond, dimly
seen but always there, the wall. She turned to him suddenly. "You build a wall around your life," she said, "like the wall which
encircles your mystery house. Last night I thought that I could see a
little way over the top. To-night you are different." "If I am different," he answered quietly, "it is because, for the first
time for many years, I have found myself wondering whether the life I
had planned for myself, the things which I had planned should make life
for me, are the best. I have had doubts--perhaps I might say regrets." "I should like to go to South America," Lady Cynthia declared softly. He finished the cigarette which he was smoking and deliberately threw
away the stump. Then he turned and looked at her. His face seemed harder
than ever, clean-cut, the face of a man able to defy Fate, but she saw
something in his eyes which she had never seen before. "Dear child," he said, "if I could roll back the years, if from all
my deeds of sin, as the world knows sin, I could cancel one, there is
nothing in the world would make me happier than to ask you to come with
me as my cherished companion to just whatever part of the world you
cared for. But I have been playing pitch and toss with fortune all my
life, since the great trouble came which changed me so much. Even at
this moment, the coin is in the air which may decide my fate." "You mean?" she ventured. "I mean," he continued, "that after the event of which we spoke last
night, nothing in life has been more than an incident, and I have
striven to find distraction by means which none of you--not even you,
Lady Cynthia, with all your breadth of outlook and all your craving
after new things--would justify." "Nothing that you may have done troubles me in the least," she assured
him. "I do wish that you could put it all out of your mind and let me
help you to make a fresh start." "I may put the thing itself out of my mind," he answered sadly, "but the
consequences remain." "There is a consequence which threatens?" she asked. He was silent for a moment. When he spoke again, he had recovered all
his courage. "There is the coin in the air of which I spoke," he replied. "Let us
forget it for a moment. Of the minor things I will make you my judge. Ledsam and Margaret are coming to my party to-morrow night. You, too,
shall be my guest. Such secrets as lie on the other side of that wall
shall be yours. After that, if I survive your judgment of them, and
if the coin which I have thrown into the air comes, down to the tune
I call--after that--I will remind you of something which happened last
night--of something which, if I live for many years, I shall never
forget." She leaned towards him. Her eyes were heavy with longing. Her arms,
sweet and white in the dusky twilight, stole hesitatingly out. "Last night was so long ago. Won't you take a later memory?" Once again she lay in his arms, still and content. As they crossed the lawn, an hour or so later, they were confronted by
Hedges--who hastened, in fact, to meet them. "You are being asked for on the telephone, sir," he announced. "It is a
trunk call. I have switched it through to the study." "Any name?" Sir Timothy asked indifferently. The man hesitated. His eyes sought his master's respectfully but charged
with meaning. "The person refuses to give his name, sir, but I fancied that I
recognised his voice. I think it would be as well for you to speak,
sir." Lady Cynthia sank into a chair. "You shall go and answer your telephone call," she said, "and leave
Hedges to serve me with one of these strange drinks. I believe I see
some of my favourite orangeade." Sir Timothy made his way into the house and into the low, oak-beamed
study with its dark furniture and latticed windows. The telephone bell
began to ring again as he entered. He took up the receiver. "Sir Timothy?" a rather hoarse, strained voice asked. "I am speaking," Sir Timothy replied. "Who is it?" The man at the other end spoke as though he were out of breath. Nevertheless, what he said was distinct enough. "I am John Walter." "Well?" "I am just ringing you up," the voice went on, "to give you what's
called a sporting chance. There's a boat from Southampton midday
tomorrow. If you're wise, you'll catch it. Or better still, get off on
your own yacht. They carry a wireless now, these big steamers. Don't
give a criminal much of a chance, does it?" "I am to understand, then," Sir Timothy said calmly, "that you have laid
your information?" "I've parted with it and serve you right," was the bitter reply. "I'm
not saying that you're not a brave man, Sir Timothy, but there's such a
thing as being foolhardy, and that's what you are. I wasn't asking you
for half your fortune, nor even a dab of it, but if your life wasn't
worth a few hundred pounds--you, with all that money--well, it wasn't
worth saving. So now you know. I've spent ninepence to give you a chance
to hop it, because I met a gent who has been good to me. I've had a good
dinner and I feel merciful. So there you are." "Do I gather," Sir Timothy asked, in a perfectly level tone, "that the
deed is already done?" "It's already done and done thoroughly," was the uncompromising answer. "I'm not ringing up to ask you to change your mind. If you were to offer
me five thousand now, or ten, I couldn't stop the bally thing. You've a
sporting chance of getting away if you start at once. That's all there
is to it." "You have nothing more to say?"