"The situation is stated," he said. "I will ask you this question as a
matter of form. Do you recognise my right to forbid your marriage with
my daughter, Mr. Ledsam?" "I most certainly do not," was the forcible reply. "Have I any rights at all?" Sir Timothy asked. "Margaret has lived under
my roof whenever it has suited her to do so. Since she has taken up her
residence at Curzon Street, she has been her own mistress, her banking
account has known no limit whatsoever. I may be a person of evil
disposition, but I have shown no unkindness to her." "It is quite true," Margaret Admitted, turning a little pale. "Since I
have been alone, you have been kindness itself." "Then let me repeat my question," Sir Timothy went on, "have I the right
to any consideration at all?" "Yes," Francis replied. "Short of keeping us apart, you have the
ordinary rights of a parent." "Then I ask you to delay the announcement of your engagement, or taking
any further steps concerning it, for fourteen days," Sir Timothy said. "I place no restrictions on your movements during that time. Such
hospitality as you, Mr. Ledsam, care to accept at my hands, is at your
disposal. I am Bohemian enough, indeed, to find nothing to complain of
in such little celebrations as you are at present indulging in--most
excellent pate, that. But I request that no announcement of your
engagement be made, or any further arrangements made concerning it, for
that fourteen days." "I am quite willing, father," Margaret acquiesced. "And I, sir," Francis echoed. "In which case," Sir Timothy concluded, rising to his feet, lighting a
cigarette and taking up his hat and gloves, "I shall go peaceably away. You will admit, I trust," he added, with that peculiar smile at the
corner of his lips, "that I have not in any way tried to come the heavy
father? I can even command a certain amount of respect, Margaret, for a
young man who is able to inaugurate his engagement by an impromptu meal
of such perfection. I wish you both good morning. Any invitation which
Margaret extends, Ledsam, please consider as confirmed by me." He closed the door softly. They heard his footsteps descending the
stairs. Francis leaned once more over Margaret. She seemed still dazed,
confused with new thoughts. She responded, however, readily to his
touch, yielded to his caress with an almost pathetic eagerness. "Francis," she murmured, as his arms closed around her, "I want to
forget." CHAPTER XXIII


There followed a brief period of time, the most wonderful of his life,
the happiest of hers. They took advantage of Sir Timothy's absolute
license, and spent long days at The Sanctuary, ideal lovers' days, with
their punt moored at night amongst the lilies, where her kisses seemed
to come to him with an aroma and wonder born of the spot. Then there
came a morning when he found a cloud on her face. She was looking at
the great wall, and away at the minaret beyond. They had heard from
the butler that Sir Timothy had spent the night at the villa, and that
preparations were on hand for another of his wonderful parties. Francis,
who was swift to read her thoughts, led her away into the rose garden
where once she had failed him. "You have been looking over the wall, Margaret," he said reproachfully. She looked at him with a little twitch at the corners of her lips. "Francis dear," she confessed, "I am afraid you are right. I cannot even
look towards The Walled House without wondering why it was built--or
catch a glimpse of that dome without stupid guesses as to what may go on
underneath." "I think very likely," he said soothingly, "we have both exaggerated the
seriousness of your father's hobbies. We know that he has a wonderful
gymnasium there, but the only definite rumour I have ever heard about
the place is that men fight there who have a grudge against one another,
and that they are not too particular about the weight of the gloves. That doesn't appeal to us, you know, Margaret, but it isn't criminal." "If that were all!" she murmured. "I dare say it is," he declared. "London, as you know, is a hot-bed of
gossip. Everything that goes on is ridiculously exaggerated, and I think
that it rather appeals to your father's curious sense of humour to pose
as the law-breaker." She pressed his arm a little. The day was overcast, a slight rain was
beginning to fall. "Francis," she whispered, "we had a perfect day here yesterday. Now the
sun has gone and I am shivery." He understood in a moment. "We'll lunch at Ranelagh," he suggested. "It is almost on the way up. Then we can see what the weather is like. If it is bad, we can dine in
town tonight and do a theatre." "You are a dear," she told him fervently. "I am going in to get ready." Francis went round to the garage for his car, and brought it to the
front. While he was sitting there, Sir Timothy came through the door
in the wall. He was smoking a cigar and he was holding an umbrella to
protect his white flannel suit. He was as usual wonderfully groomed and
turned out, but he walked as though he were tired, and his smile, as he
greeted Francis, lacked a little of its usual light-hearted mockery. "Are you going up to town?" he enquired. Francis pointed to the grey skies. "Just for the day," he answered. "Lady Cynthia went by the early train. We missed you last night." "I came down late," Sir Timothy explained, "and I found it more
convenient to stay at The Walled House. I hope you find that Grover
looks after you while I am away? He has carte blanche so far as regards
my cellar." "We have been wonderfully served," Francis assured him. In the distance they could hear the sound of hammering on the other side
of the wall. Francis moved his head in that direction. "I hear that they are preparing for another of your wonderful
entertainments over there," he remarked. "On Thursday," Sir Timothy assented. "I shall have something to say to
you about it later on." "Am I to take it that I am likely to receive an invitation?" Francis
asked. "I should think it possible," was the calm reply. "What about Margaret?" "My entertainment would not appeal to her," Sir Timothy declared. "The women whom I have been in the habit of asking are not women of
Margaret's type." "And Lady Cynthia?" Sir Timothy frowned slightly. "I find myself in some difficulty as regards Lady Cynthia," he admitted. "I am the guardian of nobody's morals, nor am I the censor of their
tastes, but my entertainments are for men. The women whom I have
hitherto asked have been women in whom I have taken no personal
interest. They are necessary to form a picturesque background for my
rooms, in the same way that I look to the gardeners to supply the
floral decorations. Lady Cynthia's instincts, however, are somewhat
adventurous. She would scarcely be content to remain a decoration." "The issuing of your invitations," Francis remarked, "is of course a
matter which concerns nobody else except yourself. If you do decide to
favour me with one, I shall be delighted to come, provided Margaret has
no objection." "Such a reservation promises well for the future," Sir Timothy observed,
with gentle sarcasm. "Here comes Margaret, looking very well, I am glad
to see." Margaret came forward to greet her father before stepping into the car. They exchanged only a few sentences, but Francis, whose interest in
their relations was almost abnormally keen, fancied that he could detect
signs of some change in their demeanour towards one another. The cold
propriety of deportment which had characterised her former attitude
towards her father, seemed to have given place to something more
uncertain, to something less formal, something which left room even for
a measure of cordiality. She looked at him differently. It was as though
some evil thought which lived in her heart concerning him had perished. "You are busy over there, father?" she asked. "In a way," he replied. "We are preparing for some festivities on
Thursday." Her face fell. "Another party?" "One more," he replied. "Perhaps the last--for the present, at any
rate." She waited as though expecting him to explain. He changed the subject,
however. "I think you are wise to run up to town this morning," he said,
glancing up at the grey skies. "By-the-bye, if you dine at Curzon
Street to-night, do ask Hedges to serve you some of the '99 Cliquot. A
marvellous wine, as you doubtless know, Ledsam, but it should be drunk. Au revoir!" Francis, after a pleasant lunch at Ranelagh, and having arranged with
Margaret to dine with her in Curzon Street, spent an hour or two that
afternoon at his chambers. As he was leaving, just before five, he came
face to face with Shopland descending from a taxi. "Are you busy, Mr. Ledsam?" the latter enquired. "Can you spare me
half-an-hour?" "An hour, if you like," Francis assented. Shopland gave the driver an address and the two men seated themselves in
the taxicab. "Any news?" Francis asked curiously. "Not yet," was the cautious reply. "It will not be long, however." "Before you discover Reggie Wilmore?" The detective smiled in a superior way. "I am no longer particularly interested in Mr. Reginald Wilmore," he
declared. "I have come to the conclusion that his disappearance is not a
serious affair." "It's serious enough for his relatives," Francis objected. "Not if they understood the situation," the detective rejoined. "Assure
them from me that nothing of consequence has happened to that young
man. I have made enquiries at the gymnasium in Holborn, and in other
directions. I am convinced that his absence from home is voluntary, and
that there is no cause for alarm as to his welfare." "Then the sooner you make your way down to Kensington and tell his
mother so, the better," Francis said, a little severely. "Don't forget
that I put you on to this." "Quite right, sir," the detective acquiesced, "and I am grateful to
you. The fact of it is that in making my preliminary investigations
with regard to the disappearance of Mr. Wilmore, I have stumbled upon a
bigger thing. Before many weeks are past, I hope to be able to unearth
one of the greatest scandals of modern times." "The devil!" Francis muttered. He looked thoughtfully, almost anxiously at his companion. Shopland's
face reflected to the full his usual confidence. He had the air of a man
buoyant with hope and with stifled self-satisfaction. "I am engaged," he continued, "upon a study of the methods and habits of
one whom I believe to be a great criminal. I think that when I place my
prisoner in the bar, Wainwright and these other great artists in crime
will fade from the memory." "Is Sir Timothy Brast your man?" Francis asked quietly. His companion frowned portentously. "No names," he begged. "Considering that it was I who first put you on to him," Francis
expostulated, "I don't think you need be so sparing of your confidence." "Mr. Ledsam," the detective assured him, "I shall tell you everything
that is possible. At the same time, I will be frank with you. You are
right when you say that it was you who first directed my attention
towards Sir Timothy Brast. Since that time, however, your own relations
with him, to an onlooker, have become a little puzzling." "I see," Francis murmured. "You've been spying on me?" Shopland shook his head in deprecating fashion. "A study of Sir Timothy during the last month," he said, "has brought
you many a time into the focus." "Where are we going to now?" Francis asked, a little abruptly. "Just a side show, sir. It's one of those outside things I have come
across which give light and shade to the whole affair. We get out here,
if you please." The two men stepped on to the pavement. They were in a street a little
north of Wardour Street, where the shops for the most part were of a
miscellaneous variety. Exactly in front of them, the space behind a
large plate-glass window had been transformed into a sort of show-place
for dogs. There were twenty or thirty of them there, of all breeds and
varieties. "What the mischief is this?" Francis demanded. "Come in and make enquiries," Shopland replied. "I can promise that you
will find it interesting. It's a sort of dog's home." Francis followed his companion into the place. A pleasant-looking,
middle-aged woman came forward and greeted the latter. "Do you mind telling my friend what you told me the other day?" he
asked. "Certainly, sir," she replied. "We collect stray animals here, sir,"
she continued, turning to Francis. "Every one who has a dog or a cat he
can't afford to keep, or which he wants to get rid of, may bring it to
us. We have agents all the time in the streets, and if any official of
the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals brings us news of
a dog or a cat being ill-treated, we either purchase it or acquire it in
some way or other and keep it here." "But your dogs in the window," Francis observed, "all seem to be in
wonderful condition." The woman smiled. "We have a large dog and cat hospital behind," she explained, "and a
veterinary surgeon who is always in attendance. The animals are treated
there as they are brought in, and fed up if they are out of condition. When they are ready to sell, we show them." "But is this a commercial undertaking," Francis enquired carefully, "or
is it a branch of the S.P.C.A.?" "It's quite a private affair, sir," the woman told him. "We charge only
five shillings for the dogs and half-a-crown for the cats, but every one
who has one must sign our book, promising to give it a good home,
and has to be either known to us or to produce references. We do not
attempt, of course, to snake a profit." "Who on earth is responsible for the upkeep?" "We are not allowed to mention any names here, sir, but as a matter of
fact I think that your friend knows. He met the gentleman in here one
day. Would you care to have a look at the hospital, sir?" Francis spent a quarter of an hour wandering around. When they left the
place, Shopland turned to him with a smile. "Now, sir," he said, "shall I tell you at whose expense that place is
run?" "I think I can guess," Francis replied. "I should say that Sir Timothy
Brast was responsible for it." The detective nodded. He was a little disappointed. "You know about his collection of broken-down horses in the park at The
Walled House, too, then, I suppose? They come whinnying after him like a
flock of sheep whenever he shows himself." "I know about them, too," Francis admitted. "I was present once when he
got out of his car, knocked a carter down who was ill-treating a horse,
bought it on the spot and sent it home." Shopland smiled, inscrutably yet with the air of one vastly pleased. "These little side-shows," he said, "are what help to make this, which I
believe will be the greatest case of my life, so supremely interesting. Any one of my fraternity," he continued, with an air of satisfaction,
"can take hold of a thread and follow it step by step, and wind up with
the handcuffs, as I did myself with the young man Fairfax. But a case
like this, which includes a study of temperament, requires something
more." They were seated once more in the taxicab, on their way westward. Francis for the first time was conscious of an utterly new sensation
with regard to his companion. He watched him through half-closed
eyes--an insignificant-looking little man whose clothes, though neat,
were ill-chosen, and whose tie was an offense. There was nothing in the
face to denote unusual intelligence, but the eyes were small and cunning
and the mouth dogged. Francis looked away out of the window. A sudden
flash of realisation had come to him, a wave of unreasoning but positive
dislike. "When do you hope to bring your case to an end?" he asked. The man smiled once more, and the very smile irritated his companion. "Within the course of the next few days, sir," he replied. "And the charge?" The detective turned around. "Mr. Ledsam," he said, "we have been old friends, if you will allow me
to use the word, ever since I was promoted to my present position in
the Force. You have trusted me with a good many cases, and I acknowledge
myself your debtor, but in the matter of Sir Timothy Brast, you will
forgive my saying with all respect, sir, that our ways seem to lie a
little apart." "Will you tell me why you have arrived at that conclusion?" Francis
asked. "It was I who first incited you to set a watch upon Sir Timothy. It was to you I first mentioned certain suspicions I myself had with
regard to him. I treated you with every confidence. Why do you now
withhold yours from me?" "It is quite true, Mr. Ledsam," Shopland admitted, "that it was you who
first pointed out Sir Timothy as an interesting study for my profession,
but that was a matter of months ago. If you will forgive my saying so,
your relations with Sir Timothy have altered since then. You have been
his guest at The Sanctuary, and there is a rumour, sir--you will pardon
me if I seem to be taking a liberty--that you are engaged to be married
to his daughter, Oliver Hilditch's widow." "You seem to be tolerably well informed as to my affairs, Shopland,"
Francis remarked. "Only so far as regards your associations with Sir Timothy," was the
deprecating reply. "If you will excuse me, sir, this is where I should
like to descend." "You have no message for Mr. Wilmore, then?" Francis asked. "Nothing definite, sir, but you can assure him of this. His brother
is not likely to come to any particular harm. I have no absolute
information to offer, but it is my impression that Mr. Reginald Wilmore
will be home before a week is past. Good afternoon, sir." Shopland stepped out of the taxicab and, raising his hat, walked quickly
away. Francis directed the man to drive to Clarges Street. As they drove
off, he was conscious of a folded piece of paper in the corner where
his late companion had been seated. He picked it up, opened it, realised
that it was a letter from a firm of lawyers, addressed to Shopland, and
deliberately read it through. It was dated from a small town not far
from Hatch End:


  DEAR SIR:

  Mr. John Phillips of this firm, who is coroner for the
district, has desired me to answer the enquiry contained in your
official letter of the 13th. The number of inquests held upon bodies
recovered from the Thames in the neighbourhood to which you allude,
during the present year has been seven. Four of these have been
identified. Concerning the remaining three nothing has ever been heard. Such particulars as are on our file will be available to any accredited
representative of the police at any time. Faithfully yours,
                                    PHILLIPS & SON. The taxicab came to a sudden stop. Francis glanced up. Very breathless,
Shopland put his head in at the window. "I dropped a letter," he gasped. Francis folded it up and handed it to him. "What about these three unidentified people, Shopland?" he asked,
looking at him intently. The man frowned angrily. There was a note of defiance in his tone as he
stowed the letter away in his pocketbook. "There were two men and one woman," he replied, "all three of the
upper classes. The bodies were recovered from Wilson's lock, some three
hundred yards from The Walled House." "Do they form part of your case?" Francis persisted. Shopland stepped back. "Mr. Ledsam," he said, "I told you, some little time ago, that so far
as this particular case was concerned I had no confidences to share with
you. I am sorry that you saw that letter. Since you did, however, I hope
you will not take it as a liberty from one in my position if I advise
you most strenuously to do nothing which might impede the course of the
law. Good day, sir!" CHAPTER XXIV


Francis, in that pleasant half-hour before dinner which he spent in
Margaret's sitting-room, told her of the dogs' home near Wardour Street. She listened sympathetically to his description of the place. "I had never heard of it," she acknowledged, "but I am not in anyway
surprised. My father spends at least an hour of every day, when he is
down at Hatch End, amongst the horses, and every time a fresh crock is
brought down, he is as interested as though it were a new toy." "It is a remarkable trait in a very remarkable character," Francis
commented. "I could tell you many things that would surprise you," Margaret
continued. "One night, for instance, when we were staying at The
Sanctuary, he and I were going out to dine with some neighbours and he
heard a cat mewing in the hedge somewhere. He stopped the car, got out
himself, found that the cat had been caught in a trap, released it, and
sent me on to the dinner alone whilst he took the animal back to the
veterinary surgeon at The Walled House. He was simply white with fury
whilst he was tying up the poor thing's leg. I couldn't help asking him
what he would have done if he could have found the farmer who set the
trap. He looked up at me and I was almost frightened. 'I should have
killed him,' he said,--and I believe he meant it. And, Francis, the very
next day we were motoring to London and saw a terrible accident. A
motor bicyclist came down a side road at full speed and ran into a
motor-lorry. My father got out of the car, helped them lift the body
from under the wheels of the lorry, and came back absolutely unmoved. 'Serve the silly young fool right!' was his only remark. He was so
horribly callous that I could scarcely bear to sit by his side.