Some one caught at his throat from behind. "Don't kill him!" cried some one. "He fought for us!" 6


An hour later Benham returned in an extraordinarily dishevelled
and battered condition to his hotel. He found his friend in anxious
consultation with the hotel proprietor. "We were afraid that something had happened to you," said his friend. "I got a little involved," said Benham. "Hasn't some one clawed your cheek?" "Very probably," said Benham. "And torn your coat? And hit you rather heavily upon the neck?" "It was a complicated misunderstanding," said Benham. "Oh! pardon! I'm
rather badly bruised upon that arm you're holding." 7


Benham told the story to White as a jest against himself. "I see now of course that they could not possibly understand my point of
view," he said....

"I'm not sure if they quite followed my German....

"It's odd, too, that I remember saying, 'Let's burn these mortgages,'
and at the time I'm almost sure I didn't know the German for
mortgage...."

It was not the only occasion on which other people had failed to
grasp the full intention behind Benham's proceedings. His aristocratic
impulses were apt to run away with his conceptions of brotherhood, and
time after time it was only too manifest to White that Benham's
pallid flash of anger had astonished the subjects of his disinterested
observations extremely. His explorations in Hayti had been terminated
abruptly by an affair with a native policeman that had necessitated the
intervention of the British Consul. It was begun with that suddenness
that was too often characteristic of Benham, by his hitting the
policeman. It was in the main street of Cap Haytien, and the policeman
had just clubbed an unfortunate youth over the head with the heavily
loaded wooden club which is the normal instrument of Haytien discipline. His blow was a repartee, part of a triangular altercation in which a
large, voluble, mahogany-coloured lady whose head was tied up in a
blue handkerchief played a conspicuous part, but it seemed to Benham an
entirely unjustifiable blow. He allowed an indignation with negro policemen in general that had been
gathering from the very moment of his arrival at Port-au-Prince to carry
him away. He advanced with the kind of shout one would hurl at a dog,
and smote the policeman to the earth with the stout stick that the
peculiar social atmosphere of Hayti had disposed him to carry. By the
local standard his blow was probably a trivial one, but the moral effect
of his indignant pallor and a sort of rearing tallness about him
on these occasions was always very considerable. Unhappily these
characteristics could have no effect on a second negro policeman who was
approaching the affray from behind, and he felled Benham by a blow on
the shoulder that was meant for the head, and with the assistance of his
colleague overpowered him, while the youth and the woman vanished. The two officials dragged Benham in a state of vehement protest to the
lock-up, and only there, in the light of a superior officer's superior
knowledge, did they begin to realize the grave fact of his British
citizenship. The memory of the destruction of the Haytien fleet by a German gunboat
was still vivid in Port-au-Prince, and to that Benham owed it that in
spite of his blank refusal to compensate the man he had knocked over, he
was after two days of anger, two days of extreme insanitary experience,
and much meditation upon his unphilosophical hastiness, released. Quite a number of trivial incidents of a kindred sort diversified his
enquiries into Indian conditions. They too turned for the most part
on his facile exasperation at any defiance of his deep-felt desire for
human brotherhood. At last indeed came an affair that refused ultimately
to remain trivial, and tangled him up in a coil that invoked newspaper
articles and heated controversies. The effect of India upon Benham's mind was a peculiar mixture of
attraction and irritation. He was attracted by the Hindu spirit of
intellectualism and the Hindu repudiation of brutality, and he was
infuriated by the spirit of caste that cuts the great world of India
into a thousand futile little worlds, all aloof and hostile one to the
other. "I came to see India," he wrote, "and there is no India. There is
a great number of Indias, and each goes about with its chin in the air,
quietly scorning everybody else." His Indian adventures and his great public controversy on caste began
with a tremendous row with an Indian civil servant who had turned an
Indian gentleman out of his first-class compartment, and culminated in
a disgraceful fracas with a squatting brown holiness at Benares, who had
thrown aside his little brass bowlful of dinner because Benham's shadow
had fallen upon it. "You unendurable snob!" said Benham, and then lapsing into the forceful
and inadvisable: "By Heaven, you SHALL eat it!..." 8


Benham's detestation of human divisions and hostilities was so deep in
his character as to seem almost instinctive. But he had too a very clear
reason for his hostility to all these amazing breaks in human continuity
in his sense of the gathering dangers they now involve. They had always,
he was convinced, meant conflict, hatred, misery and the destruction
of human dignity, but the new conditions of life that have been brought
about by modern science were making them far more dangerous than they
had ever been before. He believed that the evil and horror of war was
becoming more and more tremendous with every decade, and that the free
play of national prejudice and that stupid filching ambitiousness
that seems to be inseparable from monarchy, were bound to precipitate
catastrophe, unless a real international aristocracy could be brought
into being to prevent it. In the drawer full of papers labelled "Politics," White found a paper
called "The Metal Beast." It showed that for a time Benham had been
greatly obsessed by the thought of the armaments that were in those days
piling up in every country in Europe. He had gone to Essen, and at Essen
he had met a German who had boasted of Zeppelins and the great guns that
were presently to smash the effete British fleet and open the Imperial
way to London. "I could not sleep," he wrote, "on account of this man and his talk and
the streak of hatred in his talk. He distressed me not because he seemed
exceptional, but because he seemed ordinary. I realized that he was more
human than I was, and that only killing and killing could come out of
such humanity. I thought of the great ugly guns I had seen, and of the
still greater guns he had talked about, and how gloatingly he thought
of the destruction they could do. I felt as I used to feel about that
infernal stallion that had killed a man with its teeth and feet, a
despairing fear, a sense of monstrosity in life. And this creature
who had so disturbed me was only a beastly snuffy little man in an
ill-fitting frock-coat, who laid his knife and fork by their tips on the
edge of his plate, and picked his teeth with gusto and breathed into
my face as he talked to me. The commonest of representative men. I went
about that Westphalian country after that, with the conviction that
headless, soulless, blood-drinking metal monsters were breeding all
about me. I felt that science was producing a poisonous swarm, a nest
of black dragons. They were crouching here and away there in France and
England, they were crouching like beasts that bide their time, mewed
up in forts, kennelled in arsenals, hooded in tarpaulins as hawks are
hooded.... And I had never thought very much about them before, and
there they were, waiting until some human fool like that frock-coated
thing of spite, and fools like him multiplied by a million, saw fit
to call them out to action. Just out of hatred and nationalism and
faction...."

Then came a queer fancy. "Great guns, mines, battleships, all that cruelty-apparatus; I see it
more and more as the gathering revenge of dead joyless matter for the
happiness of life. It is a conspiracy of the lifeless, an enormous
plot of the rebel metals against sensation. That is why in particular
half-living people seem to love these things. La Ferriere was a fastness
of the kind of tyranny that passes out of human experience, the tyranny
of the strong man over men. Essen comes, the new thing, the tyranny of
the strong machine....

"Science is either slave or master. These people--I mean the German
people and militarist people generally--have no real mastery over the
scientific and economic forces on which they seem to ride. The monster
of steel and iron carries Kaiser and Germany and all Europe captive. It
has persuaded them to mount upon its back and now they must follow the
logic of its path. Whither?... Only kingship will ever master that beast
of steel which has got loose into the world. Nothing but the sense of
unconquerable kingship in us all will ever dare withstand it.... Men
must be kingly aristocrats--it isn't MAY be now, it is MUST be--or,
these confederated metals, these things of chemistry and metallurgy,
these explosives and mechanisms, will trample the blood and life out of
our race into mere red-streaked froth and filth...."

Then he turned to the question of this metallic beast's release. Would
it ever be given blood? "Men of my generation have been brought up in this threat of a great war
that never comes; for forty years we have had it, so that it is with
a note of incredulity that one tells oneself, 'After all this war may
happen. But can it happen?'" He proceeded to speculate upon the probability whether a great war would
ever devastate western Europe again, and it was very evident to White
that he wanted very much to persuade himself against that idea. It was
too disagreeable for him to think it probable. The paper was dated 1910. It was in October, 1914, that White, who was still working upon the
laborious uncertain account of Benham's life and thought he has recently
published, read what Benham had written. Benham concluded that the
common-sense of the world would hold up this danger until reason could
get "to the head of things." "There are already mighty forces in Germany," Benham wrote, "that will
struggle very powerfully to avoid a war. And these forces increase. Behind the coarseness and the threatenings, the melodrama and the
display of the vulgarer sort there arises a great and noble people.... I
have talked with Germans of the better kind.... You cannot have a whole
nation of Christophes.... There also the true knighthood discovers
itself.... I do not believe this war will overtake us." "WELL!" said White. "I must go back to Germany and understand Germany better," the notes
went on. But other things were to hold Benham back from that resolve. Other
things were to hold many men back from similar resolves until it was too
late for them....

"It is preposterous that these monstrous dangers should lower over
Europe, because a certain threatening vanity has crept into the blood of
a people, because a few crude ideas go inadequately controlled.... Does
no one see what that metallic beast will do if they once let it loose? It will trample cities; it will devour nations...."

White read this on the 9th of October, 1914. One crumpled evening
paper at his feet proclaimed in startled headlines: "Rain of Incendiary
Shells. Antwerp Ablaze." Another declared untruthfully but impressively:
"Six Zeppelins drop Bombs over the Doomed City." He had bought all the evening papers, and had read and re-read them and
turned up maps and worried over strategic problems for which he had no
data at all--as every one did at that time--before he was able to go on
with Benham's manuscripts. These pacific reassurances seemed to White's war-troubled mind like
finding a flattened and faded flower, a girl's love token, between the
pages of some torn and scorched and blood-stained book picked out from a
heap of loot after rapine and murder had had their fill....

"How can we ever begin over again?" said White, and sat for a long time
staring gloomily into the fire, forgetting forgetting, forgetting too
that men who are tired and weary die, and that new men are born to
succeed them....

"We have to begin over again," said White at last, and took up Benham's
papers where he had laid them down....



9


One considerable section of Benham's treatment of the Fourth Limitation
was devoted to what he called the Prejudices of Social Position. This
section alone was manifestly expanding into a large treatise upon the
psychology of economic organization.... It was only very slowly that he had come to realize the important part
played by economic and class hostilities in the disordering of
human affairs. This was a very natural result of his peculiar social
circumstances. Most people born to wealth and ease take the established
industrial system as the natural method in human affairs; it is only
very reluctantly and by real feats of sympathy and disinterestedness
that they can be brought to realize that it is natural only in the sense
that it has grown up and come about, and necessary only because nobody
is strong and clever enough to rearrange it. Their experience of it is
a satisfactory experience. On the other hand, the better off one is, the
wider is one's outlook and the more alert one is to see the risks and
dangers of international dissensions. Travel and talk to foreigners open
one's eyes to aggressive possibilities; history and its warnings become
conceivable. It is in the nature of things that socialists and labour
parties should minimize international obligations and necessities, and
equally so that autocracies and aristocracies and plutocracies should be
negligent of and impatient about social reform. But Benham did come to realize this broader conflict between worker and
director, between poor man and possessor, between resentful humanity and
enterprise, between unwilling toil and unearned opportunity. It is a far
profounder and subtler conflict than any other in human affairs. "I can
foresee a time," he wrote, "when the greater national and racial hatreds
may all be so weakened as to be no longer a considerable source of human
limitation and misery, when the suspicions of complexion and language
and social habit are allayed, and when the element of hatred and
aggression may be clean washed out of most religious cults, but I do not
begin to imagine a time, because I cannot imagine a method, when there
will not be great friction between those who employ, those who direct
collective action, and those whose part it is to be the rank and file in
industrialism. This, I know, is a limitation upon my confidence due
very largely to the restricted nature of my knowledge of this sort of
organization. Very probably resentment and suspicion in the mass and
self-seeking and dishonesty in the fortunate few are not so deeply
seated, so necessary as they seem to be, and if men can be cheerfully
obedient and modestly directive in war time, there is no reason why
ultimately they should not be so in the business of peace. But I do not
understand the elements of the methods by which this state of affairs
can be brought about. "If I were to confess this much to an intelligent working man I know
that at once he would answer 'Socialism,' but Socialism is no more a
solution of this problem than eating is a solution when one is lost in
the wilderness and hungry. Of course everybody with any intelligence
wants Socialism, everybody, that is to say, wants to see all human
efforts directed to the common good and a common end, but brought face
to face with practical problems Socialism betrays a vast insufficiency
of practical suggestions. I do not say that Socialism would not work,
but I do say that so far Socialists have failed to convince me that
they could work it. The substitution of a stupid official for a greedy
proprietor may mean a vanished dividend, a limited output and no
other human advantage whatever. Socialism is in itself a mere eloquent
gesture, inspiring, encouraging, perhaps, but beyond that not very
helpful, towards the vast problem of moral and material adjustment
before the race. That problem is incurably miscellaneous and intricate,
and only by great multitudes of generous workers, one working at this
point and one at that, secretly devoted knights of humanity, hidden
and dispersed kings, unaware of one another, doubting each his right
to count himself among those who do these kingly services, is this
elaborate rightening of work and guidance to be done." So from these most fundamental social difficulties he came back to his
panacea. All paths and all enquiries led him back to his conception of
aristocracy, conscious, self-disciplined, devoted, self-examining yet
secret, making no personal nor class pretences, as the supreme need not
only of the individual but the world. 10


It was the Labour trouble in the Transvaal which had brought the two
schoolfellows together again. White had been on his way to Zimbabwe. An emotional disturbance of unusual intensity had driven him to seek
consolations in strange scenery and mysterious desolations. It was as if
Zimbabwe called to him. Benham had come to South Africa to see into the
question of Indian immigration, and he was now on his way to meet Amanda
in London. Neither man had given much heed to the gathering social
conflict on the Rand until the storm burst about them. There had been
a few paragraphs in the papers about a dispute upon a point of labour
etiquette, a question of the recognition of Trade Union officials, a
thing that impressed them both as technical, and then suddenly a long
incubated quarrel flared out in rioting and violence, the burning of
houses and furniture, attacks on mines, attempts to dynamite trains. White stayed in Johannesburg because he did not want to be stranded up
country by the railway strike that was among the possibilities of
the situation. Benham stayed because he was going to London very
reluctantly, and he was glad of this justification for a few days'
delay. The two men found themselves occupying adjacent tables in the
Sherborough Hotel, and White was the first to recognize the other. They
came together with a warmth and readiness of intimacy that neither would
have displayed in London. White had not seen Benham since the social days of Amanda at Lancaster
Gate, and he was astonished at the change a few years had made in him. The peculiar contrast of his pallor and his dark hair had become more
marked, his skin was deader, his features seemed more prominent and his
expression intenser. His eyes were very bright and more sunken under his
brows. He had suffered from yellow fever in the West Indies, and these
it seemed were the marks left by that illness. And he was much more
detached from the people about him; less attentive to the small
incidents of life, more occupied with inner things. He greeted White
with a confidence that White was one day to remember as pathetic. "It is good to meet an old friend," Benham said. "I have lost friends. And I do not make fresh ones. I go about too much by myself, and I do
not follow the same tracks that other people are following...."

What track was he following? It was now that White first heard of the
Research Magnificent. He wanted to know what Benham was doing, and
Benham after some partial and unsatisfactory explanation of his interest
in insurgent Hindoos, embarked upon larger expositions. "It is, of
course, a part of something else," he amplified. He was writing a book,
"an enormous sort of book." He laughed with a touch of shyness. It
was about "everything," about how to live and how not to live. And
"aristocracy, and all sorts of things." White was always curious about
other people's books. Benham became earnest and more explicit under
encouragement, and to talk about his book was soon to talk about
himself. In various ways, intentionally and inadvertently, he told White
much. These chance encounters, these intimacies of the train and hotel,
will lead men at times to a stark frankness of statement they would
never permit themselves with habitual friends. About the Johannesburg labour trouble they talked very little,
considering how insistent it was becoming. But the wide propositions
of the Research Magnificent, with its large indifference to immediate
occurrences, its vast patience, its tremendous expectations, contrasted
very sharply in White's memory with the bitterness, narrowness and
resentment of the events about them. For him the thought of that first
discussion of this vast inchoate book into which Benham's life was
flowering, and which he was ultimately to summarize, trailed with it a
fringe of vivid little pictures; pictures of crowds of men hurrying
on bicycles and afoot under a lowering twilight sky towards murmuring
centres of disorder, of startling flares seen suddenly afar off, of the
muffled galloping of troops through the broad dusty street in the night,
of groups of men standing and watching down straight broad roads, roads
that ended in groups of chimneys and squat buildings of corrugated iron. And once there was a marching body of white men in the foreground and a
complicated wire fence, and a clustering mass of Kaffirs watching them
over this fence and talking eagerly amongst themselves. "All this affair here is little more than a hitch in the machinery,"
said Benham, and went back to his large preoccupation.... But White, who had not seen so much human disorder as Benham, felt that
it was more than that. Always he kept the tail of his eye upon that
eventful background while Benham talked to him. When the firearms went off he may for the moment have even given the
background the greater share of his attention....



11


It was only as White burrowed through his legacy of documents that the
full values came to very many things that Benham said during these last
conversations. The papers fitted in with his memories of their long
talks like text with commentary; so much of Benham's talk had repeated
the private writings in which he had first digested his ideas that it
was presently almost impossible to disentangle what had been said and
understood at Johannesburg from the fuller statement of those patched
and corrected manuscripts. The two things merged in White's mind as he
read. The written text took upon itself a resonance of Benham's
voice; it eked out the hints and broken sentences of his remembered
conversation. But some things that Benham did not talk about at all, left by their
mere marked absence an impression on White's mind. And occasionally
after Benham had been talking for a long time there would be an
occasional aphasia, such as is often apparent in the speech of men who
restrain themselves from betraying a preoccupation. He would say nothing
about Amanda or about women in general, he was reluctant to speak of
Prothero, and another peculiarity was that he referred perhaps half a
dozen times or more to the idea that he was a "prig." He seemed to be
defending himself against some inner accusation, some unconquerable
doubt of the entire adventure of his life. These half hints and hints by
omission exercised the quick intuitions of White's mind very keenly, and
he drew far closer to an understanding of Benham's reserves than Benham
ever suspected....

At first after his parting from Amanda in London Benham had felt
completely justified in his treatment of her. She had betrayed him and
he had behaved, he felt, with dignity and self-control. He had no doubt
that he had punished her very effectively, and it was only after he had
been travelling in China with Prothero for some time and in the light
of one or two chance phrases in her letters that he began to have doubts
whether he ought to have punished her at all. And one night at Shanghai
he had a dream in which she stood before him, dishevelled and tearful,
his Amanda, very intensely his Amanda, and said that she was dirty
and shameful and spoilt for ever, because he had gone away from her. Afterwards the dream became absurd: she showed him the black leopard's
fur as though it was a rug, and it was now moth-eaten and mangey, the
leopard skin that had been so bright and wonderful such a little time
ago, and he awoke before he could answer her, and for a long time he
was full of unspoken answers explaining that in view of her deliberate
unfaithfulness the position she took up was absurd. She had spoilt her
own fur. But what was more penetrating and distressing in this dream was
not so much the case Amanda stated as the atmosphere of unconquerable
intimacy between them, as though they still belonged to each other,
soul to soul, as though nothing that had happened afterwards could have
destroyed their common responsibility and the common interest of their
first unstinted union. She was hurt, and of course he was hurt. He began
to see that his marriage to Amanda was still infinitely more than a
technical bond. And having perceived that much he presently began to doubt whether she
realized anything of the sort. Her letters fluctuated very much in tone,
but at times they were as detached and guarded as a schoolgirl writing
to a cousin. Then it seemed to Benham an extraordinary fraud on her
part that she should presume to come into his dream with an entirely
deceptive closeness and confidence. She began to sound him in these
latter letters upon the possibility of divorce. This, which he had been
quite disposed to concede in London, now struck him as an outrageous
suggestion. He wrote to ask her why, and she responded exasperatingly
that she thought it was "better." But, again, why better? It is
remarkable that although his mind had habituated itself to the idea that
Easton was her lover in London, her thought of being divorced, no doubt
to marry again, filled him with jealous rage. She asked him to take
the blame in the divorce proceedings. There, again, he found himself
ungenerous. He did not want to do that. Why should he do that? As a
matter of fact he was by no means reconciled to the price he had paid
for his Research Magnificent; he regretted his Amanda acutely. He was
regretting her with a regret that grew when by all the rules of life it
ought to be diminishing. It was in consequence of that regret and his controversies with Prothero
while they travelled together in China that his concern about what he
called priggishness arose. It is a concern that one may suppose has a
little afflicted every reasonably self-conscious man who has turned from
the natural passionate personal life to religion or to public service
or any abstract devotion. These things that are at least more extensive
than the interests of flesh and blood have a trick of becoming
unsubstantial, they shine gloriously and inspiringly upon the
imagination, they capture one and isolate one and then they vanish out
of sight. It is far easier to be entirely faithful to friend or lover
than it is to be faithful to a cause or to one's country or to a
religion. In the glow of one's first service that larger idea may be as
closely spontaneous as a handclasp, but in the darkness that comes as
the glow dies away there is a fearful sense of unreality. It was in such
dark moments that Benham was most persecuted by his memories of Amanda
and most distressed by this suspicion that the Research Magnificent was
a priggishness, a pretentious logomachy. Prothero could indeed hint as
much so skilfully that at times the dream of nobility seemed an insult
to the sunshine, to the careless laughter of children, to the good light
in wine and all the warm happiness of existence. And then Amanda would
peep out of the dusk and whisper, "Of course if you could leave me--! Was I not LIFE? Even now if you cared to come back to me-- For I loved
you best and loved you still, old Cheetah, long after you had left me to
follow your dreams.... Even now I am drifting further into lies and the
last shreds of dignity drop from me; a dirty, lost, and shameful
leopard I am now, who was once clean and bright.... You could come back,
Cheetah, and you could save me yet. If you would love me...."

In certain moods she could wring his heart by such imagined speeches,
the very quality of her voice was in them, a softness that his ear had
loved, and not only could she distress him, but when Benham was in this
heartache mood, when once she had set him going, then his little mother
also would rise against him, touchingly indignant, with her blue eyes
bright with tears; and his frowsty father would back towards him and
sit down complaining that he was neglected, and even little Mrs.
Skelmersdale would reappear, bravely tearful on her chair looking after
him as he slunk away from her through Kensington Gardens; indeed every
personal link he had ever had to life could in certain moods pull him
back through the door of self-reproach Amanda opened and set him aching
and accusing himself of harshness and self-concentration. The very
kittens of his childhood revived forgotten moments of long-repented
hardness. For a year before Prothero was killed there were these
heartaches. That tragedy gave them their crowning justification. All
these people said in this form or that, "You owed a debt to us, you
evaded it, you betrayed us, you owed us life out of yourself, love and
services, and you have gone off from us all with this life that was
ours, to live by yourself in dreams about the rule of the world,
and with empty phantoms of power and destiny. All this was
intellectualization. You sacrificed us to the thin things of the mind. There is no rule of the world at all, or none that a man like you
may lay hold upon. The rule of the world is a fortuitous result of
incalculably multitudinous forces. But all of us you could have made
happier. You could have spared us distresses. Prothero died because of
you. Presently it will be the turn of your father, your mother--Amanda
perhaps...."

He made no written note of his heartaches, but he made several memoranda
about priggishness that White read and came near to understanding. In
spite of the tugging at his heart-strings, Benham was making up his mind
to be a prig. He weighed the cold uningratiating virtues of priggishness
against his smouldering passion for Amanda, and against his obstinate
sympathy for Prothero's grossness and his mother's personal pride, and
he made his choice. But it was a reluctant choice. One fragment began in the air. "Of course I had made myself responsible
for her life. But it was, you see, such a confoundedly energetic life,
as vigorous and as slippery as an eel.... Only by giving all my strength
to her could I have held Amanda.... So what was the good of trying to
hold Amanda?... "All one's people have this sort of claim upon one. Claims made by their
pride and their self-respect, and their weaknesses and dependences. You've no right to hurt them, to kick about and demand freedom when
it means snapping and tearing the silly suffering tendrils they have
wrapped about you. The true aristocrat I think will have enough grasp,
enough steadiness, to be kind and right to every human being and still
do the work that ought to be his essential life. I see that now. It's one of the things this last year or so of loneliness has made me
realize; that in so far as I have set out to live the aristocratic life
I have failed. Instead I've discovered it--and found myself out. I'm an
overstrung man. I go harshly and continuously for one idea. I live as I
ride. I blunder through my fences, I take off too soon. I've no natural
ease of mind or conduct or body. I am straining to keep hold of a thing
too big for me and do a thing beyond my ability. Only after Prothero's
death was it possible for me to realize the prig I have always been,
first as regards him and then as regards Amanda and my mother and every
one. A necessary unavoidable priggishness...." I do not see how
certain things can be done without prigs, people, that is to say, so
concentrated and specialized in interest as to be a trifle inhuman, so
resolved as to be rather rhetorical and forced.... All things must begin
with clumsiness, there is no assurance about pioneers....

"Some one has to talk about aristocracy, some one has to explain
aristocracy.... But the very essence of aristocracy, as I conceive it,
is that it does not explain nor talk about itself....

"After all it doesn't matter what I am.... It's just a private vexation
that I haven't got where I meant to get. That does not affect the truth
I have to tell....

"If one has to speak the truth with the voice of a prig, still one must
speak the truth. I have worked out some very considerable things in my
research, and the time has come when I must set them out clearly and
plainly. That is my job anyhow. My journey to London to release Amanda
will be just the end of my adolescence and the beginning of my real
life. It will release me from my last entanglement with the fellow
creatures I have always failed to make happy.... It's a detail in the
work.... And I shall go on. "But I shall feel very like a man who goes back for a surgical
operation. "It's very like that. A surgical operation, and when it is over perhaps
I shall think no more about it. "And beyond these things there are great masses of work to be done. So
far I have but cleared up for myself a project and outline of living. I
must begin upon these masses now, I must do what I can upon the details,
and, presently, I shall see more clearly where other men are working to
the same ends...."



12


Benham's expedition to China with Prothero was essentially a wrestle
between his high resolve to work out his conception of the noble life to
the utmost limit and his curiously invincible affection and sympathy for
the earthliness of that inglorious little don. Although Benham insisted
upon the dominance of life by noble imaginations and relentless
reasonableness, he would never altogether abandon the materialism of
life. Prothero had once said to him, "You are the advocate of the brain
and I of the belly. Only, only we respect each other." And at another
time, "You fear emotions and distrust sensations. I invite them. You do
not drink gin because you think it would make you weep. But if I could
not weep in any other way I would drink gin." And it was under
the influence of Prothero that Benham turned from the haughty
intellectualism, the systematized superiorities and refinements, the
caste marks and defensive dignities of India to China, that great
teeming stinking tank of humorous yellow humanity. Benham had gone to Prothero again after a bout of elevated idealism. It was only very slowly that he reconciled his mind to the idea of an
entirely solitary pursuit of his aristocratic dream. For some time as
he went about the world he was trying to bring himself into relationship
with the advanced thinkers, the liberal-minded people who seemed to
promise at least a mental and moral co-operation. Yet it is difficult to
see what co-operation was possible unless it was some sort of agreement
that presently they should all shout together. And it was after a
certain pursuit of Rabindranath Tagore, whom he met in Hampstead, that a
horror of perfect manners and perfect finish came upon him, and he fled
from that starry calm to the rich uncleanness of the most undignified
fellow of Trinity. And as an advocate and exponent of the richness of
the lower levels of life, as the declared antagonist of caste and of
the uttermost refinements of pride, Prothero went with Benham by way of
Siberia to the Chinese scene. Their controversy was perceptible at every dinner-table in their
choice of food and drink. Benham was always wary and Prothero always
appreciative. It peeped out in the distribution of their time, in the
direction of their glances. Whenever women walked about, Prothero gave
way to a sort of ethnological excitement. "That girl--a wonderful racial
type." But in Moscow he was sentimental. He insisted on going again to
the Cosmopolis Bazaar, and when he had ascertained that Anna Alexievna
had vanished and left no trace he prowled the streets until the small
hours. In the eastward train he talked intermittently of her. "I should have
defied Cambridge," he said. But at every stopping station he got out upon the platform
ethnologically alert....

Theoretically Benham was disgusted with Prothero. Really he was not
disgusted at all. There was something about Prothero like a sparrow,
like a starling, like a Scotch terrier.... These, too, are morally
objectionable creatures that do not disgust....

Prothero discoursed much upon the essential goodness of Russians. He
said they were a people of genius, that they showed it in their faults
and failures just as much as in their virtues and achievements. He
extolled the "germinating disorder" of Moscow far above the "implacable
discipline" of Berlin. Only a people of inferior imagination, a base
materialist people, could so maintain its attention upon precision and
cleanliness. Benham was roused to defence against this paradox. "But all
exaltation neglects," said Prothero. "No religion has ever boasted that
its saints were spick and span." This controversy raged between them in
the streets of Irkutsk. It was still burning while they picked their way
through the indescribable filth of Pekin. "You say that all this is a fine disdain for material things," said
Benham. "But look out there!" Apt to their argument a couple of sturdy young women came shuffling
along, cleaving the crowd in the narrow street by virtue of a single
word and two brace of pails of human ordure. "That is not a fine disdain for material things," said Benham. "That is
merely individualism and unsystematic living." "A mere phase of frankness. Only frankness is left to them now. The
Manchus crippled them, spoilt their roads and broke their waterways. European intervention paralyses every attempt they make to establish
order on their own lines. In the Ming days China did not reek.... And,
anyhow, Benham, it's better than the silly waste of London...."

And in a little while Prothero discovered that China had tried Benham
and found him wanting, centuries and dynasties ago. What was this new-fangled aristocratic man, he asked, but the ideal of
Confucius, the superior person, "the son of the King"? There you had the
very essence of Benham, the idea of self-examination, self-preparation
under a vague Theocracy. ("Vaguer," said Benham, "for the Confucian
Heaven could punish and reward.") Even the elaborate sham modesty of the
two dreams was the same. Benham interrupted and protested with heat. And
this Confucian idea of the son of the King, Prothero insisted, had been
the cause of China's paralysis. "My idea of nobility is not traditional
but expectant," said Benham. "After all, Confucianism has held together
a great pacific state far longer than any other polity has ever lasted. I'll accept your Confucianism. I've not the slightest objection to
finding China nearer salvation than any other land. Do but turn it round
so that it looks to the future and not to the past, and it will be the
best social and political culture in the world. That, indeed, is what
is happening. Mix Chinese culture with American enterprise and you will
have made a new lead for mankind." From that Benham drove on to discoveries. "When a man thinks of the past
he concentrates on self; when he thinks of the future he radiates from
self. Call me a neo-Confucian; with the cone opening forward away from
me, instead of focussing on me...."

"You make me think of an extinguisher," said Prothero. "You know I am thinking of a focus," said Benham. "But all your thought
now has become caricature.... You have stopped thinking. You are
fighting after making up your mind...."

Prothero was a little disconcerted by Benham's prompt endorsement of his
Chinese identification. He had hoped it would be exasperating. He tried
to barb his offence. He amplified the indictment. All cultures must
be judged by their reaction and fatigue products, and Confucianism had
produced formalism, priggishness, humbug.... No doubt its ideals had had
their successes; they had unified China, stamped the idea of universal
peace and good manners upon the greatest mass of population in the
world, paved the way for much beautiful art and literature and living. "But in the end, all your stern orderliness, Benham," said Prothero,
"only leads to me. The human spirit rebels against this everlasting
armour on the soul. After Han came T'ang. Have you never read Ling Po? There's scraps of him in English in that little book you have--what is
it?--the LUTE OF JADE? He was the inevitable Epicurean; the Omar Khayyam
after the Prophet. Life must relax at last...."

"No!" cried Benham. "If it is traditional, I admit, yes; but if it is
creative, no...."

Under the stimulation of their undying controversy Benham was driven to
closer enquiries into Chinese thought. He tried particularly to get to
mental grips with English-speaking Chinese. "We still know nothing of
China," said Prothero. "Most of the stuff we have been told about this
country is mere middle-class tourists' twaddle. We send merchants from
Brixton and missionaries from Glasgow, and what doesn't remind them of
these delectable standards seems either funny to them or wicked. I admit
the thing is slightly pot-bound, so to speak, in the ancient characters
and the ancient traditions, but for all that, they KNOW, they HAVE, what
all the rest of the world has still to find and get. When they begin to
speak and write in a modern way and handle modern things and break into
the soil they have scarcely touched, the rest of the world will find
just how much it is behind.... Oh! not soldiering; the Chinese are not
such fools as that, but LIFE...."

Benham was won to a half belief in these assertions. He came to realize more and more clearly that while India dreams or
wrestles weakly in its sleep, while Europe is still hopelessly and
foolishly given over to militant monarchies, racial vanities, delirious
religious feuds and an altogether imbecile fumbling with loaded
guns, China, even more than America, develops steadily into a massive
possibility of ordered and aristocratic liberalism.... The two men followed their associated and disconnected paths. Through
Benham's chance speeches and notes, White caught glimpses, as one might
catch glimpses through a moving trellis, of that bilateral adventure. He
saw Benham in conversation with liberal-minded mandarins, grave-faced,
bald-browed persons with disciplined movements, who sat with their hands
thrust into their sleeves talking excellent English; while Prothero
pursued enquiries of an intenser, more recondite sort with gentlemen of
a more confidential type. And, presently, Prothero began to discover and
discuss the merits of opium. For if one is to disavow all pride and priggishness, if one is to
find the solution of life's problem in the rational enjoyment of one's
sensations, why should one not use opium? It is art materialized. It gives tremendous experiences with a minimum of exertion, and if
presently its gifts diminish one need but increase the quantity. Moreover, it quickens the garrulous mind, and steadies the happiness of
love. Across the varied adventures of Benham's journey in China fell the
shadow first of a suspicion and then of a certainty.... The perfected and ancient vices of China wrapped about Prothero like
some tainted but scented robe, and all too late Benham sought to drag
him away. And then in a passion of disgust turned from him. "To this," cried Benham, "one comes! Save for pride and fierceness!"