His
imagination became childishly romantic. The open down about him with its
scrub of thorn and yew became the wilderness of the world, and through
it they went--in armour, weightless armour--and they wore long swords. There was a breeze blowing and larks were singing and something,
something dark and tortuous dashed suddenly in headlong flight from
before their feet. It was an ethical problem such as those Mrs.
Skelmersdale nursed in her bosom. But at the sight of Amanda it had
straightened out--and fled....

And interweaving with such imaginings, he was some day to record, there
were others. She had brought back to his memory the fancies that had
been aroused in his first reading of Plato's REPUBLIC; she made him
think of those women Guardians, who were the friends and mates of men. He wanted now to re-read that book and the LAWS. He could not remember
if the Guardians were done in the LAWS as well as in the REPUBLIC. He
wished he had both these books in his rucksack, but as he had not, he
decided he would hunt for them in Chichester. When would he see Amanda
again? He would ask his mother to make the acquaintance of these very
interesting people, but as they did not come to London very much it
might be some time before he had a chance of seeing her again. And, besides, he was going to America and India. The prospect of an
exploration of the world was still noble and attractive; but he realized
it would stand very much in the way of his seeing more of Amanda. Would
it be a startling and unforgivable thing if presently he began to write
to her? Girls of that age and spirit living in out-of-the-way villages
have been known to marry.... Marriage didn't at this stage strike Benham as an agreeable aspect of
Amanda's possibilities; it was an inconvenience; his mind was running
in the direction of pedestrian tours in armour of no particular weight,
amidst scenery of a romantic wildness.... When he had gone to the house and taken his leave that morning it had
seemed quite in the vein of the establishment that he should be received
by Amanda alone and taken up the long garden before anybody else
appeared, to see the daffodils and the early apple-trees in blossom and
the pear-trees white and delicious. Then he had taken his leave of them all and made his social tentatives. Did they ever come to London? When they did they must let his people
know. He would so like them to know his mother, Lady Marayne. And so on
with much gratitude. Amanda had said that she and the dogs would come with him up the hill,
she had said it exactly as a boy might have said it, she had brought him
up to the corner of Up Park and had sat down there on a heap of stones
and watched him until he was out of sight, waving to him when he looked
back. "Come back again," she had cried. In Chichester he found a little green-bound REPUBLIC in a second-hand
book-shop near the Cathedral, but there was no copy of the LAWS to
be found in the place. Then he was taken with the brilliant idea of
sleeping the night in Chichester and going back next day via Harting to
Petersfield station and London. He carried out this scheme and got to
South Harting neatly about four o'clock in the afternoon. He found
Mrs. Wilder and Mrs. Morris and Amanda and the dogs entertaining Mr.
Rathbone-Sanders at tea, and they all seemed a little surprised, and,
except Mr. Rathbone-Sanders, they all seemed pleased to see him again
so soon. His explanation of why he hadn't gone back to London from
Chichester struck him as a little unconvincing in the cold light of Mr.
Rathbone-Sanders' eye. But Amanda was manifestly excited by his return,
and he told them his impressions of Chichester and described the
entertainment of the evening guest at a country inn and suddenly
produced his copy of the REPUBLIC. "I found this in a book-shop," he
said, "and I brought it for you, because it describes one of the best
dreams of aristocracy there has ever been dreamt." At first she praised it as a pretty book in the dearest little binding,
and then realized that there were deeper implications, and became
grave and said she would read it through and through, she loved such
speculative reading. She came to the door with the others and stayed at the door after they
had gone in again. When he looked back at the corner of the road to
Petersfield she was still at the door and waved farewell to him. He only saw a light slender figure, but when she came back into the
sitting-room Mr. Rathbone-Sanders noted the faint flush in her cheek and
an unwonted abstraction in her eye. And in the evening she tucked her feet up in the armchair by the lamp
and read the REPUBLIC very intently and very thoughtfully, occasionally
turning over a page. 5


When Benham got back to London he experienced an unwonted desire to
perform his social obligations to the utmost. So soon as he had had some dinner at his club he wrote his South Harting
friends a most agreeable letter of thanks for their kindness to him. In
a little while he hoped he should see them again. His mother, too, was
most desirous to meet them.... That done, he went on to his flat and to
various aspects of life for which he was quite unprepared. But here we may note that Amanda answered him. Her reply came some four
days later. It was written in a square schoolgirl hand, it covered
three sheets of notepaper, and it was a very intelligent essay upon the
REPUBLIC of Plato. "Of course," she wrote, "the Guardians are inhuman,
but it was a glorious sort of inhumanity. They had a spirit--like sharp
knives cutting through life." It was her best bit of phrasing and it pleased Benham very much. But, indeed, it was not her own phrasing, she had culled it from a
disquisition into which she had led Mr. Rathbone-Sanders, and she had
sent it to Benham as she might have sent him a flower. 6


Benham re-entered the flat from which he had fled so precipitately with
three very definite plans in his mind. The first was to set out upon
his grand tour of the world with as little delay as possible, to shut
up this Finacue Street establishment for a long time, and get rid of
the soul-destroying perfections of Merkle. The second was to end his
ill-advised intimacy with little Mrs. Skelmersdale as generously and
cheerfully as possible. The third was to bring Lady Marayne into social
relations with the Wilder and Morris MENAGE at South Harting. It did not
strike him that there was any incompatibility among these projects or
any insurmountable difficulty in any of them until he was back in his
flat. The accumulation of letters, packages and telephone memoranda upon his
desk included a number of notes and slips to remind him that both Mrs.
Skelmersdale and his mother were ladies of some determination. Even as
he stood turning over the pile of documents the mechanical vehemence of
the telephone filled him with a restored sense of the adverse will in
things. "Yes, mam," he heard Merkle's voice, "yes, mam. I will tell
him, mam. Will you keep possession, mam." And then in the doorway of the
study, "Mrs. Skelmersdale, sir. Upon the telephone, sir." Benham reflected with various notes in his hand. Then he went to the
telephone. "You Wicked Boy, where have you been hiding?" "I've been away. I may have to go away again." "Not before you have seen me. Come round and tell me all about it." Benham lied about an engagement. "Then to-morrow in the morning."... Impossible. "In the afternoon. You don't WANT to see me." Benham did want to see
her. "Come round and have a jolly little evening to-morrow night. I've got
some more of that harpsichord music. And I'm dying to see you. Don't you
understand?" Further lies. "Look here," said Benham, "can you come and have a talk
in Kensington Gardens? You know the place, near that Chinese garden. Paddington Gate...."

The lady's voice fell to flatness. She agreed. "But why not come to see
me HERE?" she asked. Benham hung up the receiver abruptly. He walked slowly back to his study. "Phew!" he whispered to himself. It was like hitting her in the face. He didn't want to be a brute,
but short of being a brute there was no way out for him from this
entanglement. Why, oh! why the devil had he gone there to lunch?... He resumed his examination of the waiting letters with a ruffled mind. The most urgent thing about them was the clear evidence of gathering
anger on the part of his mother. He had missed a lunch party at Sir
Godfrey's on Tuesday and a dinner engagement at Philip Magnet's, quite
an important dinner in its way, with various promising young Liberals,
on Wednesday evening. And she was furious at "this stupid mystery. Of course you're bound to be found out, and of course there will be a
scandal."... He perceived that this last note was written on his own
paper. "Merkle!" he cried sharply. "Yessir!" Merkle had been just outside, on call. "Did my mother write any of these notes here?" he asked. "Two, sir. Her ladyship was round here three times, sir." "Did she see all these letters?" "Not the telephone calls, sir. I 'ad put them on one side. But.... It's
a little thing, sir." He paused and came a step nearer. "You see, sir," he explained with the
faintest flavour of the confidential softening his mechanical respect,
"yesterday, when 'er ladyship was 'ere, sir, some one rang up on the
telephone--"

"But you, Merkle--"

"Exactly, sir. But 'er ladyship said 'I'LL go to that, Merkle,' and just
for a moment I couldn't exactly think 'ow I could manage it, sir, and
there 'er ladyship was, at the telephone. What passed, sir, I couldn't
'ear. I 'eard her say, 'Any message?' And I FANCY, sir, I 'eard 'er say,
'I'm the 'ousemaid,' but that, sir, I think must have been a mistake,
sir." "Must have been," said Benham. "Certainly--must have been. And the call
you think came from--?" "There again, sir, I'm quite in the dark. But of course, sir, it's
usually Mrs. Skelmersdale, sir. Just about her time in the afternoon. On
an average, sir...."



7


"I went out of London to think about my life." It was manifest that Lady Marayne did not believe him. "Alone?" she asked. "Of course alone." "STUFF!" said Lady Marayne. She had taken him into her own little sitting-room, she had thrown aside
gloves and fan and theatre wrap, curled herself comfortably into the
abundantly cushioned corner by the fire, and proceeded to a mixture of
cross-examination and tirade that he found it difficult to make head
against. She was vibrating between distressed solicitude and resentful
anger. She was infuriated at his going away and deeply concerned at
what could have taken him away. "I was worried," he said. "London is too
crowded to think in. I wanted to get myself alone." "And there I was while you were getting yourself alone, as you call it,
wearing my poor little brains out to think of some story to tell people. I had to stuff them up you had a sprained knee at Chexington, and for
all I knew any of them might have been seeing you that morning. Besides
what has a boy like you to worry about? It's all nonsense, Poff." She awaited his explanations. Benham looked for a moment like his
father. "I'm not getting on, mother," he said. "I'm scattering myself. I'm
getting no grip. I want to get a better hold upon life, or else I do not
see what is to keep me from going to pieces--and wasting existence. It's
rather difficult sometimes to tell what one thinks and feels--"

She had not really listened to him. "Who is that woman," she interrupted suddenly, "Mrs. Fly-by-Night, or
some such name, who rings you up on the telephone?" Benham hesitated, blushed, and regretted it. "Mrs. Skelmersdale," he said after a little pause. "It's all the same. Who is she?" "She's a woman I met at a studio somewhere, and I went with her to one
of those Dolmetsch concerts." He stopped. Lady Marayne considered him in silence for a little while. "All men,"
she said at last, "are alike. Husbands, sons and brothers, they are all
alike. Sons! One expects them to be different. They aren't different. Why should they be? I suppose I ought to be shocked, Poff. But I'm not. She seems to be very fond of you." "She's--she's very good--in her way. She's had a difficult life...."

"You can't leave a man about for a moment," Lady Marayne reflected. "Poff, I wish you'd fetch me a glass of water." When he returned she was looking very fixedly into the fire. "Put it
down," she said, "anywhere. Poff! is this Mrs. Helter-Skelter a discreet
sort of woman? Do you like her?" She asked a few additional particulars
and Benham made his grudging admission of facts. "What I still don't
understand, Poff, is why you have been away." "I went away," said Benham, "because I want to clear things up." "But why? Is there some one else?" "No." "You went alone? All the time?" "I've told you I went alone. Do you think I tell you lies, mother?" "Everybody tells lies somehow," said Lady Marayne. "Easy lies or stiff
ones. Don't FLOURISH, Poff. Don't start saying things like a moral
windmill in a whirlwind. It's all a muddle. I suppose every one in
London is getting in or out of these entanglements--or something of
the sort. And this seems a comparatively slight one. I wish it hadn't
happened. They do happen." An expression of perplexity came into her face. She looked at him. "Why
do you want to throw her over?" "I WANT to throw her over," said Benham. He stood up and went to the hearthrug, and his mother reflected that
this was exactly what all men did at just this phase of a discussion. Then things ceased to be sensible. From overhead he said to her: "I want to get away from this
complication, this servitude. I want to do some--some work. I want to
get my mind clear and my hands clear. I want to study government and the
big business of the world." "And she's in the way?" He assented. "You men!" said Lady Marayne after a little pause. "What queer beasts
you are! Here is a woman who is kind to you. She's fond of you. I could
tell she's fond of you directly I heard her. And you amuse yourself with
her. And then it's Gobble, Gobble, Gobble, Great Work, Hands Clear, Big
Business of the World. Why couldn't you think of that before, Poff? Why
did you begin with her?" "It was unexpected...."

"STUFF!" said Lady Marayne for a second time. "Well," she said, "well. Your Mrs. Fly-by-Night,--oh it doesn't matter!--whatever she calls
herself, must look after herself. I can't do anything for her. I'm not
supposed even to know about her. I daresay she'll find her consolations. I suppose you want to go out of London and get away from it all. I can
help you there, perhaps. I'm tired of London too. It's been a tiresome
season. Oh! tiresome and disappointing! I want to go over to Ireland and
travel about a little. The Pothercareys want us to come. They've asked
us twice...."

Benham braced himself to face fresh difficulties. It was amazing how
different the world could look from his mother's little parlour and from
the crest of the North Downs. "But I want to start round the world," he cried with a note of acute
distress. "I want to go to Egypt and India and see what is happening in
the East, all this wonderful waking up of the East, I know nothing of
the way the world is going--..."

"India!" cried Lady Marayne. "The East. Poff, what is the MATTER with
you? Has something happened--something else? Have you been having a love
affair?--a REAL love affair?" "Oh, DAMN love affairs!" cried Benham. "Mother!--I'm sorry, mother! But
don't you see there's other things in the world for a man than having
a good time and making love. I'm for something else than that. You've
given me the splendidest time--..."

"I see," cried Lady Marayne, "I see. I've bored you. I might have known
I should have bored you." "You've NOT bored me!" cried Benham. He threw himself on the rug at her feet. "Oh, mother!" he said, "little,
dear, gallant mother, don't make life too hard for me. I've got to do my
job, I've got to find my job." "I've bored you," she wept. Suddenly she was weeping with all the unconcealed distressing grief of
a disappointed child. She put her pretty be-ringed little hands in front
of her face and recited the accumulation of her woes. "I've done all I can for you, planned for you, given all my time for you
and I've BORED you." "Mother!" "Don't come near me, Poff! Don't TOUCH me! All my plans. All my
ambitions. Friends--every one. You don't know all I've given up for
you...."

He had never seen his mother weep before. Her self-abandonment amazed
him. Her words were distorted by her tears. It was the most terrible and
distressing of crises....

"Go away from me! How can you help me? All I've done has been a failure! Failure! Failure!" 8


That night the silences of Finacue Street heard Benham's voice again. "I
must do my job," he was repeating, "I must do my job. Anyhow...."

And then after a long pause, like a watchword and just a little
unsurely: "Aristocracy...."

The next day his resolution had to bear the brunt of a second ordeal. Mrs. Skelmersdale behaved beautifully and this made everything
tormentingly touching and difficult. She convinced him she was really
in love with him, and indeed if he could have seen his freshness and
simplicity through her experienced eyes he would have known there was
sound reason why she should have found him exceptional. And when his
clumsy hints of compensation could no longer be ignored she treated him
with a soft indignation, a tender resentment, that left him soft and
tender. She looked at him with pained eyes and a quiver of the lips. What did he think she was? And then a little less credibly, did he think
she would have given herself to him if she hadn't been in love with him? Perhaps that was not altogether true, but at any rate it was altogether
true to her when she said it, and it was manifest that she did not for
a moment intend him to have the cheap consolation of giving her money. But, and that seemed odd to Benham, she would not believe, just as Lady
Marayne would not believe, that there was not some other woman in the
case. He assured her and she seemed reassured, and then presently she
was back at exactly the same question. Would no woman ever understand
the call of Asia, the pride of duty, the desire for the world? One sort of woman perhaps.... It was odd that for the first time now, in the sunshine of Kensington
Gardens, he saw the little gossamer lines that tell that thirty years
and more have passed over a face, a little wrinkling of the eyelids, a
little hardening of the mouth. How slight it is, how invisible it
has been, how suddenly it appears! And the sunshine of the warm April
afternoon, heightened it may be by her determined unmercenary pose,
betrayed too the faintest hint of shabbiness in her dress. He had never
noticed these shadows upon her or her setting before and their effect
was to fill him with a strange regretful tenderness....

Perhaps men only begin to love when they cease to be dazzled and admire. He had thought she might reproach him, he had felt and feared she might
set herself to stir his senses, and both these expectations had been
unjust to her he saw, now that he saw her beside him, a brave, rather
ill-advised and unlucky little struggler, stung and shamed. He forgot
the particulars of that first lunch of theirs together and he remembered
his mother's second contemptuous "STUFF!" Indeed he knew now it had not been unexpected. Why hadn't he left this
little sensitive soul and this little sensitive body alone? And since
he hadn't done so, what right had he now to back out of their common
adventure? He felt a sudden wild impulse to marry Mrs. Skelmersdale, in
a mood between remorse and love and self-immolation, and then a sunlit
young woman with a leaping stride in her paces, passed across his
heavens, pointing to Asia and Utopia and forbidding even another thought
of the banns....

"You will kiss me good-bye, dear, won't you?" said Mrs. Skelmersdale,
brimming over. "You will do that." He couldn't keep his arm from her little shoulders. And as their lips
touched he suddenly found himself weeping also....

His spirit went limping from that interview. She chose to stay behind
in her chair and think, she said, and each time he turned back she was
sitting in the same attitude looking at him as he receded, and she had
one hand on the chair back and her arm drawn up to it. The third time he
waved his hat clumsily, and she started and then answered with her hand. Then the trees hid her.... This sex business was a damnable business. If only because it made one
hurt women.... He had trampled on Mrs. Skelmersdale, he had hurt and disappointed
his mother. Was he a brute? Was he a cold-blooded prig? What was this
aristocracy? Was his belief anything more than a theory? Was he only
dreaming of a debt to the men in the quarry, to the miners, to the men
in the stokeholes, to the drudges on the fields? And while he dreamt he
wounded and distressed real living creatures in the sleep-walk of his
dreaming.... So long as he stuck to his dream he must at any rate set his face
absolutely against the establishment of any further relations with
women. Unless they were women of an entirely different type, women hardened and
tempered, who would understand. 9


So Benham was able to convert the unfortunate Mrs. Skelmersdale into a
tender but for a long time an entirely painful memory. But mothers are
not so easily disposed of, and more particularly a mother whose conduct
is coloured deeply by an extraordinary persuasion of having paid for her
offspring twice over. Nolan was inexplicable; he was, Benham understood
quite clearly, never to be mentioned again; but somehow from the past
his shadow and his legacy cast a peculiar and perplexing shadow of
undefined obligation upon Benham's outlook. His resolution to go round
the world carried on his preparations rapidly and steadily, but at the
same time his mother's thwarted and angry bearing produced a torture
of remorse in him. It was constantly in his mind, like the suit of the
importunate widow, that he ought to devote his life to the little lady's
happiness and pride, and his reason told him that even if he wanted to
make this sacrifice he couldn't; the mere act of making it would produce
so entirely catastrophic a revulsion. He could as soon have become a
croquet champion or the curate of Chexington church, lines of endeavour
which for him would have led straightly and simply to sacrilegious
scandal or manslaughter with a mallet. There is so little measure in the wild atonements of the young that it
was perhaps as well for the Research Magnificent that the remorses of
this period of Benham's life were too complicated and scattered for a
cumulative effect. In the background of his mind and less subdued
than its importance could seem to warrant was his promise to bring the
Wilder-Morris people into relations with Lady Marayne. They had been so
delightful to him that he felt quite acutely the slight he was putting
upon them by this delay. Lady Marayne's moods, however, had been so
uncertain that he had found no occasion to broach this trifling matter,
and when at last the occasion came he perceived in the same instant the
fullest reasons for regretting it. "Ah!" she said, hanging only for a moment, and then: "you told me you
were alone!"... Her mind leapt at once to the personification of these people as all
that had puzzled and baffled her in her son since his flight from
London. They were the enemy, they had got hold of him. "When I asked you if you were alone you pretended to be angry," she
remembered with a flash. "You said, 'Do I tell lies?'" "I WAS alone. Until-- It was an accident. On my walk I was alone." But he flinched before her accusing, her almost triumphant, forefinger. From the instant she heard of them she hated these South Harting people
unrestrainedly. She made no attempt to conceal it. Her valiant bantam
spirit caught at this quarrel as a refuge from the rare and uncongenial
ache of his secession. "And who are they? What are they? What sort of
people can they be to drag in a passing young man? I suppose this girl
of theirs goes out every evening--Was she painted, Poff?" She whipped him with her questions as though she was slashing his face. He became dead-white and grimly civil, answering every question as
though it was the sanest, most justifiable inquiry. "Of course I don't know who they are. How should I know? What need is
there to know?" "There are ways of finding out," she insisted. "If I am to go down and
make myself pleasant to these people because of you." "But I implore you not to."