He need not
trouble now how it would bring him into politics. Inevitably somewhere
it would bring him into politics. And he would travel. Almost at once
he would travel. It is the manifest duty of every young aristocrat to
travel. Here he was, ruling India. At any rate, passively, through the
mere fact of being English, he was ruling India. And he knew nothing of
India. He knew nothing indeed of Asia. So soon as he returned to London
his preparations for this travel must begin, he must plot out the men to
whom he would go, and so contrive that also he would go round the world. Perhaps he would get Lionel Maxim to go with him. Or if Maxim could not
come, then possibly Prothero. Some one surely could be found, some one
thinking and talking of statecraft and the larger idea of life. All the
world is not swallowed up in every day....



15


His mind shifted very suddenly from these large proposals to an entirely
different theme. These mental landslips are not unusual when men are
thinking hard and wandering. He found himself holding a trial upon
himself for Presumptuousness, for setting himself up against the wisdom
of the ages, and the decisions of all the established men in the world,
for being in short a Presumptuous Sort of Ass. He was judge and jury
and prosecutor, but rather inexplicably the defence was conducted in an
irregular and undignified way by some inferior stratum of his being. At first the defence contented itself with arguments that did at least
aim to rebut the indictment. The decisions of all the established men
in the world were notoriously in conflict. However great was the gross
wisdom of the ages the net wisdom was remarkably small. Was it after all
so very immodest to believe that the Liberals were right in what they
said about Tariff Reform, and the Tories right in their criticism of
Home Rule? And then suddenly the defence threw aside its mask and insisted that
Benham had to take this presumptuous line because there was no other
tolerable line possible for him. "Better die with the Excelsior chap up the mountains," the defence
interjected. Than what? Consider the quality Benham had already betrayed. He was manifestly
incapable of a decent modest mediocre existence. Already he had ceased
to be--if one may use so fine a word for genteel abstinence--virtuous. He didn't ride well, he hadn't good hands, and he hadn't good hands for
life. He must go hard and harsh, high or low. He was a man who needed
BITE in his life. He was exceptionally capable of boredom. He had been
bored by London. Social occasions irritated him, several times he had
come near to gross incivilities, art annoyed him, sport was an effort,
wholesome perhaps, but unattractive, music he loved, but it excited him. The defendant broke the sunset calm by uttering amazing and improper
phrases. "I can't smug about in a state of falsified righteousness like these
Crampton chaps. "I shall roll in women. I shall rollick in women. If, that is, I stay in
London with nothing more to do than I have had this year past. "I've been sliding fast to it....

"NO! I'M DAMNED IF I DO!..." 16


For some time he had been bothered by a sense of something, something
else, awaiting his attention. Now it came swimming up into his
consciousness. He had forgotten. He was, of course, going to sleep out
under the stars. He had settled that overnight, that was why he had this cloak in his
rucksack, but he had settled none of the details. Now he must find some
place where he could lie down. Here, perhaps, in this strange forgotten
wilderness of rhododendra. He turned off from the track and wandered among the bushes. One might
lie down anywhere here. But not yet; it was as yet barely twilight. He
consulted his watch. HALF-PAST SEVEN. Nearly dinner-time....

No doubt Christian during the earlier stages of his pilgrimage noticed
the recurrence of the old familiar hours of his life of emptiness
and vanity. Or rather of vanity--simply. Why drag in the thought of
emptiness just at this point?... It was very early to go to bed. He might perhaps sit and think for a time. Here for example was a mossy
bank, a seat, and presently a bed. So far there were only three stars
visible but more would come. He dropped into a reclining attitude. DAMP! When one thinks of sleeping out under the stars one is apt to forget the
dew. He spread his Swiss cloak out on the soft thick carpeting of herbs
and moss, and arranged his knapsack as a pillow. Here he would lie and
recapitulate the thoughts of the day. (That squealing might be a
young fox.) At the club at present men would be sitting about holding
themselves back from dinner. Excellent the clear soup always was at the
club! Then perhaps a Chateaubriand. That--what was that? Soft and large
and quite near and noiseless. An owl! The damp feeling was coming through his cloak. And this April night air
had a knife edge. Early ice coming down the Atlantic perhaps. It was
wonderful to be here on the top of the round world and feel the icebergs
away there. Or did this wind come from Russia? He wasn't quite clear
just how he was oriented, he had turned about so much. Which was east? Anyhow it was an extremely cold wind. What had he been thinking? Suppose after all that ending with Mrs.
Skelmersdale was simply a beginning. So far he had never looked sex in
the face.... He sat up and sneezed violently. It would be ridiculous to start out seeking the clue to one's life and
be driven home by rheumatic fever. One should not therefore incur the
risk of rheumatic fever. Something squealed in the bushes. It was impossible to collect one's thoughts in this place. He stood up. The night was going to be bitterly cold, savagely, cruelly cold....

No. There was no thinking to be done here, no thinking at all. He would
go on along the track and presently he would strike a road and so come
to an inn. One can solve no problems when one is engaged in a struggle
with the elements. The thing to do now was to find that track again.... It took Benham two hours of stumbling and walking, with a little fence
climbing and some barbed wire thrown in, before he got down into Shere
to the shelter of a friendly little inn. And then he negotiated a
satisfying meal, with beef-steak as its central fact, and stipulated for
a fire in his bedroom. The landlord was a pleasant-faced man; he attended to Benham himself and
displayed a fine sense of comfort. He could produce wine, a half-bottle
of Australian hock, Big Tree brand No. 8, a virile wine, he thought of
sardines to precede the meal, he provided a substantial Welsh rarebit
by way of a savoury, he did not mind in the least that it was nearly ten
o'clock. He ended by suggesting coffee. "And a liqueur?" Benham had some Benedictine! One could not slight such sympathetic helpfulness. The Benedictine was
genuine. And then came the coffee. The cup of coffee was generously conceived and honestly made. A night of clear melancholy ensued....



17


Hitherto Benham had not faced in any detail the problem of how to break
with Mrs. Skelmersdale. Now he faced it pessimistically. She would, he
knew, be difficult to break with. (He ought never to have gone there
to lunch.) There would be something ridiculous in breaking off. In all
sorts of ways she might resist. And face to face with her he might
find himself a man divided against himself. That opened preposterous
possibilities. On the other hand it was out of the question to do the
business by letter. A letter hits too hard; it lies too heavy on the
wound it has made. And in money matters he could be generous. He must be
generous. At least financial worries need not complicate her distresses
of desertion. But to suggest such generosities on paper, in cold ink,
would be outrageous. And, in brief--he ought not to have gone there
to lunch. After that he began composing letters at a great rate. Delicate--explanatory. Was it on the whole best to be explanatory?... It was going to be a tremendous job, this breaking with her. And it had
begun so easily.... There was, he remembered with amazing vividness, a little hollow he had
found under her ear, and how when he kissed her there it always made her
forget her worries and ethical problems for a time and turn to him....

"No," he said grimly, "it must end," and rolled over and stared at the
black....

Like an insidious pedlar, that old rascal whom young literary gentlemen
call the Great God Pan, began to spread his wares in the young man's
memory....

After long and feverish wanderings of the mind, and some talking to
himself and walking about the room, he did at last get a little away
from Mrs. Skelmersdale. He perceived that when he came to tell his mother about this journey
around the world there would be great difficulties. She would object
very strongly, and if that did not do then she would become extremely
abusive, compare him to his father, cry bitterly, and banish him
suddenly and heartbrokenly from her presence for ever. She had done that
twice already--once about going to the opera instead of listening to
a lecture on Indian ethnology and once about a week-end in Kent.... He
hated hurting his mother, and he was beginning to know now how easily
she was hurt. It is an abominable thing to hurt one's mother--whether
one has a justification or whether one hasn't. Recoiling from this, he was at once resumed by Mrs. Skelmersdale. Who
had in fact an effect of really never having been out of the room. But
now he became penitent about her. His penitence expanded until it was on
a nightmare scale. At last it blotted out the heavens. He felt like one
of those unfortunate victims of religious mania who are convinced they
have committed the Sin against the Holy Ghost. (Why had he gone there
to lunch? That was the key to it. WHY had he gone there to lunch?)... He
began to have remorse for everything, for everything he had ever done,
for everything he had ever not done, for everything in the world. In a
moment of lucidity he even had remorse for drinking that stout honest
cup of black coffee....

And so on and so on and so on.... When daylight came it found Benham still wide awake. Things crept
mournfully out of the darkness into a reproachful clearness. The sound
of birds that had been so delightful on the yesterday was now no longer
agreeable. The thrushes, he thought, repeated themselves a great deal. He fell asleep as it seemed only a few minutes before the landlord,
accompanied by a great smell of frying bacon, came to call him. 18


The second day opened rather dully for Benham. There was not an idea
left in his head about anything in the world. It was--SOLID. He walked
through Bramley and Godalming and Witley and so came out upon the purple
waste of Hindhead. He strayed away from the road and found a sunny place
of turf amidst the heather and lay down and slept for an hour or so. He
arose refreshed. He got some food at the Huts Inn on the Hindhead crest
and went on across sunlit heathery wildernesses variegated by patches of
spruce and fir and silver birch. And then suddenly his mental inanition
was at an end and his thoughts were wide and brave again. He was
astonished that for a moment he could have forgotten that he was vowed
to the splendid life. "Continence by preoccupation;" he tried the phrase....

"A man must not give in to fear; neither must he give in to sex. It's
the same thing really. The misleading of instinct." This set the key of his thought throughout the afternoon--until Amanda
happened to him. CHAPTER THE THIRD ~~ AMANDA



1


Amanda happened to Benham very suddenly. From Haslemere he had gone on to further heaths and gorse beyond
Liphook, and thence he had wandered into a pretty district beset
with Hartings. He had found himself upon a sandy ridge looking very
beautifully into a sudden steep valley that he learnt was Harting
Coombe; he had been through a West Harting and a South Harting and read
finger-posts pointing to others of the clan; and in the evening, at
the foot of a steep hill where two roads met, he sat down to consider
whether he should go back and spend the night in one of the two
kindly-looking inns of the latter place or push on over the South Downs
towards the unknown luck of Singleton or Chichester. As he sat down two
big retrievers, black and brown, came headlong down the road. The black
carried a stick, the brown disputed and pursued. As they came abreast of
him the foremost a little relaxed his hold, the pursuer grabbed at
it, and in an instant the rivalry had flared to rage and a first-class
dogfight was in progress. Benham detested dog-fights. He stood up, pale and distressed. "Lie
down!" he cried. "Shut up, you brutes!" and was at a loss for further
action. Then it was Amanda leapt into his world, a light, tall figure of a girl,
fluttering a short petticoat. Hatless she was, brown, flushed, and her
dark hair tossing loose, and in a moment she had the snarling furious
dogs apart, each gripped firmly by its collar. Then with a wriggle
black was loose and had closed again. Inspired by the best traditions of
chivalry Benham came to her assistance. He was not expert with dogs. He
grasped the black dog under its ear. He was bitten in the wrist, rather
in excitement than malice, and with a certain excess of zeal he was
strangling the brute before you could count ten. Amanda seized the fallen stick and whacked the dog she held, reasonably
but effectively until its yelps satisfied her. "There!" she said
pitching her victim from her, and stood erect again. She surveyed the
proceedings of her helper for the first time. "You needn't," she said, "choke Sultan anymore." "Ugh!" she said, as though that was enough for Sultan. And peace was
restored. "I'm obliged to you. But--... I say! He didn't bite you, did he? Oh,
SULTAN!" Sultan tried to express his disgust at the affair. Rotten business. When a fellow is fighting one can't be meticulous. And if people come
interfering. Still--SORRY! So Sultan by his code of eye and tail. "May I see?... Something ought to be done to this...."

She took his wrist in her hand, and her cheek and eyelashes came within
a foot of his face. Some observant element in his composition guessed, and guessed quite
accurately, that she was nineteen....



2


She had an eyebrow like a quick stroke of a camel's-hair brush, she
had a glowing face, half childish imp, half woman, she had honest hazel
eyes, a voice all music, a manifest decision of character. And he must
have this bite seen to at once. She lived not five minutes away. He must
come with her. She had an aunt who behaved like a mother and a mother who behaved like
a genteel visitor, and they both agreed with Amanda that although Mr.
Walter Long and his dreadful muzzles and everything did seem to have
stamped out rabies, yet you couldn't be too careful with a dog bite. A
dog bite might be injurious in all sorts of ways--particularly
Sultan's bite. He was, they had to confess, a dog without refinement,
a coarse-minded omnivorous dog. Both the elder ladies insisted upon
regarding Benham's wound as clear evidence of some gallant rescue of
Amanda from imminent danger--"she's always so RECKLESS with those dogs,"
as though Amanda was not manifestly capable of taking care of herself;
and when he had been Listerined and bandaged, they would have it that he
should join them at their supper-dinner, which was already prepared and
waiting. They treated him as if he were still an undergraduate, they
took his arrangements in hand as though he was a favourite nephew. He
must stay in Harting that night. Both the Ship and the Coach and Horses
were excellent inns, and over the Downs there would be nothing for miles
and miles.... The house was a little long house with a verandah and a garden in front
of it with flint-edged paths; the room in which they sat and ate was
long and low and equipped with pieces of misfitting good furniture, an
accidental-looking gilt tarnished mirror, and a sprinkling of old and
middle-aged books. Some one had lit a fire, which cracked and spurted
about cheerfully in a motherly fireplace, and a lamp and some candles
got lit. Mrs. Wilder, Amanda's aunt, a comfortable dark broad-browed
woman, directed things, and sat at the end of the table and placed
Benham on her right hand between herself and Amanda. Amanda's mother
remained undeveloped, a watchful little woman with at least an eyebrow
like her daughter's. Her name, it seemed, was Morris. No servant
appeared, but two cousins of a vague dark picturesqueness and with a
stamp of thirty upon them, the first young women Benham had ever seen
dressed in djibbahs, sat at the table or moved about and attended to the
simple needs of the service. The reconciled dogs were in the room and
shifted inquiring noses from one human being to another. Amanda's people were so easy and intelligent and friendly, and
Benham after his thirty hours of silence so freshly ready for human
association, that in a very little while he could have imagined he had
known and trusted this household for years. He had never met such people
before, and yet there was something about them that seemed familiar--and
then it occurred to him that something of their easy-going freedom was
to be found in Russian novels. A photographic enlargement of somebody
with a vegetarian expression of face and a special kind of slouch hat
gave the atmosphere a flavour of Socialism, and a press and tools and
stamps and pigments on an oak table in the corner suggested some such
socialistic art as bookbinding. They were clearly 'advanced' people. And
Amanda was tremendously important to them, she was their light, their
pride, their most living thing. They focussed on her. When he talked to
them all in general he talked to her in particular. He felt that some
introduction of himself was due to these welcoming people. He tried
to give it mixed with an itinerary and a sketch of his experiences. He
praised the heather country and Harting Coombe and the Hartings. He
told them that London had suddenly become intolerable--"In the spring
sunshine." "You live in London?" said Mrs. Wilder. Yes. And he had wanted to think things out. In London one could do no
thinking--

"Here we do nothing else," said Amanda. "Except dog-fights," said the elder cousin. "I thought I would just wander and think and sleep in the open air. Have
you ever tried to sleep in the open air?" "In the summer we all do," said the younger cousin. "Amanda makes us. We
go out on to the little lawn at the back." "You see Amanda has some friends at Limpsfield. And there they all go
out and camp and sleep in the woods." "Of course," reflected Mrs. Wilder, "in April it must be different." "It IS different," said Benham with feeling; "the night comes five hours
too soon. And it comes wet." He described his experiences and his flight
to Shere and the kindly landlord and the cup of coffee. "And after that
I thought with a vengeance." "Do you write things?" asked Amanda abruptly, and it seemed to him with
a note of hope. "No. No, it was just a private puzzle. It was something I couldn't get
straight." "And you have got it straight?" asked Amanda. "I think so." "You were making up your mind about something?" "Amanda DEAR!" cried her mother. "Oh! I don't mind telling you," said Benham. They seemed such unusual people that he was moved to unusual
confidences. They had that effect one gets at times with strangers
freshly met as though they were not really in the world. And there was
something about Amanda that made him want to explain himself to her
completely. "What I wanted to think about was what I should do with my life." "Haven't you any WORK--?" asked the elder cousin. "None that I'm obliged to do." "That's where a man has the advantage," said Amanda with the tone of
profound reflection. "You can choose. And what are you going to do with
your life?" "Amanda," her mother protested, "really you mustn't!" "I'm going round the world to think about it," Benham told her. "I'd give my soul to travel," said Amanda. She addressed her remark to the salad in front of her. "But have you no ties?" asked Mrs. Wilder. "None that hold me," said Benham. "I'm one of those unfortunates who
needn't do anything at all. I'm independent. You see my riddles. East
and west and north and south, it's all my way for the taking. There's
not an indication." "If I were you," said Amanda, and reflected. Then she half turned
herself to him. "I should go first to India," she said, "and I should
shoot, one, two, three, yes, three tigers. And then I would see
Farukhabad Sikri--I was reading in a book about it yesterday--where the
jungle grows in the palaces; and then I would go right up the Himalayas,
and then, then I would have a walking tour in Japan, and then I would
sail in a sailing ship down to Borneo and Java and set myself up as a
Ranee--... And then I would think what I would do next." "All alone, Amanda?" asked Mrs. Wilder. "Only when I shoot tigers. You and mother should certainly come to
Japan." "But Mr. Benham perhaps doesn't intend to shoot tigers, Amanda?" said
Amanda's mother. "Not at once. My way will be a little different. I think I shall go
first through Germany. And then down to Constantinople. And then I've
some idea of getting across Asia Minor and Persia to India. That would
take some time. One must ride." "Asia Minor ought to be fun," said Amanda. "But I should prefer India
because of the tigers. It would be so jolly to begin with the tigers
right away." "It is the towns and governments and peoples I want to see rather than
tigers," said Benham. "Tigers if they are in the programme. But I want
to find out about--other things." "Don't you think there's something to be found out at home?" said the
elder cousin, blushing very brightly and speaking with the effort of one
who speaks for conscience' sake. "Betty's a Socialist," Amanda said to Benham with a suspicion of
apology. "Well, we're all rather that," Mrs. Wilder protested. "If you are free, if you are independent, then don't you owe something
to the workers?" Betty went on, getting graver and redder with each
word. "It's just because of that," said Benham, "that I am going round the
world." 3


He was as free with these odd people as if he had been talking to
Prothero. They were--alert. And he had been alone and silent and full of
thinking for two clear days. He tried to explain why he found Socialism
at once obvious and inadequate.... Presently the supper things got themselves put away and the talk moved
into a smaller room with several armchairs and a fire. Mrs. Wilder and
the cousins and Amanda each smoked a cigarette as if it were symbolical,
and they were joined by a grave grey-bearded man with a hyphenated name
and slightly Socratic manner, dressed in a very blue linen shirt
and collar, a very woolly mustard-coloured suit and loose tie, and
manifestly devoted to one of those branches of exemplary domestic
decoration that grow upon Socialist soil in England. He joined Betty in
the opinion that the duty of a free and wealthy young man was to remain
in England and give himself to democratic Socialism and the abolition
of "profiteering." "Consider that chair," he said. But Benham had little
feeling for the craftsmanship of chairs. Under cross-examination Mr. Rathbone-Sanders became entangled and
prophetic. It was evident he had never thought out his "democratic," he
had rested in some vague tangle of idealism from which Benham now set
himself with the zeal of a specialist to rout him. Such an argument
sprang up as one meets with rarely beyond the happy undergraduate's
range. Everybody lived in the discussion, even Amanda's mother listened
visibly. Betty said she herself was certainly democratic and Mrs. Wilder
had always thought herself to be so, and outside the circle round the
fire Amanda hovered impatiently, not quite sure of her side as yet, but
eager to come down with emphasis at the first flash of intimation. She came down vehemently on Benham's. And being a very clear-cutting personality with an instinct for the
material rendering of things, she also came and sat beside him on the
little square-cornered sofa. "Of course, Mr. Rathbone-Sanders," she said, "of course the world must
belong to the people who dare. Of course people aren't all alike, and
dull people, as Mr. Benham says, and spiteful people, and narrow people
have no right to any voice at all in things...."



4


In saying this she did but echo Benham's very words, and all she
said and did that evening was in quick response to Benham's earnest
expression of his views. She found Benham a delightful novelty. She
liked to argue because there was no other talk so lively, and she had
perhaps a lurking intellectual grudge against Mr. Rathbone-Sanders
that made her welcome an ally. Everything from her that night that even
verges upon the notable has been told, and yet it sufficed, together
with something in the clear, long line of her limbs, in her voice,
in her general physical quality, to convince Benham that she was the
freest, finest, bravest spirit that he had ever encountered. In the papers he left behind him was to be found his perplexed
endeavours to explain this mental leap, that after all his efforts still
remained unexplained. He had been vividly impressed by the decision and
courage of her treatment of the dogs; it was just the sort of thing
he could not do. And there was a certain contagiousness in the petting
admiration with which her family treated her. But she was young and
healthy and so was he, and in a second mystery lies the key of the
first. He had fallen in love with her, and that being so whatever he
needed that instantly she was. He needed a companion, clean and brave
and understanding.... In his bed in the Ship that night he thought of nothing but her before
he went to sleep, and when next morning he walked on his way over
the South Downs to Chichester his mind was full of her image and of a
hundred pleasant things about her. In his confessions he wrote, "I felt
there was a sword in her spirit. I felt she was as clean as the wind." Love is the most chastening of powers, and he did not even remember now
that two days before he had told the wind and the twilight that he would
certainly "roll and rollick in women" unless there was work for him to
do. She had a peculiarly swift and easy stride that went with him in his
thoughts along the turf by the wayside halfway and more to Chichester. He thought always of the two of them as being side by side.