"She's quite grown up. Anyhow I'm not a moral nursemaid." "If you leave her about and go abroad--"

"Has she been talking to you, mother?" "The thing shows." "But about my going abroad?" "She said something, my little Poff." Lady Marayne suddenly perceived that beneath Benham's indifference
was something strung very tight, as though he had been thinking
inordinately. He weighed his words before he spoke again. "If Amanda
chooses to threaten me with a sort of conditional infidelity, I don't
see that it ought to change the plans I have made for my life...."



7


"No aristocrat has any right to be jealous," Benham wrote. "If he
chances to be mated with a woman who does not see his vision or
naturally go his way, he has no right to expect her, much less to compel
her to go his way. What is the use of dragging an unwilling companion
through morasses of uncongenial thought to unsought ends? What is the
use of dragging even a willing pretender, who has no inherent will to
seek and live the aristocratic life? "But that does not excuse him from obedience to his own call...."

He wrote that very early in his examination of the Third Limitation. Already he had thought out and judged Amanda. The very charm of her,
the sweetness, the nearness and magic of her, was making him more grimly
resolute to break away. All the elaborate process of thinking her
over had gone on behind the mask of his silences while she had been
preoccupied with her housing and establishment in London; it was with a
sense of extraordinary injustice, of having had a march stolen upon her,
of being unfairly trapped, that Amanda found herself faced by foregone
conclusions. He was ready now even with the details of his project. She
should go on with her life in London exactly as she had planned it. He
would take fifteen hundred a year for himself and all the rest she might
spend without check or stint as it pleased her. He was going round the
world for one or two years. It was even possible he would not go alone. There was a man at Cambridge he might persuade to come with him, a don
called Prothero who was peculiarly useful in helping him to hammer out
his ideas....

To her it became commandingly necessary that none of these things should
happen. She tried to play upon his jealousy, but her quick instinct speedily
told her that this only hardened his heart. She perceived that she must
make a softer appeal. Now of a set intention she began to revive and
imitate the spontaneous passion of the honeymoon; she perceived for the
first time clearly how wise and righteous a thing it is for a woman to
bear a child. "He cannot go if I am going to have a child," she told
herself. But that would mean illness, and for illness in herself or
others Amanda had the intense disgust natural to her youth. Yet even
illness would be better than this intolerable publication of her
husband's ability to leave her side....

She had a wonderful facility of enthusiasm and she set herself forthwith
to cultivate a philoprogenitive ambition, to communicate it to him. Her
dread of illness disappeared; her desire for offspring grew. "Yes," he said, "I want to have children, but I must go round the world
none the less." She argued with all the concentrated subtlety of her fine keen mind. She
argued with persistence and repetition. And then suddenly so that she
was astonished at herself, there came a moment when she ceased to argue. She stood in the dusk in a window that looked out upon the park, and she
was now so intent upon her purpose as to be still and self-forgetful;
she was dressed in a dinner-dress of white and pale green, that set off
her slim erect body and the strong clear lines of her neck and shoulders
very beautifully, some greenish stones caught a light from without and
flashed soft whispering gleams from amidst the misty darkness of her
hair. She was going to Lady Marayne and the opera, and he was bound for
a dinner at the House with some young Liberals at which he was to meet
two representative Indians with a grievance from Bengal. Husband and
wife had but a few moments together. She asked about his company and he
told her. "They will tell you about India." "Yes." She stood for a moment looking out across the lights and the dark green
trees, and then she turned to him. "Why cannot I come with you?" she asked with sudden passion. "Why cannot
I see the things you want to see?" "I tell you you are not interested. You would only be interested through
me. That would not help me. I should just be dealing out my premature
ideas to you. If you cared as I care, if you wanted to know as I want to
know, it would be different. But you don't. It isn't your fault that
you don't. It happens so. And there is no good in forced interest, in
prescribed discovery." "Cheetah," she asked, "what is it that you want to know--that I don't
care for?" "I want to know about the world. I want to rule the world." "So do I." "No, you want to have the world." "Isn't it the same?" "No. You're a greedier thing than I am, you Black Leopard you--standing
there in the dusk. You're a stronger thing. Don't you know you're
stronger? When I am with you, you carry your point, because you are more
concentrated, more definite, less scrupulous. When you run beside me
you push me out of my path.... You've made me afraid of you.... And so
I won't go with you, Leopard. I go alone. It isn't because I don't love
you. I love you too well. It isn't because you aren't beautiful and
wonderful...."

"But, Cheetah! nevertheless you care more for this that you want than
you care for me." Benham thought of it. "I suppose I do," he said. "What is it that you want? Still I don't understand." Her voice had the break of one who would keep reasonable in spite of
pain. "I ought to tell you." "Yes, you ought to tell me." "I wonder if I can tell you," he said very thoughtfully, and rested his
hands on his hips. "I shall seem ridiculous to you." "You ought to tell me." "I think what I want is to be king of the world." She stood quite still staring at him. "I do not know how I can tell you of it. Amanda, do you remember those
bodies--you saw those bodies--those mutilated men?" "I saw them," said Amanda. "Well. Is it nothing to you that those things happen?" "They must happen." "No. They happen because there are no kings but pitiful kings. They
happen because the kings love their Amandas and do not care." "But what can YOU do, Cheetah?" "Very little. But I can give my life and all my strength. I can give all
I can give." "But how? How can you help it--help things like that massacre?" "I can do my utmost to find out what is wrong with my world and rule it
and set it right." "YOU! Alone." "Other men do as much. Every one who does so helps others to do so. You
see--... In this world one may wake in the night and one may resolve to
be a king, and directly one has resolved one is a king. Does that sound
foolishness to you? Anyhow, it's fair that I should tell you, though
you count me a fool. This--this kingship--this dream of the night--is
my life. It is the very core of me. Much more than you are. More than
anything else can be. I mean to be a king in this earth. KING. I'm not
mad.... I see the world staggering from misery to misery and there is
little wisdom, less rule, folly, prejudice, limitation, the good things
come by chance and the evil things recover and slay them, and it is my
world and I am responsible. Every man to whom this light has come
is responsible. As soon as this light comes to you, as soon as your
kingship is plain to you, there is no more rest, no peace, no delight,
except in work, in service, in utmost effort. As far as I can do it I
will rule my world. I cannot abide in this smug city, I cannot
endure its self-complacency, its routine, its gloss of success, its
rottenness.... I shall do little, perhaps I shall do nothing, but what I
can understand and what I can do I will do. Think of that wild beautiful
country we saw, and the mean misery, the filth and the warring cruelty
of the life that lives there, tragedy, tragedy without dignity; and
think, too, of the limitless ugliness here, and of Russia slipping
from disorder to massacre, and China, that sea of human beings,
sliding steadily to disaster. Do you think these are only things in the
newspapers? To me at any rate they are not things in newspapers; they
are pain and failure, they are torment, they are blood and dust and
misery. They haunt me day and night. Even if it is utterly absurd I will
still do my utmost. It IS absurd. I'm a madman and you and my mother
are sensible people.... And I will go my way.... I don't care for the
absurdity. I don't care a rap." He stopped abruptly. "There you have it, Amanda. It's rant, perhaps. Sometimes I feel it's
rant. And yet it's the breath of life to me.... There you are.... At
last I've been able to break silence and tell you...."

He stopped with something like a sob and stood regarding the dusky
mystery of her face. She stood quite still, she was just a beautiful
outline in the twilight, her face was an indistinctness under the black
shadow of her hair, with eyes that were two patches of darkness. He looked at his watch, lifting it close to his face to see the time. His voice changed. "Well--if you provoke a man enough, you see he makes
speeches. Let it be a lesson to you, Amanda. Here we are talking instead
of going to our dinners. The car has been waiting ten minutes." Amanda, so still, was the most disconcerting of all Amandas....

A strange exaltation seized upon her very suddenly. In an instant she
had ceased to plot against him. A vast wave of emotion swept her forward
to a resolution that astonished her. "Cheetah!" she said, and the very quality of her voice had changed,
"give me one thing. Stay until June with me." "Why?" he asked. Her answer came in a voice so low that it was almost a whisper. "Because--now--no, I don't want to keep you any more--I am not trying to
hold you any more.... I want...."

She came forward to him and looked up closely at his face. "Cheetah," she whispered almost inaudibly, "Cheetah--I didn't
understand. But now--. I want to bear your child." He was astonished. "Old Leopard!" he said. "No," she answered, putting her hands upon his shoulders and drawing
very close to him, "Queen---if I can be--to your King." "You want to bear me a child!" he whispered, profoundly moved. 8


The Hindu agitators at the cavernous dinner under the House of Commons
came to the conclusion that Benham was a dreamer. And over against
Amanda at her dinner-party sat Sir Sidney Umber, one of those men who
know that their judgments are quoted. "Who is the beautiful young woman who is seeing visions?" he asked of
his neighbour in confidential undertones.... He tittered. "I think, you know, she ought to seem just SLIGHTLY aware
that the man to her left is talking to her...."



9


A few days later Benham went down to Cambridge, where Prothero was now a
fellow of Trinity and Brissenden Trust Lecturer....

All through Benham's writing there was manifest a persuasion that in
some way Prothero was necessary to his mind. It was as if he looked to
Prothero to keep him real. He suspected even while he obeyed that upward
flourish which was his own essential characteristic. He had a peculiar
feeling that somehow that upward bias would betray him; that from
exaltation he might presently float off, into the higher, the better,
and so to complete unreality. He fled from priggishness and the terror
of such sublimity alike to Prothero. Moreover, in relation to so many
things Prothero in a peculiar distinctive manner SAW. He had less
self-control than Benham, less integrity of purpose, less concentration,
and things that were before his eyes were by the very virtue of these
defects invariably visible to him. Things were able to insist upon
themselves with him. Benham, on the other hand, when facts contradicted
his purpose too stoutly, had a way of becoming blind to them. He
repudiated inconvenient facts. He mastered and made his world; Prothero
accepted and recorded his. Benham was a will towards the universe where
Prothero was a perception and Amanda a confusing responsive activity. And it was because of his realization of this profound difference
between them that he was possessed by the idea of taking Prothero with
him about the world, as a detachable kind of vision--rather like that
eye the Graiae used to hand one another....

After the busy sunlit streets of Maytime Cambridge, Prothero's rooms in
Trinity, their windows full of Gothic perspectives and light-soaked blue
sky, seemed cool and quiet. A flavour of scholarship pervaded them--a
little blended with the flavour of innumerable breakfasts nearly but not
completely forgotten. Prothero's door had been locked against the world,
and he had appeared after a slight delay looking a little puffy and only
apprehending who his visitor was after a resentful stare for the better
part of a second. He might have been asleep, he might have been doing
anything but the examination papers he appeared to be doing. The two men
exchanged personal details; they had not met since some months before
Benham' s marriage, and the visitor's eye went meanwhile from his host
to the room and back to his host's face as though they were all aspects
of the thing he was after, the Prothero humour, the earthly touch, the
distinctive Prothero flavour. Then his eye was caught by a large red,
incongruous, meretricious-looking volume upon the couch that had an
air of having been flung aside, VENUS IN GEM AND MARBLE, its cover
proclaimed....

His host followed that glance and blushed. "They send me all sorts of
inappropriate stuff to review," he remarked. And then he was denouncing celibacy. The transition wasn't very clear to Benham. His mind had been
preoccupied by the problem of how to open his own large project. Meanwhile Prothero got, as it were, the conversational bit between his
teeth and bolted. He began to say the most shocking things right away,
so that Benham's attention was caught in spite of himself. "Inflammatory classics." "What's that?" "Celibacy, my dear Benham, is maddening me," said Prothero. "I can't
stand it any longer." It seemed to Benham that somewhere, very far away, in another world,
such a statement might have been credible. Even in his own life,--it was
now indeed a remote, forgotten stage--there had been something distantly
akin....

"You're going to marry?" "I must." "Who's the lady, Billy?" "I don't know. Venus." His little red-brown eye met his friend's defiantly. "So far as I know,
it is Venus Anadyomene." A flash of laughter passed across his face
and left it still angrier, still more indecorously defiant. "I like her
best, anyhow. I do, indeed. But, Lord! I feel that almost any of them--"

"Tut, tut!" said Benham. Prothero flushed deeply but stuck to his discourse. "Wasn't it always your principle, Benham, to look facts in the face? I
am not pronouncing an immoral principle. Your manner suggests I am. I
am telling you exactly how I feel. That is how I feel. I want--Venus. I don't want her to talk to or anything of that sort.... I have been
studying that book, yes, that large, vulgar, red book, all the morning,
instead of doing any work. Would you like to see it?... NO!... "This spring, Benham, I tell you, is driving me mad. It is a peculiarly
erotic spring. I cannot sleep, I cannot fix my mind, I cannot attend
to ordinary conversation. These feelings, I understand, are by no means
peculiar to myself.... No, don't interrupt me, Benham; let me talk now
that the spirit of speech is upon me. When you came in you said, 'How
are you?' I am telling you how I am. You brought it on yourself. Well--I
am--inflamed. I have no strong moral or religious convictions to assist
me either to endure or deny this--this urgency. And so why should I deny
it? It's one of our chief problems here. The majority of my fellow
dons who look at me with secretive faces in hall and court and
combination-room are in just the same case as myself. The fever in
oneself detects the fever in others. I know their hidden thoughts. Their
fishy eyes defy me to challenge their hidden thoughts. Each covers his
miserable secret under the cloak of a wholesome manly indifference. A
tattered cloak.... Each tries to hide his abandonment to this horrible
vice of continence--"

"Billy, what's the matter with you?" Prothero grimaced impatience. "Shall I NEVER teach you not to be a
humbug, Benham?" he screamed, and in screaming became calmer. "Nature
taunts me, maddens me. My life is becoming a hell of shame. 'Get out
from all these books,' says Nature, 'and serve the Flesh.' The Flesh,
Benham. Yes--I insist--the Flesh. Do I look like a pure spirit? Is any
man a pure spirit? And here am I at Cambridge like a lark in a cage,
with too much port and no Aspasia. Not that I should have liked
Aspasia." "Mutual, perhaps, Billy." "Oh! you can sneer!" "Well, clearly--Saint Paul is my authority--it's marriage, Billy." Prothero had walked to the window. He turned round. "I CAN'T marry," he said. "The trouble has gone too far. I've lost my
nerve in the presence of women. I don't like them any more. They come
at one--done up in a lot of ridiculous clothes, and chattering about
all sorts of things that don't matter...." He surveyed his friend's
thoughtful attitude. "I'm getting to hate women, Benham. I'm beginning
now to understand the bitterness of spinsters against men. I'm beginning
to grasp the unkindliness of priests. The perpetual denial. To you,
happily married, a woman is just a human being. You can talk to her,
like her, you can even admire her calmly; you've got, you see, no grudge
against her...."

He sat down abruptly. Benham, upon the hearthrug before the empty fireplace, considered him. "Billy! this is delusion," he said. "What's come over you?" "I'm telling you," said Prothero. "No," said Benham. Prothero awaited some further utterance. "I'm looking for the cause of it. It's feeding, Billy. It's port and
stimulants where there is no scope for action. It's idleness. I begin to
see now how much fatter you are, how much coarser." "Idleness! Look at this pile of examination answers. Look at that filing
system like an arsenal of wisdom. Useless wisdom, I admit, but anyhow
not idleness." "There's still bodily idleness. No. That's your trouble. You're stuffy. You've enlarged your liver. You sit in this room of a warm morning after
an extravagant breakfast--. And peep and covet." "Just eggs and bacon!" "Think of it! Coffee and toast it ought to be. Come out of it, Billy,
and get aired." "How can one?" "Easily. Come out of it now. Come for a walk, you Pig!" "It's an infernally warm morning. "Walk with me to Grantchester." "We might go by boat. You could row." "WALK." "I ought to do these papers." "You weren't doing them." "No...."

"Walk with me to Grantchester. All this affliction of yours
is--horrid--and just nothing at all. Come out of it! I want you to come
with me to Russia and about the world. I'm going to leave my wife--"

"Leave your wife!" "Why not? And I came here hoping to find you clear-headed, and instead
you are in this disgusting state. I've never met anything in my life so
hot and red and shiny and shameless. Come out of it, man! How can one
talk to you?" 10


"You pull things down to your own level," said Benham as they went
through the heat to Grantchester. "I pull them down to truth," panted Prothero. "Truth! As though being full of gross appetites was truth, and
discipline and training some sort of falsity!" "Artificiality. And begetting pride, Benham, begetting a prig's pride." For a time there was more than the heat of the day between them.... The things that Benham had come down to discuss were thrust into the
background by the impassioned materialism of Prothero. "I'm not talking of Love," he said, remaining persistently outrageous. "I'm talking of physical needs. That first. What is the good of
arranging systems of morality and sentiment before you know what is
physically possible....

"But how can one disentangle physical and moral necessities?" "Then why don't we up and find out?" said Billy. He had no patience with the secrecy, the ignorance, the emotion that
surrounded these questions. We didn't worship our ancestors when it came
to building bridges or working metals or curing disease or studying our
indigestion, and why should we become breathless or wordless with
awe and terror when it came to this fundamental affair? Why here in
particular should we give way to Holy Fear and stifled submission to
traditional suppressions and the wisdom of the ages? "What is the wisdom
of the ages?" said Prothero. "Think of the corners where that wisdom was
born.... Flea-bitten sages in stone-age hovels.... Wandering wise
man with a rolling eye, a fakir under a tree, a Jewish sheik, an Arab
epileptic...."

"Would you sweep away the experience of mankind?" protested Benham. The experience of mankind in these matters had always been bitter
experience. Most of it was better forgotten. It didn't convince. It had
never worked things out. In this matter just as in every other matter
that really signified things had still to be worked out. Nothing had
been worked out hitherto. The wisdom of the ages was a Cant. People had
been too busy quarrelling, fighting and running away. There wasn't
any digested experience of the ages at all. Only the mis-remembered
hankey-pankey of the Dead Old Man. "Is this love-making a physical necessity for most men and women or
isn't it?" Prothero demanded.