He was still in the phase of being a penitent
pig, and he inquired carefully into the needs and duties of a summer
guest in a country house. He knew it was quite a considerable country
house, and that Sir Godfrey wasn't Benham's father, but like most
people, he was persuaded that Lady Marayne had divorced the parental
Benham. He arrived dressed very neatly in a brown suit that had only one
fault, it had not the remotest suggestion of having been made for him. It fitted his body fairly well, it did annex his body with only a few
slight incompatibilities, but it repudiated his hands and face. He had
a conspicuously old Gladstone bag and a conspicuously new despatch case,
and he had forgotten black ties and dress socks and a hair brush. He
arrived in the late afternoon, was met by Benham, in tennis flannels,
looking smartened up and a little unfamiliar, and taken off in a
spirited dog-cart driven by a typical groom. He met his host and hostess
at dinner. Sir Godfrey was a rationalist and a residuum. Very much of him, too much
perhaps, had gone into the acquirement and perfect performance of the
caecal operation; the man one met in the social world was what was
left over. It had the effect of being quiet, but in its unobtrusive way
knobby. He had a knobby brow, with an air about it of having recently
been intent, and his conversation was curiously spotted with little
knobby arrested anecdotes. If any one of any distinction was named, he
would reflect and say, "Of course,--ah, yes, I know him, I know him. Yes, I did him a little service--in '96." And something in his manner would suggest a satisfaction, or a
dissatisfaction with confidential mysteries. He welcomed Billy Prothero in a colourless manner, and made conversation
about Cambridge. He had known one or two of the higher dons. One he had
done at Cambridge quite recently. "The inns are better than they are at
Oxford, which is not saying very much, but the place struck me as being
changed. The men seemed younger...."

The burden of the conversation fell upon Lady Marayne. She looked
extraordinarily like a flower to Billy, a little diamond buckle on a
black velvet band glittered between the two masses of butter-coloured
hair that flowed back from her forehead, her head was poised on the
prettiest neck conceivable, and her shapely little shoulders and her
shapely little arms came decidedly but pleasantly out of a softness and
sparkle of white and silver and old rose. She talked what sounded like
innocent commonplaces a little spiced by whim, though indeed each remark
had an exploratory quality, and her soft blue eyes rested ever and again
upon Billy's white tie. It seemed she did so by the merest inadvertency,
but it made the young man wish he had after all borrowed a black one
from Benham. But the manservant who had put his things out had put it
out, and he hadn't been quite sure. Also she noted all the little things
he did with fork and spoon and glass. She gave him an unusual sense of
being brightly, accurately and completely visible. Chexington, it seemed to Billy, was done with a large and costly and
easy completeness. The table with its silver and flowers was much more
beautifully done than any table he had sat at before, and in the dimness
beyond the brightness there were two men to wait on the four of them. The old grey butler was really wonderfully good....

"You shoot, Mr. Prothero?" "You hunt, Mr. Prothero?" "You know Scotland well, Mr. Prothero?" These questions disturbed Prothero. He did not shoot, he did not hunt,
he did not go to Scotland for the grouse, he did not belong, and Lady
Marayne ought to have seen that he did not belong to the class that does
these things. "You ride much, Mr. Prothero?" Billy conceived a suspicion that these innocent inquiries were designed
to emphasize a contrast in his social quality. But he could not be sure. One never could be sure with Lady Marayne. It might be just that she
did not understand the sort of man he was. And in that case ought he
to maintain the smooth social surface unbroken by pretending as far as
possible to be this kind of person, or ought he to make a sudden gap in
it by telling his realities. He evaded the shooting question anyhow. He
left it open for Lady Marayne and the venerable butler and Sir Godfrey
and every one to suppose he just happened to be the sort of gentleman
of leisure who doesn't shoot. He disavowed hunting, he made it appear he
travelled when he travelled in directions other than Scotland. But the
fourth question brought him to bay. He regarded his questioner with his
small rufous eye. "I have never been across a horse in my life, Lady Marayne." "Tut, tut," said Sir Godfrey. "Why!--it's the best of exercise. Every man ought to ride. Good for the health. Keeps him fit. Prevents
lodgments. Most trouble due to lodgments." "I've never had a chance of riding. And I think I'm afraid of horses." "That's only an excuse," said Lady Marayne. "Everybody's afraid of
horses and nobody's really afraid of horses." "But I'm not used to horses. You see--I live on my mother. And she can't
afford to keep a stable." His hostess did not see his expression of discomfort. Her pretty eyes
were intent upon the peas with which she was being served. "Does your mother live in the country?" she asked, and took her peas
with fastidious exactness. Prothero coloured brightly. "She lives in London." "All the year?" "All the year." "But isn't it dreadfully hot in town in the summer?" Prothero had an uncomfortable sense of being very red in the face. This
kept him red. "We're suburban people," he said. "But I thought--isn't there the seaside?" "My mother has a business," said Prothero, redder than ever. "O-oh!" said Lady Marayne. "What fun that must be for her?" "It's a real business, and she has to live by it. Sometimes it's a
worry." "But a business of her own!" She surveyed the confusion of his visage
with a sweet intelligence. "Is it an amusing sort of business, Mr. Prothero?" Prothero looked mulish. "My mother is a dressmaker," he said. "In
Brixton. She doesn't do particularly badly--or well. I live on my
scholarship. I have lived on scholarships since I was thirteen. And you
see, Lady Marayne, Brixton is a poor hunting country." Lady Marayne felt she had unmasked Prothero almost indecently. Whatever
happened there must be no pause. There must be no sign of a hitch. "But it's good at tennis," she said. "You DO play tennis, Mr. Prothero?" "I--I gesticulate," said Prothero. Lady Marayne, still in flight from that pause, went off at a tangent. "Poff, my dear," she said, "I've had a diving-board put at the deep end
of the pond." The remark hung unanswered for a moment. The transition had been too
quick for Benham's state of mind. "Do you swim, Mr. Prothero?" the lady asked, though a moment before she
had determined that she would never ask him a question again. But this
time it was a lucky question. "Prothero mopped up the lot of us at Minchinghampton with his diving and
swimming," Benham explained, and the tension was relaxed. Lady Marayne spoke of her own swimming, and became daring and amusing at
her difficulties with local feeling when first she swam in the pond. The high road ran along the far side of the pond--"And it didn't wear a
hedge or anything," said Lady Marayne. "That was what they didn't quite
like. Swimming in an undraped pond...."

Prothero had been examined enough. Now he must be entertained. She told
stories about the village people in her brightest manner. The third
story she regretted as soon as she was fairly launched upon it; it
was how she had interviewed the village dressmaker, when Sir Godfrey
insisted upon her supporting local industries. It was very amusing but
technical. The devil had put it into her head. She had to go through
with it. She infused an extreme innocence into her eyes and fixed them
on Prothero, although she felt a certain deepening pinkness in her
cheeks was betraying her, and she did not look at Benham until her
unhappy, but otherwise quite amusing anecdote, was dead and gone and
safely buried under another.... But people ought not to go about having dressmakers for mothers....

And coming into other people's houses and influencing their sons....



8


That night when everything was over Billy sat at the writing-table of
his sumptuous bedroom--the bed was gilt wood, the curtains of the three
great windows were tremendous, and there was a cheval glass that showed
the full length of him and seemed to look over his head for more,--and
meditated upon this visit of his. It was more than he had been prepared
for. It was going to be a great strain. The sleek young manservant in
an alpaca jacket, who said "Sir" whenever you looked at him, and who had
seized upon and unpacked Billy's most private Gladstone bag without even
asking if he might do so, and put away and displayed Billy's things in
a way that struck Billy as faintly ironical, was unexpected. And it was
unexpected that the brown suit, with its pockets stuffed with Billy's
personal and confidential sundries, had vanished. And apparently a
bath in a bathroom far down the corridor was prescribed for him in
the morning; he hadn't thought of a dressing-gown. And after one had
dressed, what did one do? Did one go down and wander about the house
looking for the breakfast-room or wait for a gong? Would Sir Godfrey
read Family Prayers? And afterwards did one go out or hang about to be
entertained? He knew now quite clearly that those wicked blue eyes would
mark his every slip. She did not like him. She did not like him, he
supposed, because he was common stuff. He didn't play up to her world
and her. He was a discord in this rich, cleverly elaborate household. You could see it in the servants' attitudes. And he was committed to a
week of this. Billy puffed out his cheeks to blow a sigh, and then decided to be angry
and say "Damn!" This way of living which made him uncomfortable was clearly an
irrational and objectionable way of living. It was, in a cumbersome way,
luxurious. But the waste of life of it, the servants, the observances,
all concentrated on the mere detail of existence? There came a rap at
the door. Benham appeared, wearing an expensive-looking dressing-jacket
which Lady Marayne had bought for him. He asked if he might talk for
a bit and smoke. He sat down in a capacious chintz-covered easy chair
beside Prothero, lit a cigarette, and came to the point after only a
trivial hesitation. "Prothero," he said, "you know what my father is." "I thought he ran a preparatory school." There was the profoundest resentment in Prothero's voice. "And, all the same, I'm going to be a rich man." "I don't understand," said Prothero, without any shadow of
congratulation. Benham told Prothero as much as his mother had conveyed to him of the
resources of his wealth. Her version had been adapted to his tender
years and the delicacies of her position. The departed Nolan had become
an eccentric godfather. Benham's manner was apologetic, and he made
it clear that only recently had these facts come to him. He had never
suspected that he had had this eccentric godfather. It altered the
outlook tremendously. It was one of the reasons that made Benham glad to
have Prothero there, one wanted a man of one's own age, who understood
things a little, to try over one's new ideas. Prothero listened with an
unamiable expression. "What would you do, Prothero, if you found yourself saddled with some
thousands a year?" "Godfathers don't grow in Brixton," said Prothero concisely. "Well, what am I to do, Prothero?" "Does all THIS belong to you?" "No, this is my mother's." "Godfather too?" "I've not thought.... I suppose so. Or her own." Prothero meditated. "THIS life," he said at last, "this large expensiveness--..."

He left his criticism unfinished. "I agree. It suits my mother somehow. I can't understand her living in
any other way. But--for me...."

"What can one do with several thousands a year?" Prothero's interest in this question presently swamped his petty
personal resentments. "I suppose," he said, "one might have rather a
lark with money like that. One would be free to go anywhere. To set all
sorts of things going.... It's clear you can't sell all you have and
give it to the poor. That is pauperization nowadays. You might run
a tremendously revolutionary paper. A real upsetting paper. How many
thousands is it?" "I don't know. SOME." Prothero's interest was growing as he faced the possibilities. "I've dreamt of a paper," he said, "a paper that should tell the brute
truth about things." "I don't know that I'm particularly built to be a journalist," Benham
objected. "You're not," said Billy.... "You might go into Parliament as a
perfectly independent member.... Only you wouldn't get in...."

"I'm not a speaker," said Benham. "Of course," said Billy, "if you don't decide on a game, you'll just go
on like this. You'll fall into a groove, you'll--you'll hunt. You'll go
to Scotland for the grouse." For the moment Prothero had no further suggestions. Benham waited for a second or so before he broached his own idea. "Why, first of all, at any rate, Billy, shouldn't one use one's money
to make the best of oneself? To learn things that men without money and
leisure find it difficult to learn? By an accident, however unjust it
is, one is in the position of a leader and a privileged person. Why not
do one's best to give value as that?" "Benham, that's the thin end of aristocracy!" "Why not?" "I hate aristocracy. For you it means doing what you like. While you are
energetic you will kick about and then you will come back to this." "That's one's own look-out," said Benham, after reflection. "No, it's bound to happen." Benham retreated a little from the immediate question. "Well, we can't suddenly at a blow change the world. If it isn't to be
plutocracy to-day it has to be aristocracy." Prothero frowned over this, and then he made a sweeping proposition. "YOU CANNOT HAVE ARISTOCRACY," he said, "BECAUSE, YOU SEE--ALL MEN ARE
RIDICULOUS. Democracy has to fight its way out from under plutocracy. There is nothing else to be done." "But a man in my position--?" "It's a ridiculous position. You may try to escape being ridiculous. You
won't succeed." It seemed to Benham for a moment as though Prothero had got to the
bottom of the question, and then he perceived that he had only got to
the bottom of himself. Benham was pacing the floor. He turned at the open window, held out a long forefinger, and uttered
his countervailing faith. "Even if he is ridiculous, Prothero, a man may still be an aristocrat. A
man may anyhow be as much of an aristocrat as he can be." Prothero reflected. "No," he said, "it sounds all right, but it's wrong. I hate all these advantages and differences and distinctions. A man's a
man. What you say sounds well, but it's the beginning of pretension, of
pride--"

He stopped short. "Better, pride than dishonour," said Benham, "better the pretentious
life than the sordid life. What else is there?" "A life isn't necessarily sordid because it isn't pretentious," said
Prothero, his voice betraying a defensive disposition. "But a life with a large income MUST be sordid unless it makes some sort
of attempt to be fine...."



9


By transitions that were as natural as they were complicated and
untraceable Prothero found his visit to Chexington developing into a
tangle of discussions that all ultimately resolved themselves into an
antagonism of the democratic and the aristocratic idea. And his part
was, he found, to be the exponent of the democratic idea. The next day
he came down early, his talk with Benham still running through his head,
and after a turn or so in the garden he was attracted to the front door
by a sound of voices, and found Lady Marayne had been up still earlier
and was dismounting from a large effective black horse. This extorted an
unwilling admiration from him. She greeted him very pleasantly and made
a kind of introduction of her steed. There had been trouble at a gate,
he was a young horse and fidgeted at gates; the dispute was still bright
in her. Benham she declared was still in bed. "Wait till I have a mount
for him." She reappeared fitfully in the breakfast-room, and then he was
left to Benham until just before lunch. They read and afterwards, as the
summer day grew hot, they swam in the nude pond. She joined them in the
water, splashing about in a costume of some elaboration and being very
careful not to wet her hair. Then she came and sat with them on the
seat under the big cedar and talked with them in a wrap that was pretty
rather than prudish and entirely unmotherly. And she began a fresh
attack upon him by asking him if he wasn't a Socialist and whether he
didn't want to pull down Chexington and grow potatoes all over the park. This struck Prothero as an inadequate statement of the Socialist project
and he made an unsuccessful attempt to get it amended. The engagement thus opened was renewed with great energy at lunch. Sir Godfrey had returned to London and the inmost aspect of his
fellow-creatures, but the party of three was supplemented by a vague
young lady from the village and an alert agent from the neighbouring
Tentington estate who had intentions about a cottage. Lady Marayne
insisted upon regarding Socialism as a proposal to reinaugurate the
first French Revolution, as an inversion of society so that it would be
bottom upward, as an attack upon rule, order, direction. "And what good
are all these proposals? If you had the poor dear king beheaded,
you'd only get a Napoleon. If you divided all the property up between
everybody, you'd have rich and poor again in a year." Billy perceived no way of explaining away this version of his Socialism
that would not involve uncivil contradictions--and nobody ever
contradicted Lady Marayne. "But, Lady Marayne, don't you think there is a lot of disorder and
injustice in the world?" he protested. "There would be ever so much more if your Socialists had their way." "But still, don't you think--..."

It is unnecessary even to recapitulate these universal controversies of
our time. The lunch-table and the dinner-table and the general talk of
the house drifted more and more definitely at its own level in the
same direction as the private talk of Prothero and Benham, towards
the antagonism of the privileged few and the many, of the trained
and traditioned against the natural and undisciplined, of aristocracy
against democracy. At the week-end Sir Godfrey returned to bring fresh
elements. He said that democracy was unscientific. "To deny aristocracy
is to deny the existence of the fittest. It is on the existence of the
fittest that progress depends." "But do our social conditions exalt the fittest?" asked Prothero. "That is another question," said Benham. "Exactly," said Sir Godfrey. "That is another question. But speaking
with some special knowledge, I should say that on the whole the people
who are on the top of things OUGHT to be on the top of things. I agree
with Aristotle that there is such a thing as a natural inferior." "So far as I can understand Mr. Prothero," said Lady Marayne, "he thinks
that all the inferiors are the superiors and all the superiors inferior. It's quite simple...."

It made Prothero none the less indignant with this, that there
was indeed a grain of truth in it. He hated superiors, he felt for
inferiors. 10


At last came the hour of tipping. An embarrassed and miserable Prothero
went slinking about the house distributing unexpected gold. It was stupid, it was damnable; he had had to borrow the money from his
mother....

Lady Marayne felt he had escaped her. The controversy that should have
split these two young men apart had given them a new interest in each
other. When afterwards she sounded her son, very delicately, to see
if indeed he was aware of the clumsiness, the social ignorance and
uneasiness, the complete unsuitability of his friend, she could get no
more from him than that exasperating phrase, "He has ideas!" What are ideas? England may yet be ruined by ideas. He ought never to have gone to Trinity, that monster packet of
everything. He ought to have gone to some little GOOD college, good all
through. She ought to have asked some one who KNEW. 11


One glowing afternoon in October, as these two young men came over
Magdalen Bridge after a long disputatious and rather tiring walk to
Drayton--they had been talking of Eugenics and the "family"--Benham was
almost knocked down by an American trotter driven by Lord Breeze. "Whup
there!" said Lord Breeze in a voice deliberately brutal, and Benham,
roused from that abstraction which is partly fatigue, had to jump aside
and stumbled against the parapet as the gaunt pacer went pounding by. Lord Breeze grinned the sort of grin a man remembers. And passed. "Damnation!" said Benham with a face that had become suddenly very
white. Then presently. "Any fool can do that who cares to go to the trouble." "That," said Prothero, taking up their unquenchable issue, "that is the
feeling of democracy." "I walk because I choose to," said Benham. The thing rankled. "This equestrianism," he began, "is a matter of time and money--time
even more than money. I want to read. I want to deal with ideas....

"Any fool can drive...."

"Exactly," said Prothero. "As for riding, it means no more than the elaborate study and
cultivation of your horse. You have to know him. All horses are
individuals. A made horse perhaps goes its round like an omnibus, but
for the rest...."

Prothero made a noise of sympathetic assent. "In a country where equestrianism is assertion I suppose one must be
equestrian...."

That night some malignant spirit kept Benham awake, and great
American trotters with vast wide-striding feet and long yellow teeth,
uncontrollable, hard-mouthed American trotters, pounded over his angry
soul. "Prothero," he said in hall next day, "we are going to drive to-morrow." Next day, so soon as they had lunched, he led the way towards Maltby's,
in Crosshampton Lane. Something in his bearing put a question into
Prothero's mind. "Benham," he asked, "have you ever driven before?" "NEVER," said Benham. "Well?" "I'm going to now." Something between pleasure and alarm came into Prothero's eyes. He
quickened his pace so as to get alongside his friend and scrutinize his
pale determination. "Why are you doing this?" he asked. "I want to do it." "Benham, is it--EQUESTRIAN?" Benham made no audible reply. They proceeded resolutely in silence. An air of expectation prevailed in Maltby's yard. In the shafts of a
high, bleak-looking vehicle with vast side wheels, a throne-like vehicle
that impressed Billy Prothero as being a gig, a very large angular black
horse was being harnessed. "This is mine," said Benham compactly. "This is yours, sir," said an ostler. "He looks--QUIET." "You'll find him fresh enough, sir." Benham made a complicated ascent to the driver's seat and was handed the
reins. "Come on," he said, and Prothero followed to a less exalted seat
at Benham's side. They seemed to be at a very great height indeed. The
horse was then led out into Crosshampton Lane, faced towards Trinity
Street and discharged. "Check," said Benham, and touched the steed with
his whip. They started quite well, and the ostlers went back into the
yard, visibly unanxious. It struck Prothero that perhaps driving was
less difficult than he had supposed. They went along Crosshampton Lane, that high-walled gulley, with
dignity, with only a slight suggestion of the inaccuracy that was
presently to become apparent, until they met a little old bearded don
on a bicycle. Then some misunderstanding arose between Benham and the
horse, and the little bearded don was driven into the narrow pavement
and had to get off hastily. He made no comment, but his face became like
a gargoyle. "Sorry," said Benham, and gave his mind to the corner. There
was some difficulty about whether they were to turn to the right or the
left, but at last Benham, it seemed, carried his point, and they went
along the narrow street, past the grey splendours of King's, and rather
in the middle of the way. Prothero considered the beast in front of him, and how proud and
disrespectful a horse in a dogcart can seem to those behind it! Moreover, unaccustomed as he was to horses, he was struck by the strong
resemblance a bird's-eye view of a horse bears to a fiddle, a fiddle
with devil's ears. "Of course," said Prothero, "this isn't a trotter." "I couldn't get a trotter," said Benham. "I thought I would try this sort of thing before I tried a trotter," he
added. And then suddenly came disaster. There was a butcher's cart on the right, and Benham, mistrusting the
intelligence of his steed, insisted upon an excessive amplitude of
clearance. He did not reckon with the hand-barrow on his left, piled
up with dirty plates from the lunch of Trinity Hall. It had been left
there; its custodian was away upon some mysterious errand. Heaven knows
why Trinity Hall exhibited the treasures of its crockery thus stained
and deified in the Cambridge streets. But it did--for Benham's and
Prothero's undoing. Prothero saw the great wheel over which he was
poised entangle itself with the little wheel of the barrow. "God!" he whispered, and craned, fascinated. The little wheel was manifestly
intrigued beyond all self-control by the great wheel; it clung to it, it
went before it, heedless of the barrow, of which it was an inseparable
part.