"We see life," he wrote, "not only life in the world outside us, but
life in our own selves, as an immense choice of possibilities; indeed,
for us in particular who have come up here, who are not under any urgent
necessity to take this line or that, life is apparently pure choice. It
is quite easy to think we are all going to choose the pattern of life we
like best and work it out in our own way.... And, meanwhile, there is no
great hurry....

"I want to begin by saying that choice isn't so easy and so necessary as
it seems. We think we are going to choose presently, and in the end we
may never choose at all. Choice needs perhaps more energy than we think. The great multitude of older people we can observe in the world outside
there, haven't chosen either in the matter of the world outside, where
they shall go, what they shall do, what part they shall play, or in
the matter of the world within, what they will be and what they are
determined they will never be. They are still in much the same state of
suspended choice as we seem to be in, but in the meanwhile THINGS HAPPEN
TO THEM. And things are happening to us, things will happen to us, while
we still suppose ourselves in the wings waiting to be consulted about
the casting of the piece....

"Nevertheless this immense appearance of choice which we get in the
undergraduate community here, is not altogether illusion; it is more
reality than illusion even if it has not the stable and complete reality
it appears to have. And it is more a reality for us than it was for our
fathers, and much more a reality now than it was a few centuries ago. The world is more confused and multitudinous than ever it was, the
practicable world far wider, and ourselves far less under the pressure
of inflexible moulding forces and inevitable necessities than any
preceding generations. I want to put very clearly how I see the new
world, the present world, the world of novel choice to which our youth
and inexperience faces, and I want to define to you a certain selection
of choices which I am going to call aristocratic, and to which it is our
manifest duty and destiny as the elect and favoured sons of our race to
direct ourselves. "It isn't any choice of Hercules I mean, any mere alternative whether
we will be, how shall I put it?--the bridegrooms of pleasure or the
bridegrooms of duty. It is infinitely vaster and more subtly moral than
that. There are a thousand good lives possible, of which we may have
one, lives which are soundly good, or a thousand bad lives, if you like,
lives which are thoroughly bad--that's the old and perpetual choice,
that has always been--but what is more evident to me and more remarkable
and disconcerting is that there are nowadays ten thousand muddled lives
lacking even so much moral definition, even so much consistency as is
necessary for us to call them either good or bad, there are planless
indeterminate lives, more and more of them, opening out as the possible
lives before us, a perfect wilderness between salvation and damnation,
a wilderness so vast and crowded that at last it seems as though the
way to either hell or heaven would be lost in its interminable futility. Such planless indeterminate lives, plebeian lives, mere lives, fill the
world, and the spectacle of whole nations, our whole civilization, seems
to me to re-echo this planlessness, this indeterminate confusion of
purpose. Plain issues are harder and harder to find, it is as if they
had disappeared. Simple living is the countryman come to town. We are
deafened and jostled and perplexed. There are so many things afoot that
we get nothing....

"That is what is in my mind when I tell you that we have to gather
ourselves together much more than we think. We have to clench ourselves
upon a chosen end. We have to gather ourselves together out of the swill
of this brimming world. "Or--we are lost...."

("Swill of this brimming world," said White. "Some of this sounds
uncommonly like Prothero." He mused for a moment and then resumed his
reading.) "That is what I was getting at when, three years ago, I made an attack
upon Democracy to the mother society of this society, an attack that I
expressed ill and failed to drive home. That is what I have come down
now to do my best to make plainer. This age of confusion is Democracy;
it is all that Democracy can ever give us. Democracy, if it means
anything, means the rule of the planless man, the rule of the unkempt
mind. It means as a necessary consequence this vast boiling up of
collectively meaningless things. "What is the quality of the common man, I mean of the man that is common
to all of us, the man who is the Standard for such men as Carnac,
the man who seems to be the ideal of the Catholic Democrat? He is the
creature of a few fundamental impulses. He begins in blind imitation of
the life about him. He lusts and takes a wife, he hungers and tills
a field or toils in some other way to earn a living, a mere aimless
living, he fears and so he does not wander, he is jealous and stays by
his wife and his job, is fiercely yet often stupidly and injuriously
defensive of his children and his possessions, and so until he wearies. Then he dies and needs a cemetery. He needs a cemetery because he is so
afraid of dissolution that even when he has ceased to be, he still wants
a place and a grave to hold him together and prevent his returning to
the All that made him. Our chief impression of long ages of mankind
comes from its cemeteries. And this is the life of man, as the common
man conceives and lives it. Beyond that he does not go, he never
comprehends himself collectively at all, the state happens about him;
his passion for security, his gregarious self-defensiveness, makes him
accumulate upon himself until he congests in cities that have no
sense of citizenship and states that have no structure; the clumsy,
inconsecutive lying and chatter of his newspapers, his hoardings and
music-halls gives the measure of his congested intelligences, the
confusion of ugly, half empty churches and chapels and meeting-halls
gauge the intensity of his congested souls, the tricks and slow
blundering dishonesties of Diet and Congress and Parliament are his
statecraft and his wisdom....

"I do not care if this instant I am stricken dead for pride. I say here
now to you and to High Heaven that THIS LIFE IS NOT GOOD ENOUGH FOR ME. I know there is a better life than this muddle about us, a better life
possible now. I know it. A better individual life and a better public
life. If I had no other assurances, if I were blind to the glorious
intimations of art, to the perpetually widening promise of science,
to the mysterious beckonings of beauty in form and colour and the
inaccessible mockery of the stars, I should still know this from the
insurgent spirit within me....

"Now this better life is what I mean when I talk of Aristocracy. This
idea of a life breaking away from the common life to something better,
is the consuming idea in my mind. "Constantly, recurrently, struggling out of the life of the farm and
the shop, the inn and the market, the street and the crowd, is something
that is not of the common life. Its way of thinking is Science, its
dreaming is Art, its will is the purpose of mankind. It is not the
common thing. But also it is not an unnatural thing. It is not as common
as a rat, but it is no less natural than a panther. "For it is as natural to be an explorer as it is to be a potato grower,
it is rarer but it is as natural; it is as natural to seek explanations
and arrange facts as it is to make love, or adorn a hut, or show
kindness to a child. It is a folly I will not even dispute about, that
man's only natural implement is the spade. Imagination, pride, exalted
desire are just as much Man, as are hunger and thirst and sexual
curiosities and the panic dread of unknown things....

"Now you see better what I mean about choice. Now you see what I am
driving at. We have to choose each one for himself and also each one for
the race, whether we will accept the muddle of the common life, whether
we ourselves will be muddled, weakly nothings, children of luck,
steering our artful courses for mean success and tawdry honours, or
whether we will be aristocrats, for that is what it amounts to, each
one in the measure of his personal quality an aristocrat, refusing to be
restrained by fear, refusing to be restrained by pain, resolved to
know and understand up to the hilt of his understanding, resolved to
sacrifice all the common stuff of his life to the perfection of his
peculiar gift, a purged man, a trained, selected, artificial man, not
simply free, but lordly free, filled and sustained by pride. Whether
you or I make that choice and whether you or I succeed in realizing
ourselves, though a great matter to ourselves, is, I admit, a small
matter to the world. But the great matter is this, that THE CHOICE IS
BEING MADE, that it will continue to be made, and that all around us, so
that it can never be arrested and darkened again, is the dawn of human
possibility...."

(White could also see his dead friend's face with its enthusiastic
paleness, its disordered hair and the glowing darknesses in the eyes. On such occasions Benham always had an expression of ESCAPE. Temporary
escape. And thus would his hand have clutched the reading-desk; thus
would his long fingers have rustled these dry papers.) "Man has reached a point when a new life opens before him....

"The old habitual life of man is breaking up all about us, and for the
new life our minds, our imaginations, our habits and customs are all
unprepared....

"It is only now, after some years of study and living, that I begin to
realize what this tremendous beginning we call Science means to mankind. Every condition that once justified the rules and imperatives, the
manners and customs, the sentiments, the morality, the laws and
limitations which make up the common life, has been or is being
destroyed.... Two or three hundred years more and all that life will be
as much a thing past and done with as the life that was lived in the age
of unpolished stone....

"Man is leaving his ancestral shelters and going out upon the greatest
adventure that ever was in space or time, he is doing it now, he is
doing it in us as I stand here and read to you." CHAPTER THE SECOND ~~ THE YOUNG MAN ABOUT TOWN



1


The oldest novel in the world at any rate, White reflected, was a story
with a hero and no love interest worth talking about. It was the story
of Tobias and how he came out from the shelters of his youth into this
magic and intricate world. Its heroine was incidental, part of the
spoil, a seven times relict....

White had not read the book of Tobit for many years, and what he was
really thinking of was not that ancient story at all, but Botticelli's
picture, that picture of the sunlit morning of life. When you say
"Tobias" that is what most intelligent people will recall. Perhaps you
will remember how gaily and confidently the young man strides along with
the armoured angel by his side. Absurdly enough, Benham and his dream of
high aristocracy reminded White of that....

"We have all been Tobias in our time," said White. If White had been writing this chapter he would have in all probability
called it THE TOBIAS STAGE, forgetful that there was no Tobit behind
Benham and an entirely different Sara in front of him. 2


From Cambridge Benham came to London. For the first time he was to live
in London. Never before had he been in London for more than a few days
at a time. But now, guided by his mother's advice, he was to have a flat
in Finacue street, just round the corner from Desborough Street, a flat
very completely and delightfully furnished under her supervision. It had
an admirable study, in which she had arranged not only his books, but
a number of others in beautiful old leather bindings that it had
amused her extremely to buy; it had a splendid bureau and business-like
letter-filing cabinets, a neat little drawing-room and a dining-room,
well-placed abundant electric lights, and a man called Merkle whom
she had selected very carefully and who she felt would not only see to
Benham's comfort but keep him, if necessary, up to the mark. This man Merkle seemed quite unaware that humanity "here and now"--even
as he was engaged in meticulously putting out Benham's clothes--was
"leaving its ancestral shelters and going out upon the greatest
adventure that ever was in space or time." If he had been told as much
by Benham he would probably have said, "Indeed, sir," and proceeded
accurately with his duties. And if Benham's voice had seemed to call for
any additional remark, he would probably have added, "It's 'igh time,
sir, something of the sort was done. Will you have the white wesket as
before, sir, or a fresh one this evening?... Unless it's a very special
occasion, sir.... Exactly, sir. THANK you, sir." And when her son was properly installed in his apartments Lady Marayne
came round one morning with a large experienced-looking portfolio and
rendered an account of her stewardship of his estate that was already
some months overdue. It was all very confused and confusing, and there
were inexplicable incidents, a heavy overdraft at the bank for example,
but this was Sir Godfrey's fault, she explained. "He never would help
me with any of this business," she said. "I've had to add sometimes for
HOURS. But, of course, you are a man, and when you've looked through it
all, I know you'll understand." He did look through it enough to see that it was undesirable that he
should understand too explicitly, and, anyhow, he was manifestly
very well off indeed, and the circumstances of the case, even as
he understood them, would have made any businesslike book-keeping
ungracious. The bankers submitted the corroborating account of
securities, and he found himself possessed of his unconditional six
thousand a year, with, as she put it, "the world at his feet." On the
whole it seemed more wonderful to him now than when he had first heard
of it. He kissed her and thanked her, and left the portfolio open for
Merkle's entirely honest and respectful but very exact inspection, and
walked back with her to Desborough Street, and all the while he was
craving to ask the one tremendous question he knew he would never ask,
which was just how exactly this beneficent Nolan came in....

Once or twice in the small hours, and on a number of other occasions,
this unspeakable riddle assumed a portentous predominance in his mind. He was forced back upon his inner consciousness for its consideration. He could discuss it with nobody else, because that would have been
discussing his mother. Probably most young men who find themselves with riches at large in the
world have some such perplexity as this mixed in with the gift. Such men
as the Cecils perhaps not, because they are in the order of things, the
rich young Jews perhaps not, because acquisition is their principle,
but for most other intelligent inheritors there must be this twinge of
conscientious doubt. "Why particularly am I picked out for so tremendous
an advantage?" If the riddle is not Nolan, then it is rent, or it is the
social mischief of the business, or the particular speculative COUP that
established their fortune. "PECUNIA NON OLET," Benham wrote, "and it is just as well. Or the
west-ends of the world would reek with deodorizers. Restitution is
inconceivable; how and to whom? And in the meanwhile here we are lifted
up by our advantage to a fantastic appearance of opportunity. Whether
the world looks to us or not to do tremendous things, it ought to look
to us. And above all we ought to look to ourselves. RICHESSE OBLIGE." 3


It is not to be supposed that Benham came to town only with a general
theory of aristocracy. He had made plans for a career. Indeed, he had
plans for several careers. None of them when brought into contrast with
the great spectacle of London retained all the attractiveness that had
saturated them at their inception. They were all more or less political careers. Whatever a democratic man
may be, Prothero and he had decided that an aristocratic man is a public
man. He is made and protected in what he is by laws and the state and
his honour goes out to the state. The aristocrat has no right to be
a voluptuary or a mere artist or a respectable nonentity, or any such
purely personal things. Responsibility for the aim and ordering of the
world is demanded from him as imperatively as courage. Benham's deliberate assumption of the equestrian role brought him
into contact with a new set of acquaintances, conscious of political
destinies. They were amiable, hard young men, almost affectedly
unaffected; they breakfasted before dawn to get in a day's hunting, and
they saw to it that Benham's manifest determination not to discredit
himself did not lead to his breaking his neck. Their bodies were
beautifully tempered, and their minds were as flabby as Prothero's body. Among them were such men as Lord Breeze and Peter Westerton, and that
current set of Corinthians who supposed themselves to be resuscitating
the Young England movement and Tory Democracy. Poor movements which
indeed have never so much lived as suffered chronic resuscitation. These
were days when Tariff Reform was only an inglorious possibility for the
Tory Party, and Young England had yet to demonstrate its mental quality
in an anti-socialist campaign. Seen from the perspectives of Cambridge
and Chexington, the Tory party was still a credible basis for the
adventure of a young man with an aristocratic theory in his mind. These were the days when the strain and extremity of a dangerous
colonial war were fresh in people's minds, when the quality of
the public consciousness was braced up by its recent response to
unanticipated demands. The conflict of stupidities that had caused
the war was overlaid and forgotten by a hundred thousand devotions,
by countless heroic deaths and sufferings, by a pacification largely
conceived and broadly handled. The nation had displayed a belated regard
for its honour and a sustained passion for great unities. It was still
possible for Benham to regard the empire as a splendid opportunity,
and London as the conceivable heart of the world. He could think of
Parliament as a career, and of a mingling of aristocratic socialism
based on universal service with a civilizing imperialism as a
purpose.... But his thoughts had gone wider and deeper than that.... Already when Benham came to London he had begun to dream of
possibilities that went beyond the accidental states and empires of
to-day. Prothero's mind, replete with historical detail, could find
nothing but absurdity in the alliances and dynasties and loyalties of
our time. "Patched up things, Benham, temporary, pretentious. All very
well for the undignified man, the democratic man, to take shelter under,
all very well for the humourist to grin and bear, all very well for the
crowd and the quack, but not for the aristocrat--No!--his mind cuts like
steel and burns like fire. Lousy sheds they are, plastered hoardings...
and such a damned nuisance too! For any one who wants to do honourable
things! With their wars and their diplomacies, their tariffs and
their encroachments; all their humbugging struggles, their bloody and
monstrous struggles, that finally work out to no end at all.... If you
are going for the handsome thing in life then the world has to be a
united world, Benham, as a matter of course. That was settled when
the railways and the telegraph came. Telephones, wireless telegraphy,
aeroplanes insist on it. We've got to mediatise all this stuff, all
these little crowns and boundaries and creeds, and so on, that stand
in the way. Just as Italy had to be united in spite of all the rotten
little dukes and princes and republics, just as Germany had to be united
in spite of its scores of kingdoms and duchies and liberties, so now
the world. Things as they are may be fun for lawyers and politicians
and court people and--douaniers; they may suit the loan-mongers and
the armaments shareholders, they may even be more comfortable for the
middle-aged, but what, except as an inconvenience, does that matter to
you or me?" Prothero always pleased Benham when he swept away empires. There was
always a point when the rhetoric broke into gesture. "We've got to sweep them away, Benham," he said, with a wide gesture of
his arm. "We've got to sweep them all away." Prothero helped himself to some more whiskey, and spoke hastily,
because he was afraid some one else might begin. He was never safe from
interruption in his own room. The other young men present sucked at
their pipes and regarded him doubtfully. They were never quite certain
whether Prothero was a prophet or a fool. They could not understand a
mixed type, and he was so manifestly both. "The only sane political work for an intelligent man is to get the
world-state ready. For that we have to prepare an aristocracy--"

"Your world-state will be aristocratic?" some one interpolated. "Of course it will be aristocratic. How can uninformed men think all
round the globe? Democracy dies five miles from the parish pump. It will
be an aristocratic republic of all the capable men in the world...."

"Of course," he added, pipe in mouth, as he poured out his whiskey,
"it's a big undertaking. It's an affair of centuries...."

And then, as a further afterthought: "All the more reason for getting to
work at it...."

In his moods of inspiration Prothero would discourse through the tobacco
smoke until that great world-state seemed imminent--and Part Two in the
Tripos a thing relatively remote. He would talk until the dimly-lit room
about him became impalpable, and the young men squatting about it in
elaborately careless attitudes caught glimpses of cities that are still
to be, bridges in wild places, deserts tamed and oceans conquered,
mankind no longer wasted by bickerings, going forward to the conquest of
the stars....

An aristocratic world-state; this political dream had already taken
hold of Benham's imagination when he came to town. But it was a dream,
something that had never existed, something that indeed may never
materialize, and such dreams, though they are vivid enough in a study at
night, fade and vanish at the rustle of a daily newspaper or the
sound of a passing band. To come back again.... So it was with Benham. Sometimes he was set clearly towards this world-state that Prothero
had talked into possibility. Sometimes he was simply abreast of the
patriotic and socially constructive British Imperialism of Breeze and
Westerton. And there were moods when the two things were confused in his
mind, and the glamour of world dominion rested wonderfully on the slack
and straggling British Empire of Edward the Seventh--and Mr. Rudyard
Kipling and Mr. Chamberlain. He did go on for a time honestly
entertaining both these projects in his mind, each at its different
level, the greater impalpable one and the lesser concrete one within it. In some unimaginable way he could suppose that the one by some miracle
of ennoblement--and neglecting the Frenchman, the Russian, the German,
the American, the Indian, the Chinaman, and, indeed, the greater part of
mankind from the problem--might become the other....

All of which is recorded here, without excess of comment, as it
happened, and as, in a mood of astonished reminiscences, he came finally
to perceive it, and set it down for White's meditative perusal. 4


But to the enthusiasm of the young, dreams have something of the
substance of reality and realities, something of the magic of dreams. The London to which Benham came from Cambridge and the disquisitions of
Prothero was not the London of a mature and disillusioned vision. It was
London seen magnified and distorted through the young man's crystalline
intentions. It had for him a quality of multitudinous, unquenchable
activity. Himself filled with an immense appetite for life, he was
unable to conceive of London as fatigued. He could not suspect these
statesmen he now began to meet and watch, of jaded wills and petty
spites, he imagined that all the important and influential persons in
this large world of affairs were as frank in their private lives and as
unembarrassed in their financial relationships as his untainted self. And he had still to reckon with stupidity. He believed in the statecraft
of leader-writers and the sincerity of political programmes. And so
regarded, what an avenue to Empire was Whitehall! How momentous was the
sunrise in St. James's Park, and how significant the clustering knot of
listeners and speakers beneath the tall column that lifts our Nelson to
the windy sky! For a time Benham was in love with the idea of London. He got maps of
London and books about London. He made plans to explore its various
regions. He tried to grasp it all, from the conscious picturesqueness of
its garden suburbs to the factories of Croydon, from the clerk-villadoms
of Ealing to the inky streams of Bow. In those days there were passenger
steamboats that would take one from the meadows of Hampton Court past
the whole spectacle of London out to the shipping at Greenwich and the
towed liners, the incessant tugs, the heaving portals of the sea....
His time was far too occupied for him to carry out a tithe of these
expeditions he had planned, but he had many walks that bristled with
impressions. Northward and southward, eastward and westward a dreaming
young man could wander into a wilderness of population, polite or
sombre, poor, rich, or middle-class, but all ceaselessly active, all
urgently pressing, as it seemed, to their part in the drama of the
coming years. He loved the late afternoon, when every artery is injected
and gorged with the multitudinous home-going of the daily workers, he
loved the time of lighting up, and the clustering excitements of the
late hours. And he went out southward and eastward into gaunt regions of
reeking toil. As yet he knew nothing of the realities of industrialism. He saw only the beauty of the great chimneys that rose against the
sullen smoke-barred sunsets, and he felt only the romance of the lurid
shuddering flares that burst out from squat stacks of brickwork and lit
the emptiness of strange and slovenly streets....

And this London was only the foreground of the great scene upon which
he, as a prosperous, well-befriended young Englishman, was free to
play whatever part he could. This narrow turbid tidal river by which he
walked ran out under the bridges eastward beneath the grey-blue clouds
towards Germany, towards Russia, and towards Asia, which still seemed in
those days so largely the Englishman's Asia. And when you turned about
at Blackfriars Bridge this sense of the round world was so upon you
that you faced not merely Westminster, but the icy Atlantic and America,
which one could yet fancy was a land of Englishmen--Englishmen a little
estranged. At any rate they assimilated, they kept the tongue. The
shipping in the lower reaches below the Tower there carried the flags of
every country under the sky.... As he went along the riverside he met a
group of dusky students, Chinese or Japanese. Cambridge had abounded in
Indians; and beneath that tall clock tower at Westminster it seemed as
though the world might centre. The background of the Englishman's world
reached indeed to either pole, it went about the earth, his background
it was--for all that he was capable of doing. All this had awaited
him....

Is it any wonder if a young man with an excitable imagination came at
times to the pitch of audible threats? If the extreme indulgence of his
opportunity and his sense of ability and vigour lifted his vanity at
moments to the kingly pitch? If he ejaculated and made a gesture or so
as he went along the Embankment? 5


In the disquisition upon choice that opened Benham's paper on
ARISTOCRACY, he showed himself momentarily wiser than his day-dreams. For in these day-dreams he did seem to himself to be choosing among
unlimited possibilities. Yet while he dreamt other influences were
directing his movements. There were for instance his mother, Lady
Marayne, who saw a very different London from what he did, and his
mother Dame Nature, who cannot see London at all. She was busy in his
blood as she is busy in the blood of most healthy young men; common
experience must fill the gaps for us; and patiently and thoroughly
she was preparing for the entrance of that heroine, whom not the most
self-centred of heroes can altogether avoid....

And then there was the power of every day. Benham imagined himself at
large on his liberating steed of property while indeed he was mounted
on the made horse of Civilization; while he was speculating whither he
should go, he was already starting out upon the round. One hesitates
upon the magnificent plan and devotion of one's lifetime and meanwhile
there is usage, there are engagements. Every morning came Merkle, the
embodiment of the established routine, the herald of all that the world
expected and required Benham to be and do. Usually he awakened Benham
with the opening of his door and the soft tinkle of the curtain rings as
he let in the morning light. He moved softly about the room, gathering
up and removing the crumpled hulls of yesterday; that done he reappeared
at the bedside with a cup of admirable tea and one thin slice of
bread-and-butter, reported on the day's weather, stood deferential for
instructions. "You will be going out for lunch, sir. Very good, sir. White slips of course, sir. You will go down into the country in the
afternoon? Will that be the serge suit, sir, or the brown?" These matters settled, the new aristocrat could yawn and stretch like
any aristocrat under the old dispensation, and then as the sound of
running water from the bathroom ceased, stick his toes out of bed. The day was tremendously indicated. World-states and aristocracies of
steel and fire, things that were as real as coal-scuttles in Billy's
rooms away there at Cambridge, were now remoter than Sirius. He was expected to shave, expected to bath, expected to go in to
the bright warmth and white linen and silver and china of his
breakfast-table. And there he found letters and invitations, loaded with
expectation. And beyond the coffee-pot, neatly folded, lay the TIMES,
and the DAILY NEWS and the TELEGRAPH all with an air of requiring his
attention. There had been more fighting in Thibet and Mr. Ritchie had
made a Free Trade speech at Croydon. The Japanese had torpedoed another
Russian ironclad and a British cruiser was ashore in the East Indies. A
man had been found murdered in an empty house in Hoxton and the King
had had a conversation with General Booth. Tadpole was in for North
Winchelsea, beating Taper by nine votes, and there had been a new cut
in the Atlantic passenger rates. He was expected to be interested and
excited by these things. Presently the telephone bell would ring and he would hear the clear
little voice of his mother full of imperative expectations. He would be
round for lunch? Yes, he would be round to lunch. And the afternoon, had
he arranged to do anything with his afternoon? No!--put off Chexington
until tomorrow. There was this new pianist, it was really an EXPERIENCE,
and one might not get tickets again. And then tea at Panton's. It was
rather fun at Panton's.... Oh!--Weston Massinghay was coming to lunch. He was a useful man to know. So CLEVER.... So long, my dear little Son,
till I see you.... So life puts out its Merkle threads, as the poacher puts his hair noose
about the pheasant's neck, and while we theorize takes hold of us.... It came presently home to Benham that he had been down from Cambridge
for ten months, and that he was still not a step forward with the
realization of the new aristocracy. His political career waited. He had
done a quantity of things, but their net effect was incoherence. He had
not been merely passive, but his efforts to break away into creative
realities had added to rather than diminished his accumulating sense of
futility. The natural development of his position under the influence of Lady
Marayne had enormously enlarged the circle of his acquaintances. He had
taken part in all sorts of social occasions, and sat and listened to
a representative selection of political and literary and social
personages, he had been several times to the opera and to a great number
and variety of plays, he had been attentively inconspicuous in several
really good week-end parties. He had spent a golden October in North
Italy with his mother, and escaped from the glowing lassitude of
Venice for some days of climbing in the Eastern Alps. In January, in an
outbreak of enquiry, he had gone with Lionel Maxim to St. Petersburg and
had eaten zakuska, brightened his eyes with vodka, talked with a number
of charming people of the war that was then imminent, listened to
gipsy singers until dawn, careered in sledges about the most silent
and stately of capitals, and returned with Lionel, discoursing upon
autocracy and assassination, Japan, the Russian destiny, and the
government of Peter the Great. That excursion was the most after his
heart of all the dispersed employments of his first year. Through the
rest of the winter he kept himself very fit, and still further qualified
that nervous dislike for the horse that he had acquired from Prothero by
hunting once a week in Essex. He was incurably a bad horseman; he rode
without sympathy, he was unready and convulsive at hedges and ditches,
and he judged distances badly. His white face and rigid seat and a
certain joylessness of bearing in the saddle earned him the singular
nickname, which never reached his ears, of the "Galvanized Corpse." He got through, however, at the cost of four quite trifling spills
and without damaging either of the horses he rode. And his physical
self-respect increased. On his writing-desk appeared a few sheets of manuscript that increased
only very slowly. He was trying to express his Cambridge view of
aristocracy in terms of Finacue Street, West. The artistic and intellectual movements of London had made their
various demands upon his time and energies. Art came to him with a
noble assumption of his interest and an intention that presently became
unpleasantly obvious to sell him pictures that he did not want to buy
and explain away pictures that he did. He bought one or two modern
achievements, and began to doubt if art and aristocracy had any
necessary connection. At first he had accepted the assumption that they
had. After all, he reflected, one lives rather for life and things than
for pictures of life and things or pictures arising out of life and
things. This Art had an air of saying something, but when one came to
grips with it what had it to say? Unless it was Yah! The drama, and more
particularly the intellectual drama, challenged his attention. In the
hands of Shaw, Barker, Masefield, Galsworthy, and Hankin, it, too, had
an air of saying something, but he found it extremely difficult to join
on to his own demands upon life anything whatever that the intellectual
drama had the air of having said. He would sit forward in the front row
of the dress-circle with his cheek on his hand and his brow slightly
knit. His intentness amused observant people. The drama that did not
profess to be intellectual he went to with Lady Marayne, and usually
on first nights. Lady Marayne loved a big first night at St. James's
Theatre or His Majesty's. Afterwards, perhaps, Sir Godfrey would join
them at a supper party, and all sorts of clever and amusing people would
be there saying keen intimate things about each other. He met Yeats, who
told amusing stories about George Moore, and afterwards he met George
Moore, who told amusing stories about Yeats, and it was all, he felt,
great fun for the people who were in it. But he was not in it, and he
had no very keen desire to be in it. It wasn't his stuff. He had,
though they were nowadays rather at the back of his mind, quite other
intentions. In the meanwhile all these things took up his time and
distracted his attention. There was, as yet, no practicable aviation to beguile a young man of
spirit, but there were times when Benham found himself wondering whether
there might not be something rather creditable in the possession and
control of a motor-car of exceptional power. Only one might smash people
up. Should an aristocrat be deterred by the fear of smashing people up? If it is a selfish fear of smashing people up, if it is nerves rather
than pity? At any rate it did not come to the car. 6


Among other things that delayed Benham very greatly in the development
of his aristocratic experiments was the advice that was coming to him
from every quarter. It came in extraordinary variety and volume, but
always it had one unvarying feature. It ignored and tacitly contradicted
his private intentions. We are all of us disposed to be propagandists of our way of living, and
the spectacle of a wealthy young man quite at large is enough to excite
the most temperate of us without distinction of age or sex. "If I were
you," came to be a familiar phrase in his ear. This was particularly the
case with political people; and they did it not only from the natural
infirmity of humanity, but because, when they seemed reluctant or
satisfied with him as he was, Lady Marayne egged them on. There was a general assumption that he was to go into Parliament, and
most of his counsellors assumed further that on the whole his natural
sympathies would take him into the Conservative party. But it was
pointed out to him that just at present the Liberal party was the party
of a young man's opportunity; sooner or later the swing of the pendulum
which would weed the Conservatives and proliferate Liberals was bound to
come, there was always more demand and opportunity for candidates on
the Liberal side, the Tariff Reformers were straining their ministerial
majority to the splitting point, and most of the old Liberal leaders had
died off during the years of exile. The party was no longer
dominated; it would tolerate ideas. A young man who took a distinctive
line--provided it was not from the party point of view a vexatious or
impossible line--might go very rapidly far and high. On the other hand,
it was urged upon him that the Tariff Reform adventure called also
for youth and energy. But there, perhaps, there was less scope for
the distinctive line--and already they had Garvin. Quite a number
of Benham's friends pointed out to him the value of working out some
special aspect of our national political interests. A very useful
speciality was the Balkans. Mr. Pope, the well-known publicist, whose
very sound and considerable reputation was based on the East Purblow
Labour Experiment, met Benham at lunch and proposed to go with him in
a spirit of instructive association to the Balkans, rub up their Greek
together, and settle the problem of Albania. He wanted, he said, a
foreign speciality to balance his East Purblow interest. But Lady Beach
Mandarin warned Benham against the Balkans; the Balkans were getting
to be too handy for Easter and summer holidays, and now that there were
several good hotels in Servia and Montenegro and Sofia, they were
being overdone. Everybody went to the Balkans and came back with a pet
nationality. She loathed pet nationalities. She believed most people
loathed them nowadays. It was stale: it was GLADSTONIAN. She was all for
specialization in social reform. She thought Benham ought to join the
Fabian Society and consult the Webbs. Quite a number of able young men
had been placed with the assistance of the Webbs. They were, she said,
"a perfect fount...." Two other people, independently of each other,
pointed out to Benham the helpfulness of a few articles in the
half-crown monthlies....

"What are the assumptions underlying all this?" Benham asked himself in
a phase of lucidity. And after reflection. "Good God! The assumptions! What do they think
will satisfy me?..." Everybody, however, did not point to Parliament. Several people seemed
to think Travel, with a large T, was indicated. One distant cousin of
Sir Godfrey's, the kind of man of the world who has long moustaches, was
for big game shooting. "Get right out of all this while you are young,"
he said. "There's nothing to compare with stopping a charging lion
at twenty yards. I've done it, my boy. You can come back for all this
pow-wow afterwards." He gave the diplomatic service as a second choice. "There you are," he said, "first-rate social position, nothing to do,
theatres, operas, pretty women, colour, life. The best of good times. Barring Washington, that is. But Washington, they say, isn't as bad as
it used to be--since Teddy has Europeanized 'em...."

Even the Reverend Harold Benham took a subdued but thoughtful share in
his son's admonition. He came up to the flat--due precautions were taken
to prevent a painful encounter--he lunched at his son's new club, and he
was visibly oppressed by the contrast between the young man's youthful
fortunes and his own. As visibly he bore up bravely. "There are few men,
Poff, who would not envy you your opportunities," he said. "You have the
Feast of Life spread out at your feet.... I hope you have had yourself
put up for the Athenaeum. They say it takes years. When I was a young
man--and ambitious--I thought that some day I might belong to the
Athenaeum.... One has to learn...."



7


And with an effect of detachment, just as though it didn't belong to
the rest of him at all, there was beginning a sort of backstairs and
underside to Benham's life. There is no need to discuss how inevitable
that may or may not be in the case of a young man of spirit and
large means, nor to embark upon the discussion of the temptations and
opportunities of large cities. Several ladies, of various positions and
qualities, had reflected upon his manifest need of education. There was
in particular Mrs. Skelmersdale, a very pretty little widow with hazel
eyes, black hair, a mobile mouth, and a pathetic history, who talked of
old music to him and took him to a Dolmetsch concert in Clifford's Inn,
and expanded that common interest to a general participation in
his indefinite outlook. She advised him about his probable
politics--everybody did that--but when he broke through his usual
reserve and suggested views of his own, she was extraordinarily
sympathetic. She was so sympathetic and in such a caressing way that
she created a temporary belief in her understanding, and it was quite
imperceptibly that he was drawn into the discussion of modern ethical
problems. She herself was a rather stimulating instance of modern
ethical problems. She told him something of her own story, and then
their common topics narrowed down very abruptly. He found he could help
her in several ways. There is, unhappily, a disposition on the part of
many people, who ought to know better, to regard a role played by Joseph
during his earlier days in Egypt as a ridiculous one. This point of view
became very inopportunely dominant in Benham's mind when he was lunching
TETE A TETE with Mrs. Skelmersdale at her flat.... The ensuing intimacy was of an entirely concealed and respectable
nature, but a certain increased preoccupation in his manner set Lady
Marayne thinking. He had as a matter of fact been taken by surprise. Still he perceived that it is no excuse for a man that he has been taken
by surprise. Surprises in one's own conduct ought not to happen. When
they do happen then an aristocrat ought to stick to what he had done. He
was now in a subtle and complicated relationship to Mrs. Skelmersdale,
a relationship in which her pride had become suddenly a matter of
tremendous importance. Once he had launched himself upon this affair, it
was clear to him that he owed it to her never to humiliate her. And to
go back upon himself now would be a tremendous humiliation for her. You
see, he had helped her a little financially. And she looked to him, she
wanted him....

She wasn't, he knew, altogether respectable. Indeed, poor dear, her
ethical problems, already a little worn, made her seem at times anything
but respectable. He had met her first one evening at Jimmy Gluckstein's
when he was forming his opinion of Art. Her manifest want of interest
in pictures had attracted him. And that had led to music. And to the
mention of a Clementi piano, that short, gentle, sad, old, little sort
of piano people will insist upon calling a spinet, in her flat. And so to this....