Amanda and Benham riding one behind
the other in a stricken silence passed this labouring column without a
gesture, but presently they heard the commander stopping and questioning
Giorgio....

Then Giorgio and the others came clattering to overtake them. Giorgio was too full to wait for questions. He talked eagerly to
Benham's silence. It must have happened yesterday, he explained. They were
Bulgarians--traitors. They had been converted to the Patriarchists by
the Greeks--by a Greek band, that is to say. They had betrayed one
of their own people. Now a Bulgarian band had descended upon
them. Bulgarian bands it seemed were always particularly rough on
Bulgarian-speaking Patriarchists....



9


That night they slept in a dirty little room in a peasant's house in
Resnia, and in the middle of the night Amanda woke up with a start and
heard Benham talking. He seemed to be sitting up as he talked. But he
was not talking to her and his voice sounded strange. "Flies," he said, "in the sunlight!" He was silent for a time and then he repeated the same words. Then suddenly he began to declaim. "Oh! Brutes together. Apes. Apes with
knives. Have they no lord, no master, to save them from such things? This is the life of men when no man rules.... When no man rules.... Not
even himself.... It is because we are idle, because we keep our wits
slack and our wills weak that these poor devils live in hell. These
things happen here and everywhere when the hand that rules grows
weak. Away in China now they are happening. Persia. Africa.... Russia
staggers. And I who should serve the law, I who should keep order,
wander and make love.... My God! may I never forget! May I never forget! Flies in the sunlight! That man's face. And those six men! "Grip the savage by the throat. "The weak savage in the foreign office, the weak savage at the party
headquarters, feud and indolence and folly. It is all one world. This
and that are all one thing. The spites of London and the mutilations
of Macedonia. The maggots that eat men's faces and the maggots that rot
their minds. Rot their minds. Rot their minds. Rot their minds...."

To Amanda it sounded like delirium. "CHEETAH!" she said suddenly between remonstrance and a cry of terror. The darkness suddenly became quite still. He did not move. She was afraid. "Cheetah!" she said again. "What is it, Amanda?" "I thought--. Are you all right?" "Quite." "But do you feel well?" "I've got this cold I caught in Ochrida. I suppose I'm feverish. But--yes, I'm well." "You were talking." Silence for a time. "I was thinking," he said. "You talked." "I'm sorry," he said after another long pause. 10


The next morning Benham had a pink spot on either cheek, his eyes were
feverishly bright, he would touch no food and instead of coffee he
wanted water. "In Monastir there will be a doctor," he said. "Monastir
is a big place. In Monastir I will see a doctor. I want a doctor." They rode out of the village in the freshness before sunrise and up long
hills, and sometimes they went in the shade of woods and sometimes in
a flooding sunshine. Benham now rode in front, preoccupied, intent,
regardless of Amanda, a stranger, and she rode close behind him
wondering. "When you get to Monastir, young man," she told him, inaudibly, "you
will go straight to bed and we'll see what has to be done with you." "AMMALATO," said Giorgio confidentially, coming abreast of her. "MEDICO IN MONASTIR," said Amanda. "SI,--MOLTI MEDICI, MONASTIR," Giorgio agreed. Then came the inevitable dogs, big white brutes, three in full cry
charging hard at Benham and a younger less enterprising beast running
along the high bank above yapping and making feints to descend. The goatherd, reclining under the shadow of a rock, awaited Benham's
embarrassment with an indolent malice. "You UNCIVILIZED Beasts!" cried Benham, and before Amanda could realize
what he was up to, she heard the crack of his revolver and saw a puff
of blue smoke drift away above his right shoulder. The foremost beast
rolled over and the goatherd had sprung to his feet. He shouted with
something between anger and dismay as Benham, regardless of the fact
that the other dogs had turned and were running back, let fly a second
time. Then the goatherd had clutched at the gun that lay on the grass
near at hand, Giorgio was bawling in noisy remonstrance and also getting
ready to shoot, and the horse-owner and his boy were clattering back
to a position of neutrality up the stony road. "BANG!" came a flight
of lead within a yard of Benham, and then the goatherd was in retreat
behind a rock and Giorgio was shouting "AVANTI, AVANTI!" to Amanda. She grasped his intention and in another moment she had Benham's horse
by the bridle and was leading the retreat. Giorgio followed close,
driving the two baggage mules before him. "I am tired of dogs," Benham said. "Tired to death of dogs. All savage
dogs must be shot. All through the world. I am tired--"

Their road carried them down through the rocky pass and then up a long
slope in the open. Far away on the left they saw the goatherd running
and shouting and other armed goatherds appearing among the rocks. Behind
them the horse-owner and his boy came riding headlong across the zone of
danger. "Dogs must be shot," said Benham, exalted. "Dogs must be shot." "Unless they are GOOD dogs," said Amanda, keeping beside him with an eye
on his revolver. "Unless they are good dogs to every one," said Benham. They rushed along the road in a turbulent dusty huddle of horses and
mules and riders. The horse-owner, voluble in Albanian, was trying
to get past them. His boy pressed behind him. Giorgio in the rear had
unslung his rifle and got it across the front of his saddle. Far
away they heard the sound of a shot, and a kind of shudder in the air
overhead witnessed to the flight of the bullet. They crested a rise and
suddenly between the tree boughs Monastir was in view, a wide stretch of
white town, with many cypress and plane trees, a winding river with many
wooden bridges, clustering minarets of pink and white, a hilly cemetery,
and scattered patches of soldiers' tents like some queer white crop to
supplement its extensive barracks. As they hurried down towards this city of refuge a long string of mules
burthened with great bales of green stuff appeared upon a convergent
track to the left. Besides the customary muleteers there were, by way of
an escort, a couple of tattered Turkish soldiers. All these men watched
the headlong approach of Benham's party with apprehensive inquiry. Giorgio shouted some sort of information that made the soldiers brighten
up and stare up the hill, and set the muleteers whacking and shouting at
their convoy. It struck Amanda that Giorgio must be telling lies about
a Bulgarian band. In another moment Benham and Amanda found themselves
swimming in a torrent of mules. Presently they overtook a small flock of
fortunately nimble sheep, and picked up several dogs, dogs that happily
disregarded Benham in the general confusion. They also comprehended a
small springless cart, two old women with bundles and an elderly Greek
priest, before their dusty, barking, shouting cavalcade reached the
outskirts of Monastir. The two soldiers had halted behind to cover the
retreat. Benham's ghastly face was now bedewed with sweat and he swayed in his
saddle as he rode. "This is NOT civilization, Amanda," he said, "this is
NOT civilization." And then suddenly with extraordinary pathos:

"Oh! I want to go to BED! I want to go to BED! A bed with sheets...."

To ride into Monastir is to ride into a maze. The streets go nowhere in
particular. At least that was the effect on Amanda and Benham. It was
as if Monastir too had a temperature and was slightly delirious. But at
last they found an hotel--quite a civilized hotel.... The doctor in Monastir was an Armenian with an ambition that outran his
capacity to speak English. He had evidently studied the language chiefly
from books. He thought THESE was pronounced "theser" and THOSE was
pronounced "thoser," and that every English sentence should be taken at
a rush. He diagnosed Benham's complaint in various languages and failed
to make his meaning clear to Amanda. One combination of words he clung
to obstinately, having clearly the utmost faith in its expressiveness. To Amanda it sounded like, "May, Ah! Slays," and it seemed to her that
he sought to intimate a probable fatal termination of Benham's fever. But it was clear that the doctor was not satisfied that she understood. He came again with a queer little worn book, a parallel vocabulary of
half-a-dozen European languages. He turned over the pages and pointed to a word. "May! Ah! Slays!" he
repeated, reproachfully, almost bitterly. "Oh, MEASLES!" cried Amanda.... So the spirited honeymoon passed its zenith. 11


The Benhams went as soon as possible down to Smyrna and thence by way
of Uskub tortuously back to Italy. They recuperated at the best hotel
of Locarno in golden November weather, and just before Christmas they
turned their faces back to England. Benham's plans were comprehensive but entirely vague; Amanda had not so
much plans as intentions....




CHAPTER THE FIFTH ~~ THE ASSIZE OF JEALOUSY



1


It was very manifest in the disorder of papers amidst which White spent
so many evenings of interested perplexity before this novel began to be
written that Benham had never made any systematic attempt at editing
or revising his accumulation at all. There were not only overlapping
documents, in which he had returned again to old ideas and restated
them in the light of fresh facts and an apparent unconsciousness of his
earlier effort, but there were mutually destructive papers, new views
quite ousting the old had been tossed in upon the old, and the very
definition of the second limitation, as it had first presented itself to
the writer, had been abandoned. To begin with, this second division
had been labelled "Sex," in places the heading remained, no
effective substitute had been chosen for some time, but there was
a closely-written memorandum, very much erased and written over and
amended, which showed Benham's early dissatisfaction with that crude
rendering of what he had in mind. This memorandum was tacked to an
interrupted fragment of autobiography, a manuscript soliloquy in which
Benham had been discussing his married life. "It was not until I had been married for the better part of a year, and
had spent more than six months in London, that I faced the plain issue
between the aims I had set before myself and the claims and immediate
necessities of my personal life. For all that time I struggled not so
much to reconcile them as to serve them simultaneously...."

At that the autobiography stopped short, and the intercalary note began. This intercalary note ran as follows:

"I suppose a mind of my sort cannot help but tend towards
simplification, towards making all life turn upon some one dominant
idea, complex perhaps in its reality but reducible at last to one
consistent simple statement, a dominant idea which is essential as
nothing else is essential, which makes and sustains and justifies. This
is perhaps the innate disposition of the human mind, at least of the
European mind--for I have some doubts about the Chinese. Theology
drives obstinately towards an ultimate unity in God, science towards
an ultimate unity in law, towards a fundamental element and a universal
material truth from which all material truths evolve, and in matters of
conduct there is the same tendency to refer to a universal moral law. Now this may be a simplification due to the need of the human mind to
comprehend, and its inability to do so until the load is lightened by
neglecting factors. William James has suggested that on account of this,
theology may be obstinately working away from the truth, that the truth
may be that there are several or many in compatible and incommensurable
gods; science, in the same search for unity, may follow divergent
methods of inquiry into ultimately uninterchangeable generalizations;
and there may be not only not one universal moral law, but no effective
reconciliation of the various rights and duties of a single individual. At any rate I find myself doubtful to this day about my own personal
systems of right and wrong. I can never get all my life into one focus. It is exactly like examining a rather thick section with a microscope of
small penetration; sometimes one level is clear and the rest foggy and
monstrous, and sometimes another. "Now the ruling ME, I do not doubt, is the man who has set his face
to this research after aristocracy, and from the standpoint of this
research it is my duty to subordinate all other considerations to
this work of clearing up the conception of rule and nobility in human
affairs. This is my aristocratic self. What I did not grasp for a long
time, and which now grows clearer and clearer to me, is firstly that
this aristocratic self is not the whole of me, it has absolutely nothing
to do with a pain in my ear or in my heart, with a scar on my hand or my
memory, and secondly that it is not altogether mine. Whatever knowledge
I have of the quality of science, whatever will I have towards right,
is of it; but if from without, from the reasoning or demonstration or
reproof of some one else, there comes to me clear knowledge, clarified
will, that also is as it were a part of my aristocratic self coming
home to me from the outside. How often have I not found my own mind
in Prothero after I have failed to find it in myself? It is, to be
paradoxical, my impersonal personality, this Being that I have in common
with all scientific-spirited and aristocratic-spirited men. This it is
that I am trying to get clear from the great limitations of humanity. When I assert a truth for the sake of truth to my own discomfort or
injury, there again is this incompatibility of the aristocratic self and
the accepted, confused, conglomerate self of the unanalyzed man. The two
have a separate system of obligations. One's affections, compounded
as they are in the strangest way of physical reactions and emotional
associations, one's implicit pledges to particular people, one's
involuntary reactions, one's pride and jealousy, all that one might call
the dramatic side of one's life, may be in conflict with the definitely
seen rightnesses of one's higher use...."

The writing changed at this point. "All this seems to me at once as old as the hills and too new to be
true. This is like the conflict of the Superior Man of Confucius to
control himself, it is like the Christian battle of the spirit with the
flesh, it savours of that eternal wrangle between the general and the
particular which is metaphysics, it was for this aristocratic self, for
righteousness' sake, that men have hungered and thirsted, and on this
point men have left father and mother and child and wife and followed
after salvation. This world-wide, ever-returning antagonism has filled
the world in every age with hermits and lamas, recluses and teachers,
devoted and segregated lives. It is a perpetual effort to get above the
simplicity of barbarism. Whenever men have emerged from the primitive
barbarism of the farm and the tribe, then straightway there has emerged
this conception of a specialized life a little lifted off the earth;
often, for the sake of freedom, celibate, usually disciplined, sometimes
directed, having a generalized aim, beyond personal successes and bodily
desires. So it is that the philosopher, the scientifically concentrated
man, has appeared, often, I admit, quite ridiculously at first, setting
out upon the long journey that will end only when the philosopher is
king....

"At first I called my Second Limitation, Sex. But from the outset I
meant more than mere sexual desire, lust and lustful imaginings, more
than personal reactions to beauty and spirited living, more even than
what is called love. On the one hand I had in mind many appetites that
are not sexual yet turn to bodily pleasure, and on the other there are
elements of pride arising out of sex and passing into other regions,
all the elements of rivalry for example, that have strained my first
definition to the utmost. And I see now that this Second Limitation as I
first imagined it spreads out without any definite boundary, to include
one's rivalries with old schoolfellows, for example, one's generosities
to beggars and dependents, one's desire to avenge an injured friend,
one's point of honour, one's regard for the good opinion of an aunt and
one's concern for the health of a pet cat. All these things may enrich,
but they may also impede and limit the aristocratic scheme. I thought
for a time I would call this ill-defined and miscellaneous wilderness of
limitation the Personal Life. But at last I have decided to divide this
vast territory of difficulties into two subdivisions and make one of
these Indulgence, meaning thereby pleasurable indulgence of sense or
feeling, and the other a great mass of self-regarding motives that
will go with a little stretching under the heading of Jealousy. I
admit motives are continually playing across the boundary of these
two divisions, I should find it difficult to argue a case for my
classification, but in practice these two groupings have a quite
definite meaning for me. There is pride in the latter group of impulses
and not in the former; the former are always a little apologetic. Fear,
Indulgence, Jealousy, these are the First Three Limitations of the soul
of man. And the greatest of these is Jealousy, because it can use pride. Over them the Life Aristocratic, as I conceive it, marches to its end. It saves itself for the truth rather than sacrifices itself romantically
for a friend. It justifies vivisection if thereby knowledge is won for
ever. It upholds that Brutus who killed his sons. It forbids devotion to
women, courts of love and all such decay of the chivalrous idea. And it
resigns--so many things that no common Man of Spirit will resign. Its
intention transcends these things. Over all the world it would maintain
justice, order, a noble peace, and it would do this without indignation,
without resentment, without mawkish tenderness or individualized
enthusiasm or any queen of beauty. It is of a cold austere quality,
commanding sometimes admiration but having small hold upon the
affections of men. So that it is among its foremost distinctions that
its heart is steeled...."

There this odd fragment ended and White was left to resume the
interrupted autobiography. 2


What moods, what passions, what nights of despair and gathering storms
of anger, what sudden cruelties and amazing tendernesses are buried
and hidden and implied in every love story! What a waste is there of
exquisite things! So each spring sees a million glorious beginnings, a
sunlit heaven in every opening leaf, warm perfection in every stirring
egg, hope and fear and beauty beyond computation in every forest tree;
and in the autumn before the snows come they have all gone, of all
that incalculable abundance of life, of all that hope and adventure,
excitement and deliciousness, there is scarcely more to be found than
a soiled twig, a dirty seed, a dead leaf, black mould or a rotting
feather....

White held the ten or twelve pencilled pages that told how Benham and
Amanda drifted into antagonism and estrangement and as he held it he
thought of the laughter and delight they must have had together, the
exquisite excitements of her eye, the racing colour of her cheek, the
gleams of light upon her skin, the flashes of wit between them, the
sense of discovery, the high rare paths they had followed, the pools in
which they had swum together. And now it was all gone into nothingness,
there was nothing left of it, nothing at all, but just those sheets of
statement, and it may be, stored away in one single mind, like things
forgotten in an attic, a few neglected faded memories....

And even those few sheets of statement were more than most love leaves
behind it. For a time White would not read them. They lay neglected on
his knee as he sat back in Benham's most comfortable chair and enjoyed
an entirely beautiful melancholy. White too had seen and mourned the spring. Indeed, poor dear! he had seen and mourned several springs....

With a sigh he took up the manuscript and read Benham's desiccated story
of intellectual estrangement, and how in the end he had decided to
leave his wife and go out alone upon that journey of inquiry he had been
planning when first he met her. 3


Amanda had come back to England in a state of extravagantly vigorous
womanhood. Benham's illness, though it lasted only two or three
weeks, gave her a sense of power and leadership for which she had been
struggling instinctively ever since they came together. For a time at
Locarno he was lax-minded and indolent, and in that time she formed her
bright and limited plans for London. Benham had no plans as yet but
only a sense of divergence, as though he was being pulled in opposite
directions by two irresistible forces. To her it was plain that he
needed occupation, some distinguished occupation, and she could imagine
nothing better for him than a political career. She perceived he had
personality, that he stood out among men so that his very silences were
effective. She loved him immensely, and she had tremendous ambitions for
him and through him. And also London, the very thought of London, filled her with appetite. Her soul thirsted for London. It was like some enormous juicy fruit
waiting for her pretty white teeth, a place almost large enough to give
her avidity the sense of enough. She felt it waiting for her, household,
servants, a carriage, shops and the jolly delight of buying and
possessing things, the opera, first-nights, picture exhibitions, great
dinner-parties, brilliant lunch parties, crowds seen from a point
of vantage, the carriage in a long string of fine carriages with the
lamplit multitude peering, Amanda in a thousand bright settings, in a
thousand various dresses. She had had love; it had been glorious, it
was still glorious, but her love-making became now at times almost
perfunctory in the contemplation of these approaching delights and
splendours and excitements. She knew, indeed, that ideas were at work in Benham's head; but she
was a realist. She did not see why ideas should stand in the way of a
career. Ideas are a brightness, the good looks of the mind. One talks
ideas, but THE THING THAT IS, IS THE THING THAT IS. And though she
believed that Benham had a certain strength of character of his own, she
had that sort of confidence in his love for her and in the power of her
endearments that has in it the assurance of a faint contempt. She had
mingled pride and sense in the glorious realization of the power over
him that her wit and beauty gave her. She had held him faint with her
divinity, intoxicated with the pride of her complete possession, and she
did not dream that the moment when he should see clearly that she could
deliberately use these ultimate delights to rule and influence him,
would be the end of their splendour and her power. Her nature, which
was just a nest of vigorous appetites, was incapable of suspecting his
gathering disillusionment until it burst upon her. Now with her attention set upon London ahead he could observe her. In the beginning he had never seemed to be observing her at all, they
dazzled one another; it seemed extraordinary now to him to note how much
he had been able to disregard. There were countless times still when he
would have dropped his observation and resumed that mutual exaltation
very gladly, but always now other things possessed her mind.... There was still an immense pleasure for him in her vigour; there was
something delightful in her pounce, even when she was pouncing on things
superficial, vulgar or destructive. She made him understand and share
the excitement of a big night at the opera, the glitter and prettiness
of a smart restaurant, the clustering little acute adventures of a great
reception of gay people, just as she had already made him understand and
sympathize with dogs. She picked up the art world where he had laid
it down, and she forced him to feel dense and slow before he rebelled
against her multitudinous enthusiasms and admirations. South Harting had
had its little group of artistic people; it is not one of your sleepy
villages, and she slipped back at once into the movement. Those were
the great days of John, the days before the Post Impressionist outbreak. John, Orpen, Tonks, she bought them with vigour. Artistic circles began
to revolve about her. Very rapidly she was in possession.... And among
other desirable things she had, it seemed, pounced upon and captured
Lady Marayne. At any rate it was clear that that awful hostile silence and aloofness
was to end. Benham never quite mastered how it was done. But Amanda
had gone in one morning to Desborough Street, very sweetly and
chastely dressed, had abased herself and announced a possible (though
subsequently disproved) grandchild. And she had appreciated the little
lady so highly and openly, she had so instantly caught and reproduced
her tone, that her success, though only temporary in its completeness,
was immediate. In the afternoon Benham was amazed by the apparition of
his mother amidst the scattered unsettled furnishings of the new home
Amanda had chosen in Lancaster Gate. He was in the hall, the door stood
open awaiting packing-cases from a van without. In the open doorway she
shone, looking the smallest of dainty things. There was no effect of her
coming but only of her having arrived there, as a little blue butterfly
will suddenly alight on a flower. "Well, Poff!" said Lady Marayne, ignoring abysses, "What are you up to
now, Poff? Come and embrace me...."

"No, not so," she said, "stiffest of sons...."

She laid hold of his ears in the old fashion and kissed one eye. "Congratulations, dear little Poff. Oh! congratulations! In heaps. I'm
so GLAD." Now what was that for? And then Amanda came out upon the landing upstairs, saw the encounter
with an involuntary cry of joy, and came downstairs with arms wide open. It was the first intimation he had of their previous meeting. He was for
some minutes a stunned, entirely inadequate Benham....



4


At first Amanda knew nobody in London, except a few people in the
Hampstead Garden suburb that she had not the slightest wish to know, and
then very quickly she seemed to know quite a lot of people. The artistic
circle brought in people, Lady Marayne brought in people; they spread. It was manifest the Benhams were a very bright young couple; he would
certainly do something considerable presently, and she was bright and
daring, jolly to look at and excellent fun, and, when you came to talk
to her, astonishingly well informed. They passed from one hostess's hand
to another: they reciprocated. The Clynes people and the Rushtones took
her up; Mr. Evesham was amused by her, Lady Beach Mandarin proclaimed
her charm like a trumpet, the Young Liberal people made jealous
advances, Lord Moggeridge found she listened well, she lit one of the
brightest weekend parties Lady Marayne had ever gathered at Chexington. And her descriptions of recent danger and adventure in Albania not
only entertained her hearers but gave her just that flavour of personal
courage which completes the fascination of a young woman. People in the
gaps of a halting dinner-table conversation would ask: "Have you met
Mrs. Benham?" Meanwhile Benham appeared to be talking. A smiling and successful young
woman, who a year ago had been nothing more than a leggy girl with a
good lot of miscellaneous reading in her head, and vaguely engaged, or
at least friendly to the pitch of engagement, to Mr. Rathbone-Sanders,
may be forgiven if in the full tide of her success she does not
altogether grasp the intention of her husband's discourse. It seemed to
her that he was obsessed by a responsibility for civilization and the
idea that he was aristocratic. (Secretly she was inclined to doubt
whether he was justified in calling himself aristocratic; at the best
his mother was county-stuff; but still if he did there was no great
harm in it nowadays.) Clearly his line was Tory-Democracy, social reform
through the House of Lords and friendly intimacy with the more spirited
young peers. And it was only very slowly and reluctantly that she
was forced to abandon this satisfactory solution of his problem. She
reproduced all the equipment and comforts of his Finacue Street study in
their new home, she declared constantly that she would rather forego
any old social thing than interfere with his work, she never made him
go anywhere with her without first asking if his work permitted it. To
relieve him of the burthen of such social attentions she even made a fag
or so. The making of fags out of manifestly stricken men, the keeping
of tamed and hopeless admirers, seemed to her to be the most natural and
reasonable of feminine privileges. They did their useful little services
until it pleased the Lord Cheetah to come to his own. That was how she
put it.... But at last he was talking to her in tones that could no longer be
ignored. He was manifestly losing his temper with her. There was a
novel austerity in his voice and a peculiar whiteness about his face on
certain occasions that lingered in her memory. He was indeed making elaborate explanations. He said that what he wanted
to do was to understand "the collective life of the world," and that
this was not to be done in a West-End study. He had an extraordinary
contempt, it seemed, for both sides in the drama of British politics. He
had extravagant ideas of beginning in some much more fundamental way. He wanted to understand this "collective life of the world," because
ultimately he wanted to help control it. (Was there ever such nonsense?) The practical side of this was serious enough, however; he was back at
his old idea of going round the earth. Later on that might be rather
a jolly thing to do, but not until they had struck root a little more
surely in London. And then with amazement, with incredulity, with indignation, she began
to realize that he was proposing to go off by himself upon this vague
extravagant research, that all this work she had been doing to make
a social place for him in London was as nothing to him, that he was
thinking of himself as separable from her....

"But, Cheetah! How can you leave your spotless leopard? You would howl
in the lonely jungle!" "Possibly I shall. But I am going." "Then I shall come." "No." He considered her reasons. "You see you are not interested." "But I am." "Not as I am. You would turn it all into a jolly holiday. You don't want
to see things as I want to do. You want romance. All the world is a show
for you. As a show I can't endure it. I want to lay hands on it." "But, Cheetah!" she said, "this is separation." "You will have your life here. And I shall come back." "But, Cheetah! How can we be separated?" "We are separated," he said. Her eyes became round with astonishment. Then her face puckered. "Cheetah!" she cried in a voice of soft distress, "I love you. What do
you mean?" And she staggered forward, tear-blinded, and felt for his neck and
shoulders, so that she might weep in his arms....



5


"Don't say we are separated," she whispered, putting her still wet face
close to his. "No. We're mates," he answered softly, with his arm about her. "How could we ever keep away from each uvver?" she whispered. He was silent. "How COULD we?" He answered aloud. "Amanda," he said, "I mean to go round the world." She disentangled herself from his arm and sat up beside him. "What is to become of me," she asked suddenly in a voice of despair,
"while you go round the world? If you desert me in London," she said,
"if you shame me by deserting me in London-- If you leave me, I will
never forgive you, Cheetah! Never." Then in an almost breathless voice,
and as if she spoke to herself, "Never in all my days." 6


It was after that that Amanda began to talk about children. There was
nothing involuntary about Amanda. "Soon," she said, "we must begin to
think of children. Not just now, but a little later. It's good to travel
and have our fun, but life is unreal until there are children in the
background. No woman is really content until she is a mother...." And
for nearly a fortnight nothing more was said about that solitary journey
round the world. But children were not the only new topic in Amanda's talk. She set
herself with an ingenious subtlety to remind her husband that there
were other men in the world. The convenient fags, sometimes a little
embarrassed, found their inobtrusive services being brought into the
light before Benham's eyes. Most of them were much older men than
himself, elderly philanderers of whom it seemed to him no sane man need
be jealous, men often of forty or more, but one was a contemporary, Sir
Philip Easton, a man with a touch of Spanish blood and a suggestion of
Spanish fire, who quite manifestly was very much in love with Amanda and
of whom she spoke with a slight perceptible difference of manner that
made Benham faintly uneasy. He was ashamed of the feeling. Easton it
seemed was a man of a peculiarly fine honour, so that Amanda could trust
herself with him to an extent that would have been inadvisable with men
of a commoner substance, and he had a gift of understanding and sympathy
that was almost feminine; he could cheer one up when one was lonely and
despondent. For Amanda was so methodical in the arrangement of her time
that even in the full rush of a London season she could find an hour
now and then for being lonely and despondent. And he was a liberal and
understanding purchaser of the ascendant painters; he understood
that side of Amanda's interests, a side upon which Benham was notably
deficient....

"Amanda seems to like that dark boy, Poff; what is his name?--Sir Philip
Easton?" said Lady Marayne. Benham looked at her with a slightly hostile intelligence, and said
nothing. "When a man takes a wife, he has to keep her," said Lady Marayne. "No," said Benham after consideration. "I don't intend to be a
wife-herd." "What?" "Wife-herd--same as goat-herd." "Coarse, you are sometimes, Poff--nowadays." "It's exactly what I mean. I can understand the kind of curator's
interest an Oriental finds in shepherding a large establishment, but
to spend my days looking after one person who ought to be able to look
after herself--"

"She's very young."