The barrow came about with an appearance of unwillingness, it
locked against the great wheel; it reared itself towards Prothero and
began, smash, smash, smash, to shed its higher plates. It was clear
that Benham was grappling with a crisis upon a basis of inadequate
experience. A number of people shouted haphazard things. Then, too late,
the barrow had persuaded the little wheel to give up its fancy for the
great wheel, and there was an enormous crash. "Whoa!" cried Benham. "Whoa!" but also, unfortunately, he sawed hard at
the horse's mouth. The animal, being in some perplexity, danced a little in the narrow
street, and then it had come about and it was backing, backing, on
the narrow pavement and towards the plate-glass window of a book and
newspaper shop. Benham tugged at its mouth much harder than ever. Prothero saw the window bending under the pressure of the wheel. A sense
of the profound seriousness of life and of the folly of this expedition
came upon him. With extreme nimbleness he got down just as the window
burst. It went with an explosion like a pistol shot, and then a clatter
of falling glass. People sprang, it seemed, from nowhere, and jostled
about Prothero, so that he became a peripheral figure in the discussion. He perceived that a man in a green apron was holding the horse, and that
various people were engaged in simultaneous conversation with Benham,
who with a pale serenity of face and an awful calm of manner, dealt with
each of them in turn. "I'm sorry," he was saying. "Somebody ought to have been in charge of
the barrow. Here are my cards. I am ready to pay for any damage....

"The barrow ought not to have been there....

"Yes, I am going on. Of course I'm going on. Thank you." He beckoned to the man who had held the horse and handed him
half-a-crown. He glanced at Prothero as one might glance at a stranger. "Check!" he said. The horse went on gravely. Benham lifted out his whip. He appeared to have clean forgotten Prothero. Perhaps presently he would
miss him. He went on past Trinity, past the ruddy brick of St. John's. The curve of the street hid him from Prothero's eyes. Prothero started in pursuit. He glimpsed the dog-cart turning into
Bridge Street. He had an impression that Benham used the whip at the
corner, and that the dog-cart went forward out of sight with a startled
jerk. Prothero quickened his pace. But when he got to the fork between the Huntingdon Road and the
Cottenham Road, both roads were clear. He spent some time in hesitation. Then he went along the Huntingdon Road
until he came upon a road-mender, and learnt that Benham had passed that
way. "Going pretty fast 'e was," said the road-mender, "and whipping 'is
'orse. Else you might 'a thought 'e was a boltin' with 'im." Prothero
decided that if Benham came back at all he would return by way of
Cottenham, and it was on the Cottenham Road that at last he encountered
his friend again. Benham was coming along at that good pace which all experienced horses
when they are fairly turned back towards Cambridge display. And there
was something odd about Benham, as though he had a large circular
halo with a thick rim. This, it seemed, had replaced his hat. He was
certainly hatless. The warm light of the sinking sun shone upon the
horse and upon Benham's erect figure and upon his face, and gleams of
fire kept flashing from his head to this rim, like the gleam of drawn
swords seen from afar. As he drew nearer this halo detached itself from
him and became a wheel sticking up behind him. A large, clumsy-looking
bicycle was attached to the dog-cart behind. The expression of Benham's
golden face was still a stony expression; he regarded his friend with
hard eyes. "You all right, Benham?" cried Prothero, advancing into the road. His eye examined the horse. It looked all right, if anything it was a
trifle subdued; there was a little foam about its mouth, but not very
much. "Whoa!" said Benham, and the horse stopped. "Are you coming up,
Prothero?" Prothero clambered up beside him. "I was anxious," he said. "There was no need to be." "You've broken your whip." "Yes. It broke.... GET up!" They proceeded on their way to Cambridge. "Something has happened to the wheel," said Prothero, trying to be at
his ease. "Merely a splinter or so. And a spoke perhaps." "And what is this behind?" Benham made a half-turn of the head. "It's a motor-bicycle." Prothero took in details. "Some of it is missing." "No, the front wheel is under the seat." "Oh!" "Did you find it?" Prothero asked, after an interval. "You mean?" "He ran into a motor-car--as I was passing. I was perhaps a little to
blame. He asked me to bring his machine to Cambridge. He went on in the
car.... It is all perfectly simple." Prothero glanced at the splinters in the wheel with a renewed interest. "Did your wheel get into it?" he asked. Benham affected not to hear. He
was evidently in no mood for story-telling. "Why did you get down, Prothero?" he asked abruptly, with the note of
suppressed anger thickening his voice. Prothero became vividly red. "I don't know," he said, after an interval. "I DO," said Benham, and they went on in a rich and active silence to
Cambridge, and the bicycle repair shop in Bridge Street, and Trinity
College. At the gate of Trinity Benham stopped, and conveyed rather by
acts than words that Prothero was to descend. He got down meekly enough,
although he felt that the return to Maltby's yard might have many points
of interest. But the spirit had gone out of him. 12


For three days the two friends avoided each other, and then Prothero
went to Benham's room. Benham was smoking cigarettes--Lady Marayne, in
the first warmth of his filial devotion, had prohibited his pipe--and
reading Webb's INDUSTRIAL DEMOCRACY. "Hello!" he said coldly, scarcely
looking up, and continued to read that absorbing work. "I keep on thinking how I jumped down from that damned dog-cart," said
Prothero, without any preface. "It didn't matter in the least," said Benham distantly. "Oh! ROT," said Prothero. "I behaved like a coward." Benham shut his book. "Benham," said Prothero. "You are right about aristocracy, and I am
wrong. I've been thinking about it night and day." Benham betrayed no emotion. But his tone changed. "Billy," he said,
"there are cigarettes and whiskey in the corner. Don't make a fuss about
a trifle." "No whiskey," said Billy, and lit a cigarette. "And it isn't a trifle." He came to Benham's hearthrug. "That business," he said, "has changed
all my views. No--don't say something polite! I see that if one hasn't
the habit of pride one is bound to get off a dogcart when it seems
likely to smash. You have the habit of pride, and I haven't. So far as
the habit of pride goes, I come over to the theory of aristocracy." Benham said nothing, but he put down Sidney and Beatrice Webb, and
reached out for and got and lit a cigarette. "I give up 'Go as you please.' I give up the natural man. I admit
training. I perceive I am lax and flabby, unguarded, I funk too much, I
eat too much, and I drink too much. And, yet, what I have always liked
in you, Benham, is just this--that you don't." "I do," said Benham. "Do what?" "Funk." "Benham, I believe that naturally you funk as much as I do. You're more
a thing of nerves than I am, far more. But you keep yourself up to
the mark, and I have let myself get flabby. You're so right. You're
so utterly right. These last nights I've confessed it--aloud. I had
an inkling of it--after that rag. But now it's as clear as daylight. I don't know if you mean to go on with me, after what's happened, but
anyhow I want you to know, whether you end our friendship or not--"

"Billy, don't be an old ass," said Benham. Both young men paused for a moment. They made no demonstrations. But the
strain was at an end between them. "I've thought it all out," Billy went on with a sudden buoyancy. "We
two are both of the same kind of men. Only you see, Benham, you have
a natural pride and I haven't. You have pride. But we are both
intellectuals. We both belong to what the Russians call the
Intelligentsia. We have ideas, we have imagination, that is our
strength. And that is our weakness. That makes us moral light-weights. We are flimsy and uncertain people. All intellectuals are flimsy and
uncertain people. It's not only that they are critical and fastidious;
they are weak-handed. They look about them; their attention wanders. Unless they have got a habit of controlling themselves and forcing
themselves and holding themselves together." "The habit of pride." "Yes. And then--then we are lords of the world." "All this, Billy," said Benham, "I steadfastly believe." "I've seen it all now," said Prothero. "Lord! how clearly I see it! The intellectual is either a prince or he is a Greek slave in a Roman
household. He's got to hold his chin up or else he becomes--even as
these dons we see about us--a thing that talks appointments, a toady, a
port-wine bibber, a mass of detail, a conscious maker of neat sayings,
a growing belly under a dwindling brain. Their gladness is drink or
gratified vanity or gratified malice, their sorrow is indigestion
or--old maid's melancholy. They are the lords of the world who will not
take the sceptre.... And what I want to say to you, Benham, more than
anything else is, YOU go on--YOU make yourself equestrian. You drive
your horse against Breeze's, and go through the fire and swim in the
ice-cold water and climb the precipice and drink little and sleep hard. And--I wish I could do so too." "But why not?" "Because I can't. Now I admit I've got shame in my heart and pride in
my head, and I'm strung up. I might do something--this afternoon. But it
won't last. YOU--you have pride in your bones. My pride will vanish at
a laugh. My honour will go at a laugh. I'm just exalted by a crisis. That's all. I'm an animal of intelligence. Soul and pride are weak in
me. My mouth waters, my cheek brightens, at the sight of good things. And I've got a lickerish tail, Benham. You don't know. You don't begin
to imagine. I'm secretive. But I quiver with hot and stirring desires. And I'm indolent--dirty indolent. Benham, there are days when I splash
my bath about without getting into it. There are days when I turn back
from a walk because there's a cow in the field.... But, I spare you the
viler details.... And it's that makes me hate fine people and try so
earnestly to persuade myself that any man is as good as any man, if not
a trifle better. Because I know it isn't so...."

"Billy," said Benham, "you've the boldest mind that ever I met." Prothero's face lit with satisfaction. Then his countenance fell again. "I know I'm better there," he said, "and yet, see how I let in a whole
system of lies to cover my secret humiliations. There, at least, I will
cling to pride. I will at least THINK free and clean and high. But you
can climb higher than I can. You've got the grit to try and LIVE high. There you are, Benham." Benham stuck one leg over the arm of his chair. "Billy," he said, "come
and be--equestrian and stop this nonsense." "No." "Damn it--you DIVE!" "You'd go in before me if a woman was drowning." "Nonsense. I'm going to ride. Come and ride too. You've a cleverer way
with animals than I have. Why! that horse I was driving the other day
would have gone better alone. I didn't drive it. I just fussed it. I
interfered. If I ride for ever, I shall never have decent hands, I shall
always hang on my horse's mouth at a gallop, I shall never be sure at a
jump. But at any rate I shall get hard. Come and get hard too." "You can," said Billy, "you can. But not I! Heavens, the TROUBLE of it! The riding-school! The getting up early! No!--for me the Trumpington
Road on foot in the afternoon. Four miles an hour and panting. And my
fellowship and the combination-room port. And, besides, Benham, there's
the expense. I can't afford the equestrian order." "It's not so great." "Not so great! I don't mean the essential expense. But--the incidentals. I don't know whether any one can realize how a poor man is hampered by
the dread of minor catastrophes. It isn't so much that he is afraid of
breaking his neck, Benham, as that he is afraid of breaking something he
will have to pay for. For instance--. Benham! how much did your little
expedition the other day--?" He stopped short and regarded his friend with round eyes and raised
eyebrows. A reluctant grin overspread Benham's face. He was beginning to see the
humour of the affair. "The claim for the motor-bicycle isn't sent in yet. The repair of
the mudguards of the car is in dispute. Trinity Hall's crockery, the
plate-glass window, the whip-lash and wheel and so forth, the hire of
the horse and trap, sundry gratuities.... I doubt if the total will come
very much under fifty pounds. And I seem to have lost a hat somewhere." Billy regarded his toes and cleared his throat. "Depending as I do on a widowed mother in Brixton for all the
expenditure that isn't covered by my pot-hunting--"

"Of course," said Benham, "it wasn't a fair sample afternoon." "Still--"

"There's footer," said Benham, "we might both play footer." "Or boxing." "And, anyhow, you must come with me when I drive again. I'm going to
start a trotter." "If I miss another drive may I be--lost for ever," said Billy, with the
utmost sincerity. "Never more will I get down, Benham, wherever you may
take me. Short of muffing my fellowship I'm with you always.... Will it
be an American trotter?" "It will be the rawest, gauntest, ungainliest brute that ever scared the
motor-bicycles on the Northampton Road. It will have the legs and stride
of an ostrich. It will throw its feet out like dealing cards. It will
lift its head and look the sun in the eye like a vulture. It will have
teeth like the English spinster in a French comic paper.... And we will
fly...."

"I shall enjoy it very much," said Prothero in a small voice after an
interval for reflection. "I wonder where we shall fly. It will do us
both a lot of good. And I shall insure my life for a small amount in
my mother's interest.... Benham, I think I will, after all, take a
whiskey.... Life is short...."

He did so and Benham strolled to the window and stood looking out upon
the great court. "We might do something this afternoon," said Benham. "Splendid idea," reflected Billy over his whiskey. "Living hard and
thinking hard. A sort of Intelligentsia that is BLOODED.... I shall, of
course, come as far as I can with you." 13


In one of the bureau drawers that White in this capacity of literary
executor was examining, there were two documents that carried back
right to these early days. They were both products of this long wide
undergraduate argumentation that had played so large a part in the
making of Benham. One recorded the phase of maximum opposition, and one
was the outcome of the concluding approach of the antagonists. They were
debating club essays. One had been read to a club in Pembroke, a club
called the ENQUIRERS, of which White also had been a member, and as he
turned it over he found the circumstances of its reading coming back to
his memory. He had been present, and Carnac's share in the discussion
with his shrill voice and stumpy gestures would alone have sufficed to
have made it a memorable occasion. The later one had been read to the
daughter club of the ENQUIRERS, the SOCIAL ENQUIRERS, in the year after
White had gone down, and it was new to him. Both these papers were folded flat and neatly docketed; they were rather
yellow and a little dog-eared, and with the outer sheet pencilled over
with puzzling or illegible scribblings, Benham's memoranda for his
reply. White took the earlier essay in his hand. At the head of the
first page was written in large letters, "Go slowly, speak to the man
at the back." It brought up memories of his own experiences, of rows of
gaslit faces, and of a friendly helpful voice that said, "Speak up?" Of course this was what happened to every intelligent contemporary, this
encounter with ideas, this restatement and ventilation of the old truths
and the old heresies. Only in this way does a man make a view his own,
only so does he incorporate it. These are our real turning points. The significant, the essential moments in the life of any one worth
consideration are surely these moments when for the first time he faces
towards certain broad ideas and certain broad facts. Life nowadays
consists of adventures among generalizations. In class-rooms after the
lecture, in studies in the small hours, among books or during solitary
walks, the drama of the modern career begins. Suddenly a man sees
his line, his intention. Yet though we are all of us writing long
novels--White's world was the literary world, and that is how it looked
to him--which profess to set out the lives of men, this part of the
journey, this crucial passage among the Sphinxes, is still done--when it
is done at all--slightly, evasively. Why? White fell back on his professionalism. "It does not make a book. It
makes a novel into a treatise, it turns it into a dissertation." But even as White said this to himself he knew it was wrong, and it slid
out of his thoughts again. Was not this objection to the play of ideas
merely the expression of that conservative instinct which fights for
every old convention? The traditional novel is a love story and takes
ideas for granted, it professes a hero but presents a heroine. And to
begin with at least, novels were written for the reading of heroines. Miss Lydia Languish sets no great store upon the contents of a man's
head. That is just the stuffing of the doll. Eyes and heart are her
game. And so there is never any more sphinx in the story than a lady may
impersonate. And as inevitably the heroine meets a man. In his own first
success, White reflected, the hero, before he had gone a dozen pages,
met a very pleasant young woman very pleasantly in a sunlit thicket;
the second opened at once with a bicycle accident that brought two young
people together so that they were never afterwards disentangled;
the third, failing to produce its heroine in thirty pages, had to be
rearranged. The next--

White returned from an unprofitable digression to the matter before him. 14


The first of Benham's early essays was written in an almost boyish hand,
it was youthfully amateurish in its nervous disposition to definitions
and distinctions, and in the elaborate linking of part to part. It was
called TRUE DEMOCRACY. Manifestly it was written before the incident of
the Trinity Hall plates, and most of it had been done after Prothero's
visit to Chexington. White could feel that now inaudible interlocutor. And there were even traces of Sir Godfrey Marayne's assertion that
democracy was contrary to biology. From the outset it was clear that
whatever else it meant, True Democracy, following the analogy of True
Politeness, True Courage, True Honesty and True Marriage, did not mean
democracy at all. Benham was, in fact, taking Prothero's word, and
trying to impose upon it his own solidifying and crystallizing opinion
of life. They were not as yet very large or well-formed crystals. The proposition
he struggled to develop was this, that True Democracy did not mean an
equal share in the government, it meant an equal opportunity to share in
the government. Men were by nature and in the most various ways unequal. True Democracy aimed only at the removal of artificial inequalities.... It was on the truth of this statement, that men were by nature unequal,
that the debate had turned. Prothero was passionately against the idea
at that time. It was, he felt, separating himself from Benham more and
more. He spoke with a personal bitterness. And he found his chief ally
in a rigorous and voluble Frenchman named Carnac, an aggressive Roman
Catholic, who opened his speech by saying that the first aristocrat was
the devil, and shocked Prothero by claiming him as probably the only
other sound Christian in the room. Several biologists were present, and
one tall, fair youth with a wearisome forefinger tried to pin Carnac
with questions. "But you must admit some men are taller than others?" "Then the others are broader." "Some are smaller altogether." "Nimbler--it's notorious." "Some of the smaller are less nimble than the others." "Then they have better nightmares. How can you tell?" The biologist was temporarily incapacitated, and the talk went on over
his prostrate attempts to rally and protest. A second biologist seemed to Benham to come nearer the gist of the
dispute when he said that they were not discussing the importance of
men, but their relative inequalities. Nobody was denying the equal
importance of everybody. But there was a virtue of this man and a virtue
of that. Nobody could dispute the equal importance of every wheel in a
machine, of every atom in the universe. Prothero and Carnac were angry
because they thought the denial of absolute equality was a denial of
equal importance. That was not so. Every man mattered in his place. But
politically, or economically, or intellectually that might be a lowly
place....

At this point Carnac interrupted with a whooping and great violence, and
a volley of obscure French colloquialisms. He was understood to convey that the speaker was a Jew, and did not in
the least mean what he was saying....


15


The second paper was an altogether maturer and more characteristic
production. It was no longer necessary to answer Prothero. Prothero had
been incorporated. And Benham had fairly got away with his great idea. It was evident to White that this paper had been worked over on several
occasions since its first composition and that Benham had intended
to make it a part of his book. There were corrections in pencil and
corrections in a different shade of ink, and there was an unfinished
new peroration, that was clearly the latest addition of all. Yet
its substance had been there always. It gave the youth just grown
to manhood, but anyhow fully grown. It presented the far-dreaming
intellectualist shaped. Benham had called it ARISTOCRACY. But he was far away by now from
political aristocracy. This time he had not begun with definitions and generalizations,
but with a curiously subjective appeal. He had not pretended to be
theorizing at large any longer, he was manifestly thinking of his own
life and as manifestly he was thinking of life as a matter of difficulty
and unexpected thwartings.