It was very wonderful and delicious, this first indulgence of sense. It was shabby and underhand. The great god Pan is a glorious god. (And so was Swinburne.) And what
can compare with the warmth of blood and the sheen of sunlit limbs? But Priapus....

She was the most subtle, delightful and tender of created beings. She had amazing streaks of vulgarity. And some astonishing friends. Once she had seemed to lead the talk deliberately to money matters. She loved him and desired him. There was no doubt of it. There was a curious effect about her as though when she went round the
corner she would become somebody else. And a curious recurrent feeling
that round the corner there was somebody else. He had an extraordinary feeling that his mother knew about this
business. This feeling came from nothing in her words or acts, but from
some indefinable change in her eyes and bearing towards him. But how
could she know? It was unlikely that she and Mrs. Skelmersdale would ever meet, and it
seemed to him that it would be a particularly offensive incident for
them to meet. There were times now when life took on a grey and boring quality such
as it had never had before he met Mrs. Skelmersdale, and the only
remedy was to go to her. She could restore his nervous tranquillity, his
feeling of solidity and reality, his pride in himself. For a time, that
is. Nevertheless his mind was as a whole pervaded by the feeling that he
ought not to have been taken by surprise. And he had the clearest conviction in his mind that if now he could be
put back again to the day before that lunch....

No! he should not have gone there to lunch. He had gone there to see her Clementi piano. Had he or had he not thought beforehand of any other possibility? On a point so vital his memory was curiously unsure. 8


The worry and disorganization of Benham's life and thoughts increased as
the spring advanced. His need in some way to pull things together became
overpowering. He began to think of Billy Prothero, more and more did it
seem desirable to have a big talk with Billy and place everything that
had got disturbed. Benham thought of going to Cambridge for a week of
exhaustive evenings. Small engagements delayed that expedition....

Then came a day in April when all the world seemed wrong to Benham. He
was irritable; his will was unstable; whatever presented itself to be
done presented itself as undesirable; he could settle to nothing. He had
been keeping away from Mrs. Skelmersdale and in the morning there came a
little note from her designed to correct this abstention. She understood
the art of the attractive note. But he would not decide to go to her. He
left the note unanswered. Then came his mother at the telephone and it became instantly certain to
Benham that he could not play the dutiful son that evening. He answered
her that he could not come to dinner. He had engaged himself. "Where?" "With some men." There was a pause and then his mother's voice came, flattened by
disappointment. "Very well then, little Poff. Perhaps I shall see you
to-morrow." He replaced the receiver and fretted back into his study, where the
notes on aristocracy lay upon his desk, the notes he had been pretending
to work over all the morning. "Damned liar!" he said, and then, "Dirty liar!" He decided to lunch at
the club, and in the afternoon he was moved to telephone an appointment
with his siren. And having done that he was bound to keep it. About one o'clock in the morning he found himself walking back to
Finacue Street. He was no longer a fretful conflict of nerves, but if
anything he was less happy than he had been before. It seemed to him
that London was a desolate and inglorious growth. London ten years ago was much less nocturnal than it is now. And not so
brightly lit. Down the long streets came no traffic but an occasional
hansom. Here and there a cat halted or bolted in the road. Near
Piccadilly a policeman hovered artfully in a doorway, and then came a
few belated prostitutes waylaying the passers-by, and a few youths and
men, wearily lust driven. As he turned up New Bond Street he saw a figure that struck him
as familiar. Surely!--it was Billy Prothero! Or at any rate it was
astonishingly like Billy Prothero. He glanced again and the likeness
was more doubtful. The man had his back to Benham, he was halting and
looking back at a woman. By some queer flash of intuition it came to Benham that even if this
was not Prothero, still Prothero did these things. It might very well
be Prothero even, though, as he now saw, it wasn't. Everybody did these
things.... It came into Benham's head for the first time that life could be
tiresome. This Bond Street was a tiresome place; with its shops all shut and
muffled, its shops where in the crowded daytime one bought costly
furniture, costly clothes, costly scent, sweets, bibelots, pictures,
jewellery, presents of all sorts, clothes for Mrs. Skelmersdale, sweets
for Mrs. Skelmersdale, presents for Mrs. Skelmersdale, all the elaborate
fittings and equipage of--THAT! "Good night, dear," a woman drifted by him. "I've SAID good night," he cried, "I've SAID good night," and so went
on to his flat. The unquenchable demand, the wearisome insatiability
of sex! When everything else has gone, then it shows itself bare in the
bleak small hours. And at first it had seemed so light a matter! He went
to bed, feeling dog-tired, he went to bed at an hour and with a finished
completeness that Merkle would have regarded as entirely becoming in a
young gentleman of his position. And a little past three o'clock in the morning he awoke to a mood of
indescribable desolation. He awoke with a start to an agony of remorse
and self-reproach. 9


For a time he lay quite still staring at the darkness, then he groaned
and turned over. Then, suddenly, like one who fancies he hears a strange
noise, he sat up in bed and listened. "Oh, God!" he said at last. And then: "Oh! The DIRTINESS of life! The dirty muddle of life! "What are we doing with life? What are we all doing with life? "It isn't only this poor Milly business. This only brings it to a head. Of course she wants money...."

His thoughts came on again. "But the ugliness! "Why did I begin it?" He put his hands upon his knees and pressed his eyes against the backs
of his hands and so remained very still, a blankness beneath his own
question. After a long interval his mind moved again. And now it was as if he looked upon his whole existence, he seemed to
see in a large, clear, cold comprehensiveness, all the wasted days, the
fruitless activities, the futilities, the perpetual postponements
that had followed his coming to London. He saw it all as a joyless
indulgence, as a confusion of playthings and undisciplined desires, as
a succession of days that began amiably and weakly, that became steadily
more crowded with ignoble and trivial occupations, that had sunken now
to indignity and uncleanness. He was overwhelmed by that persuasion,
which only freshly soiled youth can feel in its extreme intensity, that
life was slipping away from him, that the sands were running out, that
in a little while his existence would be irretrievably lost. By some trick of the imagination he saw life as an interminable Bond
Street, lit up by night lamps, desolate, full of rubbish, full of the
very best rubbish, trappings, temptations, and down it all he drove, as
the damned drive, wearily, inexplicably. WHAT ARE WE UP TO WITH LIFE! WHAT ARE WE MAKING OF LIFE! But hadn't he intended to make something tremendous of life? Hadn't he
come to London trailing a glory?... He began to remember it as a project. It was the project of a great
World-State sustained by an aristocracy of noble men. He was to have
been one of those men, too fine and far-reaching for the dull manoeuvers
of such politics as rule the world to-day. The project seemed still
large, still whitely noble, but now it was unlit and dead, and in the
foreground he sat in the flat of Mrs. Skelmersdale, feeling dissipated
and fumbling with his white tie. And she was looking tired. "God!" he
said. "How did I get there?" And then suddenly he reached out his arms in the darkness and prayed
aloud to the silences. "Oh, God! Give me back my visions! Give me back my visions!" He could have imagined he heard a voice calling upon him to come out
into life, to escape from the body of this death. But it was his own
voice that called to him....



10


The need for action became so urgent in him, that he got right out of
his bed and sat on the edge of it. Something had to be done at once. He
did not know what it was but he felt that there could be no more sleep,
no more rest, no dressing nor eating nor going forth before he came to
decisions. Christian before his pilgrimage began was not more certain of
this need of flight from the life of routine and vanities. What was to be done? In the first place he must get away and think about it all, think
himself clear of all these--these immediacies, these associations and
relations and holds and habits. He must get back to his vision, get back
to the God in his vision. And to do that he must go alone. He was clear he must go alone. It was useless to go to Prothero, one
weak man going to a weaker. Prothero he was convinced could help him not
at all, and the strange thing is that this conviction had come to him
and had established itself incontestably because of that figure at the
street corner, which had for just one moment resembled Prothero. By some
fantastic intuition Benham knew that Prothero would not only participate
but excuse. And he knew that he himself could endure no excuses. He
must cut clear of any possibility of qualification. This thing had to be
stopped. He must get away, he must get free, he must get clean. In the
extravagance of his reaction Benham felt that he could endure nothing
but solitary places and to sleep under the open sky. He wanted to get right away from London and everybody and lie in the
quiet darkness and stare up at the stars. His plans grew so definite that presently he was in his dressing-gown
and turning out the maps in the lower drawer of his study bureau. He
would go down into Surrey with a knapsack, wander along the North Downs
until the Guildford gap was reached, strike across the Weald country to
the South Downs and then beat eastward. The very thought of it brought
a coolness to his mind. He knew that over those southern hills one could
be as lonely as in the wilderness and as free to talk to God. And there
he would settle something. He would make a plan for his life and end
this torment. When Merkle came in to him in the morning he was fast asleep. The familiar curtain rings awakened Benham. He turned his head over,
stared for a moment and then remembered. "Merkle," he said, "I am going for a walking tour. I am going off this
morning. Haven't I a rucksack?" "You 'ave a sort of canvas bag, sir, with pockets to it," said Merkle. "Will you be needing the VERY 'eavy boots with 'obnails--Swiss, I fancy,
sir--or your ordinary shooting boots?" "And when may I expect you back, sir?" asked Merkle as the moment for
departure drew near. "God knows," said Benham, "I don't." "Then will there be any address for forwarding letters, sir?" Benham hadn't thought of that. For a moment he regarded Merkle's
scrupulous respect with a transient perplexity. "I'll let you know, Merkle," he said. "I'll let you know." For some days at least, notes, telephone messages, engagements, all this
fuss and clamour about nothing, should clamour for him in vain....



11


"But how closely," cried White, in a mood of cultivated enthusiasm; "how
closely must all the poor little stories that we tell to-day follow
in the footsteps of the Great Exemplars! A little while ago and the
springtime freshness of Tobias irradiated the page. Now see! it is
Christian--." Indeed it looked extremely like Christian as Benham went up across the
springy turf from Epsom Downs station towards the crest of the hill. Was he not also fleeing in the morning sunlight from the City of
Destruction? Was he not also seeking that better city whose name is
Peace? And there was a bundle on his back. It was the bundle, I think,
that seized most firmly upon the too literary imagination of White. But the analogy of the bundle was a superficial one. Benham had not
the slightest desire to lose it from his shoulders. It would have
inconvenienced him very greatly if he had done so. It did not contain
his sins. Our sins nowadays are not so easily separated. It contained a
light, warm cape-coat he had bought in Switzerland and which he intended
to wrap about him when he slept under the stars, and in addition
Merkle had packed it with his silk pyjamas, an extra pair of stockings,
tooth-brush, brush and comb, a safety razor.... And there were several
sheets of the Ordnance map. 12


The urgency of getting away from something dominated Benham to the
exclusion of any thought of what he might be getting to. That muddle of
his London life had to be left behind. First, escape....

Over the downs great numbers of larks were singing. It was warm April
that year and early. All the cloud stuff in the sky was gathered
into great towering slow-sailing masses, and the rest was blue of
the intensest. The air was so clean that Benham felt it clean in the
substance of his body. The chestnuts down the hill to the right were
flowering, the beeches were luminously green, and the oaks in the
valley foaming gold. And sometimes it was one lark filled his ears, and
sometimes he seemed to be hearing all the larks for miles about him. Presently over the crest he would be out of sight of the grand stand and
the men exercising horses, and that brace of red-jacketed golfers....

What was he to do? For a time he could think of nothing to do except to keep up and out of
the valley. His whole being seemed to have come to his surfaces to look
out at the budding of the year and hear the noise of the birds. And then
he got into a long road from which he had to escape, and trespassing
southward through plantations he reached the steep edge of the hills
and sat down over above a great chalk pit somewhere near Dorking and
surveyed all the tumbled wooded spaces of the Weald.... It is after all
not so great a country this Sussex, nor so hilly, from deepest valley to
highest crest is not six hundred feet, yet what a greatness of effect it
can achieve! There is something in those downland views which, like sea
views, lifts a mind out to the skies. All England it seemed was there to
Benham's vision, and the purpose of the English, and his own purpose in
the world. For a long time he surveyed the large delicacy of the detail
before him, the crests, the tree-protected houses, the fields and
farmsteads, the distant gleams of water. And then he became interested
in the men who were working in the chalk pit down below. They at any rate were not troubled with the problem of what to do with
their lives. 13


Benham found his mind was now running clear, and so abundantly that he
could scarcely, he felt, keep pace with it. As he thought his flow of
ideas was tinged with a fear that he might forget what he was thinking. In an instant, for the first time in his mental existence, he could have
imagined he had discovered Labour and seen it plain. A little while ago
and he had seemed a lonely man among the hills, but indeed he was not
lonely, these men had been with him all the time, and he was free to
wander, to sit here, to think and choose simply because those men down
there were not free. HE WAS SPENDING THEIR LEISURE.... Not once but
many times with Prothero had he used the phrase RICHESSE OBLIGE. Now
he remembered it. He began to remember a mass of ideas that had been
overlaid and stifling within him. This was what Merkle and the club
servants and the entertainments and engagements and his mother and
the artistic touts and the theatrical touts and the hunting and the
elaboration of games and--Mrs. Skelmersdale and all that had clustered
thickly round him in London had been hiding from him. Those men below
there had not been trusted to choose their work; they had been given it. And he had been trusted....

And now to grapple with it! Now to get it clear! What work was he going
to do? That settled, he would deal with his distractions readily enough. Until that was settled he was lax and exposed to every passing breeze of
invitation. "What work am I going to do? What work am I going to do?" He repeated
it. It is the only question for the aristocrat. What amusement? That for
a footman on holiday. That for a silly child, for any creature that is
kept or led or driven. That perhaps for a tired invalid, for a
toiler worked to a rag. But able-bodied amusement! The arms of Mrs.
Skelmersdale were no worse than the solemn aimlessness of hunting, and
an evening of dalliance not an atom more reprehensible than an evening
of chatter. It was the waste of him that made the sin. His life in
London had been of a piece together. It was well that his intrigue had
set a light on it, put a point to it, given him this saving crisis of
the nerves. That, indeed, is the chief superiority of idle love-making
over other more prevalent forms of idleness and self-indulgence; it
does at least bear its proper label. It is reprehensible. It brings your
careless honour to the challenge of concealment and shabby evasions and
lies.... But in this pellucid air things took their proper proportions again. And now what was he to do? "Politics," he said aloud to the turf and the sky. Is there any other work for an aristocratic man?... Science? One
could admit science in that larger sense that sweeps in History, or
Philosophy. Beyond that whatever work there is is work for which men
are paid. Art? Art is nothing aristocratic except when it is a means
of scientific or philosophical expression. Art that does not argue nor
demonstrate nor discover is merely the craftsman's impudence. He pulled up at this and reflected for a time with some distinguished
instances in his mind. They were so distinguished, so dignified, they
took their various arts with so admirable a gravity that the soul of
this young man recoiled from the verdicts to which his reasoning drove
him. "It's not for me to judge them," he decided, "except in relation
to myself. For them there may be tremendous significances in Art. But
if these do not appear to me, then so far as I am concerned they do not
exist for me. They are not in my world. So far as they attempt to invade
me and control my attitudes or my outlook, or to judge me in any way,
there is no question of their impudence. Impudence is the word for it. My world is real. I want to be really aristocratic, really brave, really
paying for the privilege of not being a driven worker. The things
the artist makes are like the things my private dream-artist makes,
relaxing, distracting. What can Art at its greatest be, pure Art that
is, but a more splendid, more permanent, transmissible reverie! The very
essence of what I am after is NOT to be an artist...."

After a large and serious movement through his mind he came back to
Science, Philosophy or Politics as the sole three justifications for the
usurpation of leisure. So far as devotion to science went, he knew he had no specific aptitude
for any departmentalized subject, and equally he felt no natural call to
philosophy. He was left with politics....

"Or else, why shouldn't I go down there and pick up a shovel and set to
work? To make leisure for my betters...."

And now it was that he could take up the real trouble that more than
anything else had been keeping him ineffective and the prey of every
chance demand and temptation during the last ten months. He had not been
able to get himself into politics, and the reason why he had not been
able to do so was that he could not induce himself to fit in. Statecraft
was a remote and faded thing in the political life of the time; politics
was a choice of two sides in a game, and either side he found equally
unattractive. Since he had come down from Cambridge the Tariff Reform
people had gone far to capture the Conservative party. There was little
chance of a candidature for him without an adhesion to that. And
he could find nothing he could imagine himself working for in the
declarations of the Tariff Reform people. He distrusted them, he
disliked them. They took all the light and pride out of imperialism,
they reduced it to a shabby conspiracy of the British and their colonies
against foreign industrialism. They were violent for armaments and
hostile to education. They could give him no assurance of any scheme of
growth and unification, and no guarantees against the manifest dangers
of economic disturbance and political corruption a tariff involves. Imperialism without noble imaginations, it seemed to him, was simply
nationalism with megalomania. It was swaggering, it was greed, it was
German; its enthusiasm was forced, its nobility a vulgar lie. No. And
when he turned to the opposite party he found little that was more
attractive. They were prepared, it seemed, if they came into office, to
pull the legislature of the British Isles to pieces in obedience to the
Irish demand for Home Rule, and they were totally unprepared with any
scheme for doing this that had even a chance of success. In the twenty
years that had elapsed since Gladstone's hasty and disastrous essay in
political surgery they had studied nothing, learnt nothing, produced no
ideas whatever in the matter. They had not had the time. They had just
negotiated, like the mere politicians they were, for the Nationalist
vote. They seemed to hope that by a marvel God would pacify Ulster. Lord
Dunraven, Plunkett, were voices crying in the wilderness. The sides in
the party game would as soon have heeded a poet.... But unless Benham
was prepared to subscribe either to Home Rule or Tariff Reform there was
no way whatever open to him into public life. He had had some decisive
conversations. He had no illusions left upon that score.... Here was the real barrier that had kept him inactive for ten months. Here was the problem he had to solve. This was how he had been left
out of active things, a prey to distractions, excitements, idle
temptations--and Mrs. Skelmersdale. Running away to shoot big game or explore wildernesses was no remedy. That was just running away. Aristocrats do not run away. What of his
debt to those men down there in the quarry? What of his debt to the
unseen men in the mines away in the north? What of his debt to the
stokers on the liners, and to the clerks in the city? He reiterated the
cardinal article of his creed: The aristocrat is a privileged man in
order that he may be a public and political man. But how is one to be a political man when one is not in politics? Benham frowned at the Weald. His ideas were running thin. He might hammer at politics from the outside. And then again how? He
would make a list of all the things that he might do. For example he
might write. He rested one hand on his knee and lifted one finger and
regarded it. COULD he write? There were one or two men who ran papers
and seemed to have a sort of independent influence. Strachey, for
example, with his SPECTATOR; Maxse, with his NATIONAL REVIEW. But they
were grown up, they had formed their ideas. He had to learn first. He lifted a second finger. How to learn? For it was learning that he had
to do. When one comes down from Oxford or Cambridge one falls into the mistake
of thinking that learning is over and action must begin. But until one
perceives clearly just where one stands action is impossible. How is one with no experience of affairs to get an experience of affairs
when the door of affairs is closed to one by one's own convictions? Outside of affairs how can one escape being flimsy? How can one escape
becoming merely an intellectual like those wordy Fabians, those writers,
poseurs, and sham publicists whose wrangles he had attended? And,
moreover, there is danger in the leisure of your intellectual. One
cannot be always reading and thinking and discussing and inquiring....
WOULD IT NOT BE BETTER AFTER ALL TO MAKE A CONCESSION, SWALLOW HOME RULE
OR TARIFF REFORM, AND SO AT LEAST GET HIS HANDS ON THINGS? And then in a little while the party conflict would swallow him up? Still it would engage him, it would hold him. If, perhaps, he did not
let it swallow him up. If he worked with an eye open for opportunities
of self-assertion.... The party game had not altogether swallowed "Mr. Arthur."... But every one is not a Balfour.... He reflected profoundly. On his left knee his left hand rested with
two fingers held up. By some rapid mental alchemy these fingers had now
become Home Rule and Tariff Reform. His right hand which had hitherto
taken no part in the controversy, had raised its index finger by
imperceptible degrees. It had been raised almost subconsciously. And by
still obscurer processes this finger had become Mrs. Skelmersdale. He
recognized her sudden reappearance above the threshold of consciousness
with mild surprise. He had almost forgotten her share in these problems. He had supposed her dismissed to an entirely subordinate position....

Then he perceived that the workmen in the chalk pit far below had
knocked off and were engaged upon their midday meal. He understood why
his mind was no longer moving forward with any alacrity. Food? The question where he should eat arose abruptly and dismissed all other
problems from his mind. He unfolded a map. Here must be the chalk pit,
here was Dorking. That village was Brockham Green. Should he go down to
Dorking or this way over Box Hill to the little inn at Burford Bridge. He would try the latter. 14


The April sunset found our young man talking to himself for greater
emphasis, and wandering along a turfy cart-track through a wilderness
mysteriously planted with great bushes of rhododendra on the Downs above
Shere. He had eaten a belated lunch at Burford Bridge, he had got some
tea at a little inn near a church with a splendid yew tree, and for the
rest of the time he had wandered and thought. He had travelled perhaps a
dozen or fifteen miles, and a good way from his first meditations above
the Dorking chalk pit. He had recovered long ago from that remarkable conception of an active
if dishonest political career as a means of escaping Mrs. Skelmersdale
and all that Mrs. Skelmersdale symbolized. That would be just louting
from one bad thing to another. He had to settle Mrs. Skelmersdale clean
and right, and he had to do as exquisitely right in politics as he could
devise. If the public life of the country had got itself into a stupid
antagonism of two undesirable things, the only course for a sane man of
honour was to stand out from the parties and try and get them back to
sound issues again. There must be endless people of a mind with himself
in this matter. And even if there were not, if he was the only man in
the world, he still had to follow his lights and do the right. And his
business was to find out the right.... He came back from these imaginative excursions into contemporary
politics with one idea confirmed in his mind, an idea that had been
indeed already in his mind during his Cambridge days. This was the
idea of working out for himself, thoroughly and completely, a political
scheme, a theory of his work and duty in the world, a plan of the
world's future that should give a rule for his life. The Research
Magnificent was emerging. It was an alarmingly vast proposal, but he
could see no alternative but submission, a plebeian's submission to the
currents of life about him. Little pictures began to flit before his imagination of the way in which
he might build up this tremendous inquiry. He would begin by hunting up
people, everybody who seemed to have ideas and promise ideas he would
get at. He would travel far--and exhaustively. He would, so soon as
the ideas seemed to indicate it, hunt out facts. He would learn how the
world was governed. He would learn how it did its thinking. He would
live sparingly. ("Not TOO sparingly," something interpolated.) He would
work ten or twelve hours a day. Such a course of investigation must
pass almost of its own accord into action and realization.