I wasn't sorry for
him any more than I was for myself. "It seemed to me that it was all right with us both, remarkable, vivid,
but all right...."



8


"But though there is little or no fear in an aeroplane, even when it
is smashing up, there is fear about aeroplanes. There is something that
says very urgently, 'Don't,' to the man who looks up into the sky. It
is very interesting to note how at a place like Eastchurch or Brooklands
the necessary discretion trails the old visceral feeling with it,
and how men will hang about, ready to go up, resolved to go up, but
delaying. Men of indisputable courage will get into a state between
dread and laziness, and waste whole hours of flying weather on any
excuse or no excuse. Once they are up that inhibition vanishes. The man
who was delaying and delaying half an hour ago will now be cutting the
most venturesome capers in the air. Few men are in a hurry to get down
again. I mean that quite apart from the hesitation of landing, they like
being up there." Then, abruptly, Benham comes back to his theory. "Fear, you see, is the inevitable janitor, but it is not the ruler of
experience. That is what I am driving at in all this. The bark of danger
is worse than its bite. Inside the portals there may be events and
destruction, but terror stays defeated at the door. It may be that when
that old man was killed by a horse the child who watched suffered more
than he did....

"I am sure that was so...."



9


As White read Benham's notes and saw how his argument drove on, he was
reminded again and again of those schoolboy days and Benham's hardihood,
and his own instinctive unreasonable reluctance to follow those gallant
intellectual leads. If fear is an ancient instinctive boundary that the
modern life, the aristocratic life, is bound to ignore and transcend,
may this not also be the case with pain? We do a little adventure into
the "life beyond fear"; may we not also think of adventuring into the
life beyond pain? Is pain any saner a warning than fear? May not pain
just as much as fear keep us from possible and splendid things? But why
ask a question that is already answered in principle in every dentist's
chair? Benham's idea, however, went much further than that, he was
clearly suggesting that in pain itself, pain endured beyond a certain
pitch, there might come pleasure again, an intensity of sensation
that might have the colour of delight. He betrayed a real anxiety to
demonstrate this possibility, he had the earnestness of a man who is
sensible of dissentient elements within. He hated the thought of
pain even more than he hated fear. His arguments did not in the least
convince White, who stopped to poke the fire and assure himself of his
own comfort in the midst of his reading. Young people and unseasoned people, Benham argued, are apt to imagine
that if fear is increased and carried to an extreme pitch it becomes
unbearable, one will faint or die; given a weak heart, a weak artery or
any such structural defect and that may well happen, but it is just as
possible that as the stimulation increases one passes through a brief
ecstasy of terror to a new sane world, exalted but as sane as normal
existence. There is the calmness of despair. Benham had made some notes
to enforce this view, of the observed calm behaviour of men already
hopelessly lost, men on sinking ships, men going to execution, men
already maimed and awaiting the final stroke, but for the most part
these were merely references to books and periodicals. In exactly the
same way, he argued, we exaggerate the range of pain as if it were
limitless. We think if we are unthinking that it passes into agony and
so beyond endurance to destruction. It probably does nothing of the
kind. Benham compared pain to the death range of the electric current. At a certain voltage it thrills, at a greater it torments and convulses,
at a still greater it kills. But at enormous voltages, as Tesla was
the first to demonstrate, it does no injury. And following on this came
memoranda on the recorded behaviour of martyrs, on the self-torture of
Hindoo ascetics, of the defiance of Red Indian prisoners. "These things," Benham had written, "are much more horrible when one
considers them from the point of view of an easy-chair";--White gave
an assenting nod--"ARE THEY REALLY HORRIBLE AT ALL? Is it possible that
these charred and slashed and splintered persons, those Indians hanging
from hooks, those walkers in the fiery furnace, have had glimpses
through great windows that were worth the price they paid for them? Haven't we allowed those checks and barriers that are so important a
restraint upon childish enterprise, to creep up into and distress and
distort adult life?... "The modern world thinks too much as though painlessness and freedom
from danger were ultimate ends. It is fear-haunted, it is troubled
by the thoughts of pain and death, which it has never met except as
well-guarded children meet these things, in exaggerated and untestable
forms, in the menagerie or in nightmares. And so it thinks the discovery
of anaesthetics the crowning triumph of civilization, and cosiness and
innocent amusement, those ideals of the nursery, the whole purpose of
mankind...."

"Mm," said White, and pressed his lips together and knotted his brows
and shook his head. 10


But the bulk of Benham's discussion of fear was not concerned with
this perverse and overstrained suggestion of pleasure reached through
torture, this exaggeration of the man resolved not to shrink at
anything; it was an examination of the present range and use of fear
that led gradually to something like a theory of control and discipline. The second of his two dominating ideas was that fear is an instinct
arising only in isolation, that in a crowd there may be a collective
panic, but that there is no real individual fear. Fear, Benham held,
drives the man back to the crowd, the dog to its master, the wolf to the
pack, and when it is felt that the danger is pooled, then fear leaves
us. He was quite prepared to meet the objection that animals of a
solitary habit do nevertheless exhibit fear. Some of this apparent fear,
he argued, was merely discretion, and what is not discretion is the
survival of an infantile characteristic. The fear felt by a tiger cub
is certainly a social emotion, that drives it back to the other cubs,
to its mother and the dark hiding of the lair. The fear of a fully grown
tiger sends it into the reeds and the shadows, to a refuge, that must be
"still reminiscent of the maternal lair." But fear has very little hold
upon the adult solitary animal, it changes with extreme readiness to
resentment and rage. "Like most inexperienced people," ran his notes, "I was astonished at
the reported feats of men in war; I believed they were exaggerated,
and that there was a kind of unpremeditated conspiracy of silence about
their real behaviour. But when on my way to visit India for the third
time I turned off to see what I could of the fighting before Adrianople,
I discovered at once that a thousand casually selected conscripts will,
every one of them, do things together that not one of them could by any
means be induced to do alone. I saw men not merely obey orders that
gave them the nearly certain prospect of death, but I saw them exceeding
orders; I saw men leap out of cover for the mere sake of defiance, and
fall shot through and smashed by a score of bullets. I saw a number
of Bulgarians in the hands of the surgeon, several quite frightfully
wounded, refuse chloroform merely to impress the English onlooker, some
of their injuries I could scarcely endure to see, and I watched a line
of infantry men go on up a hill and keep on quite manifestly cheerful
with men dropping out and wriggling, and men dropping out and lying
still until every other man was down.... Not one man would have gone up
that hill alone, without onlookers...."

Rowe, the lion hunter, told Benham that only on one occasion in his life
had he given way to ungovernable fear, and that was when he was alone. Many times he had been in fearful situations in the face of charging
lions and elephants, and once he had been bowled over and carried some
distance by a lion, but on none of these occasions had fear demoralized
him. There was no question of his general pluck. But on one occasion he
was lost in rocky waterless country in Somaliland. He strayed out in the
early morning while his camels were being loaded, followed some antelope
too far, and lost his bearings. He looked up expecting to see the sun
on his right hand and found it on his left. He became bewildered. He
wandered some time and then fired three signal shots and got no reply. Then losing his head he began shouting. He had only four or five more
cartridges and no water-bottle. His men were accustomed to his going on
alone, and might not begin to remark upon his absence until sundown.... It chanced, however, that one of the shikari noted the water-bottle he
had left behind and organized a hunt for him. Long before they found him he had passed to an extremity of terror. The
world had become hideous and threatening, the sun was a pitiless glare,
each rocky ridge he clambered became more dreadful than the last, each
new valley into which he looked more hateful and desolate, the cramped
thorn bushes threatened him gauntly, the rocks had a sinister lustre,
and in every blue shadow about him the night and death lurked and
waited. There was no hurry for them, presently they would spread out
again and join and submerge him, presently in the confederated darkness
he could be stalked and seized and slain. Yes, this he admitted was real
fear. He had cracked his voice, yelling as a child yells. And then he
had become afraid of his own voice....

"Now this excess of fear in isolation, this comfort in a crowd, in
support and in a refuge, even when support or refuge is quite illusory,
is just exactly what one would expect of fear if one believed it to be
an instinct which has become a misfit. In the ease of the soldier fear
is so much a misfit that instead of saving him for the most part it
destroys him. Raw soldiers under fire bunch together and armies fight in
masses, men are mowed down in swathes, because only so is the courage of
the common men sustained, only so can they be brave, albeit spread out
and handling their weapons as men of unqualified daring would handle
them they would be infinitely safer and more effective....

"And all of us, it may be, are restrained by this misfit fear from a
thousand bold successful gestures of mind and body, we are held back
from the attainment of mighty securities in pitiful temporary shelters
that are perhaps in the end no better than traps...."

From such considerations Benham went on to speculate how far the crowd
can be replaced in a man's imagination, how far some substitute for that
social backing can be made to serve the same purpose in neutralizing
fear. He wrote with the calm of a man who weighs the probabilities of a
riddle, and with the zeal of a man lost to every material consideration. His writing, it seemed to White, had something of the enthusiastic
whiteness of his face, the enthusiastic brightness of his eyes. We can
no more banish fear from our being at present than we can carve out the
fleshy pillars of the heart or the pineal gland in the brain. It is deep
in our inheritance. As deep as hunger. And just as we have to satisfy
hunger in order that it should leave us free, so we have to satisfy the
unconquerable importunity of fear. We have to reassure our faltering
instincts. There must be something to take the place of lair and
familiars, something not ourselves but general, that we must carry with
us into the lonely places. For it is true that man has now not only
to learn to fight in open order instead of in a phalanx, but he has to
think and plan and act in open order, to live in open order....

Then with one of his abrupt transitions Benham had written, "This brings
me to God." "The devil it does!" said White, roused to a keener attention. "By no feat of intention can we achieve courage in loneliness so long as
we feel indeed alone. An isolated man, an egoist, an Epicurean man, will
always fail himself in the solitary place. There must be something more
with us to sustain us against this vast universe than the spark of life
that began yesterday and must be extinguished to-morrow. There can be
no courage beyond social courage, the sustaining confidence of the herd,
until there is in us the sense of God. But God is a word that covers a
multitude of meanings. When I was a boy I was a passionate atheist, I
defied God, and so far as God is the mere sanction of social traditions
and pressures, a mere dressing up of the crowd's will in canonicals, I
do still deny him and repudiate him. That God I heard of first from my
nursemaid, and in very truth he is the proper God of all the nursemaids
of mankind. But there is another God than that God of obedience, God the
immortal adventurer in me, God who calls men from home and country, God
scourged and crowned with thorns, who rose in a nail-pierced body out of
death and came not to bring peace but a sword." With something bordering upon intellectual consternation, White, who
was a decent self-respecting sceptic, read these last clamberings of
Benham's spirit. They were written in pencil; they were unfinished when
he died. (Surely the man was not a Christian!) "You may be heedless of death and suffering because you think you cannot
suffer and die, or you may be heedless of death and pain because you
have identified your life with the honour of mankind and the insatiable
adventurousness of man's imagination, so that the possible death is
negligible and the possible achievement altogether outweighs it."... White shook his head over these pencilled fragments. He was a member of the Rationalist Press Association, and he had always
taken it for granted that Benham was an orthodox unbeliever. But this
was hopelessly unsound, heresy, perilous stuff; almost, it seemed to
him, a posthumous betrayal....



11


One night when he was in India the spirit of adventure came upon Benham. He had gone with Kepple, of the forestry department, into the jungle
country in the hills above the Tapti. He had been very anxious to see
something of that aspect of Indian life, and he had snatched at the
chance Kepple had given him. But they had scarcely started before the
expedition was brought to an end by an accident, Kepple was thrown by
a pony and his ankle broken. He and Benham bandaged it as well as they
could, and a litter was sent for, and meanwhile they had to wait in the
camp that was to have been the centre of their jungle raids. The second
day of this waiting was worse for Kepple than the first, and he suffered
much from the pressure of this amateurish bandaging. In the evening
Benham got cool water from the well and rearranged things better; the
two men dined and smoked under their thatched roof beneath the big
banyan, and then Kepple, tired out by his day of pain, was carried to
his tent. Presently he fell asleep and Benham was left to himself. Now that the heat was over he found himself quite indisposed to sleep. He felt full of life and anxious for happenings. He went back and sat down upon the iron bedstead beneath the banyan,
that Kepple had lain upon through the day, and he watched the soft
immensity of the Indian night swallow up the last lingering colours of
the world. It left the outlines, it obliterated nothing, but it stripped
off the superficial reality of things. The moon was full and high
overhead, and the light had not so much gone as changed from definition
and the blazing glitter and reflections of solidity to a translucent and
unsubstantial clearness. The jungle that bordered the little encampment
north, south, and west seemed to have crept a little nearer, enriched
itself with blackness, taken to itself voices. (Surely it had been silent during the day.) A warm, faintly-scented breeze just stirred the dead grass and the
leaves. In the day the air had been still. Immediately after the sunset there had been a great crying of peacocks
in the distance, but that was over now; the crickets, however,
were still noisy, and a persistent sound had become predominant, an
industrious unmistakable sound, a sound that took his mind back to
England, in midsummer. It was like a watchman's rattle--a nightjar! So there were nightjars here in India, too! One might have expected
something less familiar. And then came another cry from far away over
the heat-stripped tree-tops, a less familiar cry. It was repeated. Was
that perhaps some craving leopard, a tiger cat, a panther?--

"HUNT, HUNT"; that might be a deer. Then suddenly an angry chattering came from the dark trees quite close
at hand. A monkey?... These great, scarce visible, sweeping movements through the air were
bats....

Of course, the day jungle is the jungle asleep. This was its waking
hour. Now the deer were arising from their forms, the bears creeping
out of their dens amidst the rocks and blundering down the gullies,
the tigers and panthers and jungle cats stalking noiselessly from their
lairs in the grass. Countless creatures that had hidden from the heat
and pitiless exposure of the day stood now awake and alertly intent upon
their purposes, grazed or sought water, flitting delicately through the
moonlight and shadows. The jungle was awakening. Again Benham heard that
sound like the belling of a stag.... This was the real life of the jungle, this night life, into which man
did not go. Here he was on the verge of a world that for all the stuffed
trophies of the sportsman and the specimens of the naturalist is still
almost as unknown as if it was upon another planet. What intruders men
are, what foreigners in the life of this ancient system! He looked over his shoulder, and there were the two little tents,
one that sheltered Kepple and one that awaited him, and beyond, in an
irregular line, glowed the ruddy smoky fires of the men. One or two
turbaned figures still flitted about, and there was a voice--low,
monotonous--it must have been telling a tale. Further, sighing and
stirring ever and again, were tethered beasts, and then a great pale
space of moonlight and the clumsy outlines of the village well. The
clustering village itself slept in darkness beyond the mango trees,
and still remoter the black encircling jungle closed in. One might have
fancied this was the encampment of newly-come invaders, were it not
for the larger villages that are overgrown with thickets and altogether
swallowed up again in the wilderness, and for the deserted temples that
are found rent asunder by the roots of trees and the ancient embankments
that hold water only for the drinking of the sambur deer....

Benham turned his face to the dim jungle again.... He had come far out of his way to visit this strange world of the
ancient life, that now recedes and dwindles before our new civilization,
that seems fated to shrivel up and pass altogether before the dry
advance of physical science and material organization. He was full of
unsatisfied curiosities about its fierce hungers and passions, its fears
and cruelties, its instincts and its well-nigh incommunicable and yet
most precious understandings. He had long ceased to believe that the
wild beast is wholly evil, and safety and plenty the ultimate good for
men....

Perhaps he would never get nearer to this mysterious jungle life than he
was now. It was intolerably tantalizing that it should be so close at hand and so
inaccessible....

As Benham sat brooding over his disappointment the moon, swimming on
through the still circle of the hours, passed slowly over him. The
lights and shadows about him changed by imperceptible gradations and
a long pale alley where the native cart track drove into the forest,
opened slowly out of the darkness, slowly broadened, slowly lengthened. It opened out to him with a quality of invitation.... There was the jungle before him. Was it after all so inaccessible? "Come!" the road said to him. Benham rose and walked out a few paces into the moonlight and stood
motionless. Was he afraid? Even now some hungry watchful monster might lurk in yonder shadows,
watching with infinite still patience. Kepple had told him how they
would sit still for hours--staring unblinkingly as cats stare at a
fire--and then crouch to advance. Beneath the shrill overtone of
the nightjars, what noiseless grey shapes, what deep breathings and
cracklings and creepings might there not be?... Was he afraid? That question determined him to go. He hesitated whether he should take a gun. A stick? A gun, he knew, was
a dangerous thing to an inexperienced man. No! He would go now, even as
he was with empty hands. At least he would go as far as the end of that
band of moonlight. If for no other reason than because he was afraid. NOW! For a moment it seemed to him as though his feet were too heavy to lift
and then, hands in pockets, khaki-clad, an almost invisible figure, he
strolled towards the cart-track. Come to that, he halted for a moment to regard the distant fires of
the men. No one would miss him. They would think he was in his tent. He faced the stirring quiet ahead. The cart-track was a rutted path of
soft, warm sand, on which he went almost noiselessly. A bird squabbled
for an instant in a thicket. A great white owl floated like a flake of
moonlight across the track and vanished without a sound among the trees. Along the moonlit path went Benham, and when he passed near trees his
footsteps became noisy with the rustle and crash of dead leaves. The
jungle was full of moonlight; twigs, branches, creepers, grass-clumps
came out acutely vivid. The trees and bushes stood in pools of darkness,
and beyond were pale stretches of misty moonshine and big rocks shining
with an unearthly lustre. Things seemed to be clear and yet uncertain. It was as if they dissolved or retired a little and then returned to
solidity. A sudden chattering broke out overhead, and black across the great
stars soared a flying squirrel and caught a twig, and ran for shelter. A second hesitated in a tree-top and pursued. They chased each other and
vanished abruptly. He forgot his sense of insecurity in the interest of
these active little silhouettes. And he noted how much bigger and more
wonderful the stars can look when one sees them through interlacing
branches. Ahead was darkness; but not so dark when he came to it that the track
was invisible. He was at the limit of his intention, but now he saw that
that had been a childish project. He would go on, he would walk right
into the jungle. His first disinclination was conquered, and the soft
intoxication of the subtropical moonshine was in his blood.... But he
wished he could walk as a spirit walks, without this noise of leaves.... Yes, this was very wonderful and beautiful, and there must always be
jungles for men to walk in. Always there must be jungles.... Some small beast snarled and bolted from under his feet. He stopped
sharply. He had come into a darkness under great boughs, and now he
stood still as the little creature scuttled away. Beyond the track
emerged into a dazzling whiteness.... In the stillness he could hear the deer belling again in the distance,
and then came a fuss of monkeys in a group of trees near at hand. He
remained still until this had died away into mutterings. Then on the verge of movement he was startled by a ripe mango that
slipped from its stalk and fell out of the tree and struck his hand. It took a little time to understand that, and then he laughed, and his
muscles relaxed, and he went on again. A thorn caught at him and he disentangled himself. He crossed the open space, and the moon was like a great shield of light
spread out above him. All the world seemed swimming in its radiance. The
stars were like lamps in a mist of silvery blue. The track led him on across white open spaces of shrivelled grass and
sand, amidst trees where shadows made black patternings upon the silver,
and then it plunged into obscurities. For a time it lifted, and then
on one hand the bush fell away, and he saw across a vast moonlit valley
wide undulations of open cultivation, belts of jungle, copses, and a
great lake as black as ebony. For a time the path ran thus open, and
then the jungle closed in again and there were more thickets, more
levels of grass, and in one place far overhead among the branches he
heard and stood for a time perplexed at a vast deep humming of bees.... Presently a black monster with a hunched back went across his path
heedless of him and making a great noise in the leaves. He stood quite
still until it had gone. He could not tell whether it was a boar or
hyaena; most probably, he thought, a boar because of the heaviness of
its rush. The path dropped downhill for a time, crossed a ravine, ascended. He
passed a great leafless tree on which there were white flowers. On the
ground also, in the darkness under the tree, there were these flowers;
they were dropping noiselessly, and since they were visible in the
shadows, it seemed to him that they must be phosphorescent. And they
emitted a sweetish scent that lay heavily athwart the path. Presently he
passed another such tree. Then he became aware of a tumult ahead of him,
a smashing of leaves, a snorting and slobbering, grunting and sucking,
a whole series of bestial sounds. He halted for a little while, and then
drew nearer, picking his steps to avoid too great a noise. Here were
more of those white-blossomed trees, and beneath, in the darkness,
something very black and big was going to and fro, eating greedily. Then
he found that there were two and then more of these black things, three
or four of them. Curiosity made Benham draw nearer, very softly. Presently one showed in a patch of moonlight, startlingly big, a huge,
black hairy monster with a long white nose on a grotesque face, and he
was stuffing armfuls of white blossom into his mouth with his curved
fore claws. He took not the slightest notice of the still man, who stood
perhaps twenty yards away from him. He was too blind and careless. He
snorted and smacked his slobbering lips, and plunged into the shadows
again. Benham heard him root among the leaves and grunt appreciatively. The air was heavy with the reek of the crushed flowers. For some time Benham remained listening to and peering at these
preoccupied gluttons. At last he shrugged his shoulders, and left them
and went on his way. For a long time he could hear them, then just as he
was on the verge of forgetting them altogether, some dispute arose among
them, and there began a vast uproar, squeals, protests, comments, one
voice ridiculously replete and authoritative, ridiculously suggestive
of a drunken judge with his mouth full, and a shrill voice of grievance
high above the others.... The uproar of the bears died away at last, almost abruptly, and left the
jungle to the incessant night-jars....

For what end was this life of the jungle? All Benham's senses were alert to the sounds and appearances about him,
and at the same time his mind was busy with the perplexities of that
riddle. Was the jungle just an aimless pool of life that man must drain
and clear away? Or is it to have a use in the greater life of our race
that now begins? Will man value the jungle as he values the precipice,
for the sake of his manhood? Will he preserve it? Man must keep hard, man must also keep fierce. Will the jungle keep him
fierce? For life, thought Benham, there must be insecurity.... He had missed the track.... He was now in a second ravine. He was going downward, walking on silvery
sand amidst great boulders, and now there was a new sound in the
air--. It was the croaking of frogs. Ahead was a solitary gleam. He was
approaching a jungle pool.... Suddenly the stillness was alive, in a panic uproar. "HONK!" cried a
great voice, and "HONK!" There was a clatter of hoofs, a wild rush--a
rush as it seemed towards him. Was he being charged? He backed against a
rock. A great pale shape leaped by him, an antlered shape. It was a herd
of big deer bolting suddenly out of the stillness. He heard the swish
and smash of their retreat grow distant, disperse. He remained standing
with his back to the rock. Slowly the strophe and antistrophe of frogs and goat-suckers resumed
possession of his consciousness. But now some primitive instinct
perhaps or some subconscious intimation of danger made him meticulously
noiseless. He went on down a winding sound-deadening path of sand towards the
drinking-place. He came to a wide white place that was almost level, and
beyond it under clustering pale-stemmed trees shone the mirror surface
of some ancient tank, and, sharp and black, a dog-like beast sat on its
tail in the midst of this space, started convulsively and went slinking
into the undergrowth. Benham paused for a moment and then walked out
softly into the light, and, behold! as if it were to meet him, came
a monster, a vast dark shape drawing itself lengthily out of the
blackness, and stopped with a start as if it had been instantly changed
to stone. It had stopped with one paw advanced. Its striped mask was light and
dark grey in the moonlight, grey but faintly tinged with ruddiness; its
mouth was a little open, its fangs and a pendant of viscous saliva shone
vivid. Its great round-pupilled eyes regarded him stedfastly. At last
the nightmare of Benham's childhood had come true, and he was face to
face with a tiger, uncaged, uncontrolled. For some moments neither moved, neither the beast nor the man. They
stood face to face, each perhaps with an equal astonishment, motionless
and soundless, in that mad Indian moonlight that makes all things like a
dream. Benham stood quite motionless, and body and mind had halted together. That confrontation had an interminableness that had nothing to do with
the actual passage of time. Then some trickle of his previous thoughts
stirred in the frozen quiet of his mind. He spoke hoarsely. "I am Man," he said, and lifted a hand as he spoke. "The Thought of the world." His heart leapt within him as the tiger moved. But the great beast
went sideways, gardant, only that its head was low, three noiseless
instantaneous strides it made, and stood again watching him. "Man," he said, in a voice that had no sound, and took a step forward. "Wough!" With two bounds the monster had become a great grey streak
that crackled and rustled in the shadows of the trees. And then it
had vanished, become invisible and inaudible with a kind of
instantaneousness. For some seconds or some minutes Benham stood rigid, fearlessly
expectant, and then far away up the ravine he heard the deer repeat
their cry of alarm, and understood with a new wisdom that the tiger had
passed among them and was gone.... He walked on towards the deserted tank and now he was talking aloud. "I understand the jungle. I understand.... If a few men die here, what
matter? There are worse deaths than being killed....

"What is this fool's trap of security? "Every time in my life that I have fled from security I have fled from
death....

"Let men stew in their cities if they will. It is in the lonely places,
in jungles and mountains, in snows and fires, in the still observatories
and the silent laboratories, in those secret and dangerous places where
life probes into life, it is there that the masters of the world, the
lords of the beast, the rebel sons of Fate come to their own....

"You sleeping away there in the cities! Do you know what it means for
you that I am here to-night? "Do you know what it means to you? "I am just one--just the precursor. "Presently, if you will not budge, those hot cities must be burnt about
you. You must come out of them...."

He wandered now uttering his thoughts as they came to him, and he saw no
more living creatures because they fled and hid before the sound of his
voice. He wandered until the moon, larger now and yellow tinged, was low
between the black bars of the tree stems. And then it sank very suddenly
behind a hilly spur and the light failed swiftly. He stumbled and went with difficulty. He could go no further among these
rocks and ravines, and he sat down at the foot of a tree to wait for
day. He sat very still indeed. A great stillness came over the world, a velvet silence that wrapped
about him, as the velvet shadows wrapped about him. The corncrakes had
ceased, all the sounds and stir of animal life had died away, the breeze
had fallen. A drowsing comfort took possession of him. He grew more
placid and more placid still. He was enormously content to find that
fear had fled before him and was gone. He drifted into that state of
mind when one thinks without ideas, when one's mind is like a starless
sky, serene and empty. 12


Some hours later Benham found that the trees and rocks were growing
visible again, and he saw a very bright star that he knew must be
Lucifer rising amidst the black branches. He was sitting upon a rock at
the foot of a slender-stemmed leafless tree. He had been asleep, and it
was daybreak. Everything was coldly clear and colourless. He must have slept soundly. He heard a cock crow, and another answer--jungle fowl these must be,
because there could be no village within earshot--and then far away and
bringing back memories of terraced houses and ripe walled gardens, was
the scream of peacocks. And some invisible bird was making a hollow
beating sound among the trees near at hand. TUNK.... TUNK, and out of
the dry grass came a twittering. There was a green light in the east that grew stronger, and the stars
after their magnitudes were dissolving in the blue; only a few remained
faintly visible. The sound of birds increased. Through the trees he saw
towering up a great mauve thing like the back of a monster,--but that
was nonsense, it was the crest of a steep hillside covered with woods of
teak. He stood up and stretched himself, and wondered whether he had dreamed
of a tiger. He tried to remember and retrace the course of his over-night
wanderings. A flight of emerald parakeets tore screaming through the trees, and then
far away uphill he heard the creaking of a cart. He followed the hint of a footmark, and went back up the glen slowly and
thoughtfully. Presently he came to a familiar place, a group of trees, a sheet of
water, and the ruins of an old embankment. It was the ancient tank of
his overnight encounter. The pool of his dream? With doubt still in his mind, he walked round its margin to the sandy
level beyond, and cast about and sought intently, and at last found, and
then found clearly, imposed upon the tracks of several sorts of deer and
the footprints of many biggish birds, first the great spoor of the
tiger and then his own. Here the beast had halted, and here it had leapt
aside. Here his own footmarks stopped. Here his heels had come together. It had been no dream. There was a white mist upon the water of the old tank like the bloom
upon a plum, and the trees about it seemed smaller and the sand-space
wider and rougher than they had seemed in the moonshine. Then the ground
had looked like a floor of frosted silver. And thence he went on upward through the fresh morning, until just as
the east grew red with sunrise, he reached the cart-track from which he
had strayed overnight. It was, he found, a longer way back to the camp
than he remembered it to be. Perhaps he had struck the path further
along. It curved about and went up and down and crossed three ravines. At last he came to that trampled place of littered white blossom under
great trees where he had seen the bears. The sunlight went before him in a sheaf of golden spears, and his
shadow, that was at first limitless, crept towards his feet. The dew had
gone from the dead grass and the sand was hot to his dry boots before he
came back into the open space about the great banyan and the tents. And
Kepple, refreshed by a night's rest and coffee, was wondering loudly
where the devil he had gone. THE STORY




CHAPTER THE FIRST ~~ THE BOY GROWS UP



1


Benham was the son of a schoolmaster. His father was assistant first at
Cheltenham, and subsequently at Minchinghampton, and then he became
head and later on sole proprietor of Martindale House, a high-class
preparatory school at Seagate. He was extremely successful for some
years, as success goes in the scholastic profession, and then disaster
overtook him in the shape of a divorce. His wife, William Porphyry's
mother, made the acquaintance of a rich young man named Nolan, who was
recuperating at Seagate from the sequelae of snake-bite, malaria, and a
gun accident in Brazil. She ran away with him, and she was divorced. She was, however, unable to marry him because he died at Wiesbaden
only three days after the Reverend Harold Benham obtained his decree
absolute. Instead, therefore, being a woman of great spirit, enterprise
and sweetness, she married Godfrey Marayne, afterwards Sir Godfrey
Marayne, the great London surgeon. Nolan was a dark, rather melancholy and sentimental young man, and he
left about a third of his very large fortune entirely to Mrs. Benham
and the rest to her in trust for her son, whom he deemed himself to have
injured. With this and a husband already distinguished, she returned
presently to London, and was on the whole fairly well received there. It was upon the reverend gentleman at Seagate that the brunt of this
divorce fell. There is perhaps a certain injustice in the fact that a
schoolmaster who has lost his wife should also lose the more valuable
proportion of his pupils, but the tone of thought in England is against
any association of a schoolmaster with matrimonial irregularity. And
also Mr. Benham remarried. It would certainly have been better for him
if he could have produced a sister. His school declined and his efforts
to resuscitate it only hastened its decay. Conceiving that he could now
only appeal to the broader-minded, more progressive type of parent,
he became an educational reformer, and wrote upon modernizing the
curriculum with increasing frequency to the TIMES. He expended a
considerable fraction of his dwindling capital upon a science laboratory
and a fives court; he added a London Bachelor of Science with a Teaching
Diploma to the school staff, and a library of about a thousand volumes,
including the Hundred Best Books as selected by the late Lord Avebury,
to the school equipment.