It's certain I'll
never be angelically good. Mrs. Spencer says--oh, Mr. Cuthbert! Oh, Mr. Cuthbert!! Oh, Mr. Cuthbert!!!" That was not what Mrs. Spencer had said; neither had the child tumbled
out of the buggy nor had Matthew done anything astonishing. They had
simply rounded a curve in the road and found themselves in the "Avenue." The "Avenue," so called by the Newbridge people, was a stretch of road
four or five hundred yards long, completely arched over with huge,
wide-spreading apple-trees, planted years ago by an eccentric old
farmer. Overhead was one long canopy of snowy fragrant bloom. Below the
boughs the air was full of a purple twilight and far ahead a glimpse
of painted sunset sky shone like a great rose window at the end of a
cathedral aisle. Its beauty seemed to strike the child dumb. She leaned back in the
buggy, her thin hands clasped before her, her face lifted rapturously to
the white splendor above. Even when they had passed out and were driving
down the long slope to Newbridge she never moved or spoke. Still with
rapt face she gazed afar into the sunset west, with eyes that saw
visions trooping splendidly across that glowing background. Through
Newbridge, a bustling little village where dogs barked at them and small
boys hooted and curious faces peered from the windows, they drove, still
in silence. When three more miles had dropped away behind them the child
had not spoken. She could keep silence, it was evident, as energetically
as she could talk. "I guess you're feeling pretty tired and hungry," Matthew ventured to
say at last, accounting for her long visitation of dumbness with the
only reason he could think of. "But we haven't very far to go now--only
another mile." She came out of her reverie with a deep sigh and looked at him with the
dreamy gaze of a soul that had been wondering afar, star-led. "Oh, Mr. Cuthbert," she whispered, "that place we came through--that
white place--what was it?" "Well now, you must mean the Avenue," said Matthew after a few moments'
profound reflection. "It is a kind of pretty place." "Pretty? Oh, PRETTY doesn't seem the right word to use. Nor beautiful,
either. They don't go far enough. Oh, it was wonderful--wonderful. It's the first thing I ever saw that couldn't be improved upon by
imagination. It just satisfies me here"--she put one hand on her
breast--"it made a queer funny ache and yet it was a pleasant ache. Did
you ever have an ache like that, Mr. Cuthbert?" "Well now, I just can't recollect that I ever had." "I have it lots of time--whenever I see anything royally beautiful. But
they shouldn't call that lovely place the Avenue. There is no meaning
in a name like that. They should call it--let me see--the White Way of
Delight. Isn't that a nice imaginative name? When I don't like the name
of a place or a person I always imagine a new one and always think of
them so. There was a girl at the asylum whose name was Hepzibah Jenkins,
but I always imagined her as Rosalia DeVere. Other people may call that
place the Avenue, but I shall always call it the White Way of Delight. Have we really only another mile to go before we get home? I'm glad and
I'm sorry. I'm sorry because this drive has been so pleasant and I'm
always sorry when pleasant things end. Something still pleasanter may
come after, but you can never be sure. And it's so often the case that
it isn't pleasanter. That has been my experience anyhow. But I'm glad to
think of getting home. You see, I've never had a real home since I can
remember. It gives me that pleasant ache again just to think of coming
to a really truly home. Oh, isn't that pretty!" They had driven over the crest of a hill. Below them was a pond, looking
almost like a river so long and winding was it. A bridge spanned it
midway and from there to its lower end, where an amber-hued belt of
sand-hills shut it in from the dark blue gulf beyond, the water was a
glory of many shifting hues--the most spiritual shadings of crocus and
rose and ethereal green, with other elusive tintings for which no name
has ever been found. Above the bridge the pond ran up into fringing
groves of fir and maple and lay all darkly translucent in their wavering
shadows. Here and there a wild plum leaned out from the bank like a
white-clad girl tip-toeing to her own reflection. From the marsh at the
head of the pond came the clear, mournfully-sweet chorus of the frogs. There was a little gray house peering around a white apple orchard on
a slope beyond and, although it was not yet quite dark, a light was
shining from one of its windows. "That's Barry's pond," said Matthew. "Oh, I don't like that name, either. I shall call it--let me see--the
Lake of Shining Waters. Yes, that is the right name for it. I know
because of the thrill. When I hit on a name that suits exactly it gives
me a thrill. Do things ever give you a thrill?" Matthew ruminated. "Well now, yes. It always kind of gives me a thrill to see them ugly
white grubs that spade up in the cucumber beds. I hate the look of
them." "Oh, I don't think that can be exactly the same kind of a thrill. Do you
think it can? There doesn't seem to be much connection between grubs
and lakes of shining waters, does there? But why do other people call it
Barry's pond?" "I reckon because Mr. Barry lives up there in that house. Orchard
Slope's the name of his place. If it wasn't for that big bush behind it
you could see Green Gables from here. But we have to go over the bridge
and round by the road, so it's near half a mile further." "Has Mr. Barry any little girls? Well, not so very little either--about
my size." "He's got one about eleven. Her name is Diana." "Oh!" with a long indrawing of breath. "What a perfectly lovely name!" "Well now, I dunno. There's something dreadful heathenish about it,
seems to me. I'd ruther Jane or Mary or some sensible name like that. But when Diana was born there was a schoolmaster boarding there and they
gave him the naming of her and he called her Diana." "I wish there had been a schoolmaster like that around when I was born,
then. Oh, here we are at the bridge. I'm going to shut my eyes tight. I'm always afraid going over bridges. I can't help imagining that
perhaps just as we get to the middle, they'll crumple up like a
jack-knife and nip us. So I shut my eyes. But I always have to open them
for all when I think we're getting near the middle. Because, you see,
if the bridge DID crumple up I'd want to SEE it crumple. What a jolly
rumble it makes! I always like the rumble part of it. Isn't it splendid
there are so many things to like in this world? There we're over. Now
I'll look back. Good night, dear Lake of Shining Waters. I always say
good night to the things I love, just as I would to people. I think they
like it. That water looks as if it was smiling at me." When they had driven up the further hill and around a corner Matthew
said:

"We're pretty near home now. That's Green Gables over--"

"Oh, don't tell me," she interrupted breathlessly, catching at his
partially raised arm and shutting her eyes that she might not see his
gesture. "Let me guess. I'm sure I'll guess right." She opened her eyes and looked about her. They were on the crest of a
hill. The sun had set some time since, but the landscape was still
clear in the mellow afterlight. To the west a dark church spire rose
up against a marigold sky. Below was a little valley and beyond a long,
gently-rising slope with snug farmsteads scattered along it. From one
to another the child's eyes darted, eager and wistful. At last they
lingered on one away to the left, far back from the road, dimly white
with blossoming trees in the twilight of the surrounding woods. Over it,
in the stainless southwest sky, a great crystal-white star was shining
like a lamp of guidance and promise. "That's it, isn't it?" she said, pointing. Matthew slapped the reins on the sorrel's back delightedly. "Well now, you've guessed it! But I reckon Mrs. Spencer described it
so's you could tell." "No, she didn't--really she didn't. All she said might just as well have
been about most of those other places. I hadn't any real idea what it
looked like. But just as soon as I saw it I felt it was home. Oh, it
seems as if I must be in a dream. Do you know, my arm must be black and
blue from the elbow up, for I've pinched myself so many times today. Every little while a horrible sickening feeling would come over me and
I'd be so afraid it was all a dream. Then I'd pinch myself to see if it
was real--until suddenly I remembered that even supposing it was only
a dream I'd better go on dreaming as long as I could; so I stopped
pinching. But it IS real and we're nearly home." With a sigh of rapture she relapsed into silence. Matthew stirred
uneasily. He felt glad that it would be Marilla and not he who would
have to tell this waif of the world that the home she longed for was
not to be hers after all. They drove over Lynde's Hollow, where it was
already quite dark, but not so dark that Mrs. Rachel could not see them
from her window vantage, and up the hill and into the long lane of Green
Gables. By the time they arrived at the house Matthew was shrinking from
the approaching revelation with an energy he did not understand. It was
not of Marilla or himself he was thinking of the trouble this mistake
was probably going to make for them, but of the child's disappointment. When he thought of that rapt light being quenched in her eyes he had
an uncomfortable feeling that he was going to assist at murdering
something--much the same feeling that came over him when he had to kill
a lamb or calf or any other innocent little creature. The yard was quite dark as they turned into it and the poplar leaves
were rustling silkily all round it. "Listen to the trees talking in their sleep," she whispered, as he
lifted her to the ground. "What nice dreams they must have!" Then, holding tightly to the carpet-bag which contained "all her worldly
goods," she followed him into the house. CHAPTER III. Marilla Cuthbert is Surprised


Marilla came briskly forward as Matthew opened the door. But when her
eyes fell of the odd little figure in the stiff, ugly dress, with the
long braids of red hair and the eager, luminous eyes, she stopped short
in amazement. "Matthew Cuthbert, who's that?" she ejaculated. "Where is the boy?" "There wasn't any boy," said Matthew wretchedly. "There was only HER." He nodded at the child, remembering that he had never even asked her
name. "No boy! But there MUST have been a boy," insisted Marilla. "We sent
word to Mrs. Spencer to bring a boy." "Well, she didn't. She brought HER. I asked the station-master. And I
had to bring her home. She couldn't be left there, no matter where the
mistake had come in." "Well, this is a pretty piece of business!" ejaculated Marilla. During this dialogue the child had remained silent, her eyes roving from
one to the other, all the animation fading out of her face. Suddenly
she seemed to grasp the full meaning of what had been said. Dropping her
precious carpet-bag she sprang forward a step and clasped her hands. "You don't want me!" she cried. "You don't want me because I'm not a
boy! I might have expected it. Nobody ever did want me. I might have
known it was all too beautiful to last. I might have known nobody really
did want me. Oh, what shall I do? I'm going to burst into tears!" Burst into tears she did. Sitting down on a chair by the table, flinging
her arms out upon it, and burying her face in them, she proceeded to cry
stormily. Marilla and Matthew looked at each other deprecatingly across
the stove. Neither of them knew what to say or do. Finally Marilla
stepped lamely into the breach. "Well, well, there's no need to cry so about it." "Yes, there IS need!" The child raised her head quickly, revealing a
tear-stained face and trembling lips. "YOU would cry, too, if you were
an orphan and had come to a place you thought was going to be home and
found that they didn't want you because you weren't a boy. Oh, this is
the most TRAGICAL thing that ever happened to me!" Something like a reluctant smile, rather rusty from long disuse,
mellowed Marilla's grim expression. "Well, don't cry any more. We're not going to turn you out-of-doors
to-night. You'll have to stay here until we investigate this affair. What's your name?" The child hesitated for a moment. "Will you please call me Cordelia?" she said eagerly. "CALL you Cordelia? Is that your name?" "No-o-o, it's not exactly my name, but I would love to be called
Cordelia. It's such a perfectly elegant name." "I don't know what on earth you mean. If Cordelia isn't your name, what
is?" "Anne Shirley," reluctantly faltered forth the owner of that name, "but,
oh, please do call me Cordelia. It can't matter much to you what you
call me if I'm only going to be here a little while, can it? And Anne is
such an unromantic name." "Unromantic fiddlesticks!" said the unsympathetic Marilla. "Anne is a
real good plain sensible name. You've no need to be ashamed of it." "Oh, I'm not ashamed of it," explained Anne, "only I like Cordelia
better. I've always imagined that my name was Cordelia--at least, I
always have of late years. When I was young I used to imagine it was
Geraldine, but I like Cordelia better now. But if you call me Anne
please call me Anne spelled with an E."

"What difference does it make how it's spelled?" asked Marilla with
another rusty smile as she picked up the teapot. "Oh, it makes SUCH a difference. It LOOKS so much nicer. When you hear a
name pronounced can't you always see it in your mind, just as if it was
printed out? I can; and A-n-n looks dreadful, but A-n-n-e looks so much
more distinguished. If you'll only call me Anne spelled with an E I
shall try to reconcile myself to not being called Cordelia." "Very well, then, Anne spelled with an E, can you tell us how this
mistake came to be made? We sent word to Mrs. Spencer to bring us a boy. Were there no boys at the asylum?" "Oh, yes, there was an abundance of them. But Mrs. Spencer said
DISTINCTLY that you wanted a girl about eleven years old. And the matron
said she thought I would do. You don't know how delighted I was. I
couldn't sleep all last night for joy. Oh," she added reproachfully,
turning to Matthew, "why didn't you tell me at the station that you
didn't want me and leave me there? If I hadn't seen the White Way of
Delight and the Lake of Shining Waters it wouldn't be so hard." "What on earth does she mean?" demanded Marilla, staring at Matthew. "She--she's just referring to some conversation we had on the road,"
said Matthew hastily. "I'm going out to put the mare in, Marilla. Have
tea ready when I come back." "Did Mrs. Spencer bring anybody over besides you?" continued Marilla
when Matthew had gone out. "She brought Lily Jones for herself. Lily is only five years old and she
is very beautiful and had nut-brown hair. If I was very beautiful and
had nut-brown hair would you keep me?" "No. We want a boy to help Matthew on the farm. A girl would be of
no use to us. Take off your hat. I'll lay it and your bag on the hall
table." Anne took off her hat meekly. Matthew came back presently and they sat
down to supper. But Anne could not eat. In vain she nibbled at the
bread and butter and pecked at the crab-apple preserve out of the little
scalloped glass dish by her plate. She did not really make any headway
at all. "You're not eating anything," said Marilla sharply, eying her as if it
were a serious shortcoming. Anne sighed. "I can't. I'm in the depths of despair. Can you eat when you are in the
depths of despair?" "I've never been in the depths of despair, so I can't say," responded
Marilla. "Weren't you? Well, did you ever try to IMAGINE you were in the depths
of despair?" "No, I didn't." "Then I don't think you can understand what it's like. It's very
uncomfortable feeling indeed. When you try to eat a lump comes right
up in your throat and you can't swallow anything, not even if it was a
chocolate caramel. I had one chocolate caramel once two years ago and it
was simply delicious. I've often dreamed since then that I had a lot
of chocolate caramels, but I always wake up just when I'm going to eat
them. I do hope you won't be offended because I can't eat. Everything is
extremely nice, but still I cannot eat." "I guess she's tired," said Matthew, who hadn't spoken since his return
from the barn. "Best put her to bed, Marilla." Marilla had been wondering where Anne should be put to bed. She had
prepared a couch in the kitchen chamber for the desired and expected
boy. But, although it was neat and clean, it did not seem quite the
thing to put a girl there somehow. But the spare room was out of the
question for such a stray waif, so there remained only the east gable
room. Marilla lighted a candle and told Anne to follow her, which Anne
spiritlessly did, taking her hat and carpet-bag from the hall table as
she passed. The hall was fearsomely clean; the little gable chamber in
which she presently found herself seemed still cleaner. Marilla set the candle on a three-legged, three-cornered table and
turned down the bedclothes. "I suppose you have a nightgown?" she questioned. Anne nodded. "Yes, I have two. The matron of the asylum made them for me. They're
fearfully skimpy. There is never enough to go around in an asylum, so
things are always skimpy--at least in a poor asylum like ours. I hate
skimpy night-dresses. But one can dream just as well in them as
in lovely trailing ones, with frills around the neck, that's one
consolation." "Well, undress as quick as you can and go to bed. I'll come back in a
few minutes for the candle. I daren't trust you to put it out yourself. You'd likely set the place on fire." When Marilla had gone Anne looked around her wistfully. The whitewashed
walls were so painfully bare and staring that she thought they must ache
over their own bareness. The floor was bare, too, except for a round
braided mat in the middle such as Anne had never seen before. In
one corner was the bed, a high, old-fashioned one, with four dark,
low-turned posts. In the other corner was the aforesaid three-corner
table adorned with a fat, red velvet pin-cushion hard enough to turn the
point of the most adventurous pin. Above it hung a little six-by-eight
mirror. Midway between table and bed was the window, with an icy white
muslin frill over it, and opposite it was the wash-stand. The whole
apartment was of a rigidity not to be described in words, but which
sent a shiver to the very marrow of Anne's bones. With a sob she hastily
discarded her garments, put on the skimpy nightgown and sprang into bed
where she burrowed face downward into the pillow and pulled the clothes
over her head. When Marilla came up for the light various skimpy
articles of raiment scattered most untidily over the floor and a certain
tempestuous appearance of the bed were the only indications of any
presence save her own. She deliberately picked up Anne's clothes, placed them neatly on a prim
yellow chair, and then, taking up the candle, went over to the bed. "Good night," she said, a little awkwardly, but not unkindly. Anne's white face and big eyes appeared over the bedclothes with a
startling suddenness. "How can you call it a GOOD night when you know it must be the very
worst night I've ever had?" she said reproachfully. Then she dived down into invisibility again. Marilla went slowly down to the kitchen and proceeded to wash the supper
dishes. Matthew was smoking--a sure sign of perturbation of mind. He
seldom smoked, for Marilla set her face against it as a filthy habit;
but at certain times and seasons he felt driven to it and them Marilla
winked at the practice, realizing that a mere man must have some vent
for his emotions. "Well, this is a pretty kettle of fish," she said wrathfully. "This is
what comes of sending word instead of going ourselves. Richard Spencer's
folks have twisted that message somehow. One of us will have to drive
over and see Mrs. Spencer tomorrow, that's certain. This girl will have
to be sent back to the asylum." "Yes, I suppose so," said Matthew reluctantly. "You SUPPOSE so! Don't you know it?" "Well now, she's a real nice little thing, Marilla. It's kind of a pity
to send her back when she's so set on staying here." "Matthew Cuthbert, you don't mean to say you think we ought to keep
her!" Marilla's astonishment could not have been greater if Matthew had
expressed a predilection for standing on his head. "Well, now, no, I suppose not--not exactly," stammered Matthew,
uncomfortably driven into a corner for his precise meaning. "I
suppose--we could hardly be expected to keep her." "I should say not. What good would she be to us?" "We might be some good to her," said Matthew suddenly and unexpectedly. "Matthew Cuthbert, I believe that child has bewitched you! I can see as
plain as plain that you want to keep her." "Well now, she's a real interesting little thing," persisted Matthew. "You should have heard her talk coming from the station." "Oh, she can talk fast enough. I saw that at once. It's nothing in her
favour, either. I don't like children who have so much to say. I don't
want an orphan girl and if I did she isn't the style I'd pick out. There's something I don't understand about her. No, she's got to be
despatched straight-way back to where she came from." "I could hire a French boy to help me," said Matthew, "and she'd be
company for you." "I'm not suffering for company," said Marilla shortly. "And I'm not
going to keep her." "Well now, it's just as you say, of course, Marilla," said Matthew
rising and putting his pipe away. "I'm going to bed." To bed went Matthew. And to bed, when she had put her dishes away, went
Marilla, frowning most resolutely. And up-stairs, in the east gable, a
lonely, heart-hungry, friendless child cried herself to sleep. CHAPTER IV. Morning at Green Gables


It was broad daylight when Anne awoke and sat up in bed, staring
confusedly at the window through which a flood of cheery sunshine was
pouring and outside of which something white and feathery waved across
glimpses of blue sky. For a moment she could not remember where she was. First came a
delightful thrill, as something very pleasant; then a horrible
remembrance.