Take this chair, Marilla; it's easier
than the one you've got; I just keep that for the hired boy to sit
on. Yes, she certainly is an odd child, but there is something kind of
taking about her after all. I don't feel so surprised at you and Matthew
keeping her as I did--nor so sorry for you, either. She may turn out all
right. Of course, she has a queer way of expressing herself--a little
too--well, too kind of forcible, you know; but she'll likely get over
that now that she's come to live among civilized folks. And then, her
temper's pretty quick, I guess; but there's one comfort, a child that
has a quick temper, just blaze up and cool down, ain't never likely to
be sly or deceitful. Preserve me from a sly child, that's what. On the
whole, Marilla, I kind of like her." When Marilla went home Anne came out of the fragrant twilight of the
orchard with a sheaf of white narcissi in her hands. "I apologized pretty well, didn't I?" she said proudly as they went
down the lane. "I thought since I had to do it I might as well do it
thoroughly." "You did it thoroughly, all right enough," was Marilla's comment. Marilla was dismayed at finding herself inclined to laugh over the
recollection. She had also an uneasy feeling that she ought to scold
Anne for apologizing so well; but then, that was ridiculous! She
compromised with her conscience by saying severely:

"I hope you won't have occasion to make many more such apologies. I hope
you'll try to control your temper now, Anne." "That wouldn't be so hard if people wouldn't twit me about my looks,"
said Anne with a sigh. "I don't get cross about other things; but I'm
SO tired of being twitted about my hair and it just makes me boil right
over. Do you suppose my hair will really be a handsome auburn when I
grow up?" "You shouldn't think so much about your looks, Anne. I'm afraid you are
a very vain little girl." "How can I be vain when I know I'm homely?" protested Anne. "I love
pretty things; and I hate to look in the glass and see something that
isn't pretty. It makes me feel so sorrowful--just as I feel when I look
at any ugly thing. I pity it because it isn't beautiful." "Handsome is as handsome does," quoted Marilla. "I've had that said
to me before, but I have my doubts about it," remarked skeptical Anne,
sniffing at her narcissi. "Oh, aren't these flowers sweet! It was lovely
of Mrs. Lynde to give them to me. I have no hard feelings against Mrs.
Lynde now. It gives you a lovely, comfortable feeling to apologize and
be forgiven, doesn't it? Aren't the stars bright tonight? If you could
live in a star, which one would you pick? I'd like that lovely clear big
one away over there above that dark hill." "Anne, do hold your tongue," said Marilla, thoroughly worn out trying to
follow the gyrations of Anne's thoughts. Anne said no more until they turned into their own lane. A little gypsy
wind came down it to meet them, laden with the spicy perfume of young
dew-wet ferns. Far up in the shadows a cheerful light gleamed out
through the trees from the kitchen at Green Gables. Anne suddenly came
close to Marilla and slipped her hand into the older woman's hard palm. "It's lovely to be going home and know it's home," she said. "I love
Green Gables already, and I never loved any place before. No place ever
seemed like home. Oh, Marilla, I'm so happy. I could pray right now and
not find it a bit hard." Something warm and pleasant welled up in Marilla's heart at touch of
that thin little hand in her own--a throb of the maternity she had
missed, perhaps. Its very unaccustomedness and sweetness disturbed
her. She hastened to restore her sensations to their normal calm by
inculcating a moral. "If you'll be a good girl you'll always be happy, Anne. And you should
never find it hard to say your prayers." "Saying one's prayers isn't exactly the same thing as praying," said
Anne meditatively. "But I'm going to imagine that I'm the wind that is
blowing up there in those tree tops. When I get tired of the trees I'll
imagine I'm gently waving down here in the ferns--and then I'll fly over
to Mrs. Lynde's garden and set the flowers dancing--and then I'll go
with one great swoop over the clover field--and then I'll blow over the
Lake of Shining Waters and ripple it all up into little sparkling waves. Oh, there's so much scope for imagination in a wind! So I'll not talk
any more just now, Marilla." "Thanks be to goodness for that," breathed Marilla in devout relief. CHAPTER XI. Anne's Impressions of Sunday-School


"Well, how do you like them?" said Marilla. Anne was standing in the gable room, looking solemnly at three new
dresses spread out on the bed. One was of snuffy colored gingham which
Marilla had been tempted to buy from a peddler the preceding summer
because it looked so serviceable; one was of black-and-white checkered
sateen which she had picked up at a bargain counter in the winter; and
one was a stiff print of an ugly blue shade which she had purchased that
week at a Carmody store. She had made them up herself, and they were all made alike--plain skirts
fulled tightly to plain waists, with sleeves as plain as waist and skirt
and tight as sleeves could be. "I'll imagine that I like them," said Anne soberly. "I don't want you to imagine it," said Marilla, offended. "Oh, I can see
you don't like the dresses! What is the matter with them? Aren't they
neat and clean and new?" "Yes." "Then why don't you like them?" "They're--they're not--pretty," said Anne reluctantly. "Pretty!" Marilla sniffed. "I didn't trouble my head about getting
pretty dresses for you. I don't believe in pampering vanity, Anne, I'll
tell you that right off. Those dresses are good, sensible, serviceable
dresses, without any frills or furbelows about them, and they're all
you'll get this summer. The brown gingham and the blue print will do
you for school when you begin to go. The sateen is for church and Sunday
school. I'll expect you to keep them neat and clean and not to tear
them. I should think you'd be grateful to get most anything after those
skimpy wincey things you've been wearing." "Oh, I AM grateful," protested Anne. "But I'd be ever so much
gratefuller if--if you'd made just one of them with puffed sleeves. Puffed sleeves are so fashionable now. It would give me such a thrill,
Marilla, just to wear a dress with puffed sleeves." "Well, you'll have to do without your thrill. I hadn't any material
to waste on puffed sleeves. I think they are ridiculous-looking things
anyhow. I prefer the plain, sensible ones." "But I'd rather look ridiculous when everybody else does than plain and
sensible all by myself," persisted Anne mournfully. "Trust you for that! Well, hang those dresses carefully up in your
closet, and then sit down and learn the Sunday school lesson. I got
a quarterly from Mr. Bell for you and you'll go to Sunday school
tomorrow," said Marilla, disappearing downstairs in high dudgeon. Anne clasped her hands and looked at the dresses. "I did hope there would be a white one with puffed sleeves," she
whispered disconsolately. "I prayed for one, but I didn't much expect it
on that account. I didn't suppose God would have time to bother about
a little orphan girl's dress. I knew I'd just have to depend on
Marilla for it. Well, fortunately I can imagine that one of them is of
snow-white muslin with lovely lace frills and three-puffed sleeves." The next morning warnings of a sick headache prevented Marilla from
going to Sunday-school with Anne. "You'll have to go down and call for Mrs. Lynde, Anne," she said. "She'll see that you get into the right class. Now, mind you behave
yourself properly. Stay to preaching afterwards and ask Mrs. Lynde to
show you our pew. Here's a cent for collection. Don't stare at people
and don't fidget. I shall expect you to tell me the text when you come
home." Anne started off irreproachable, arrayed in the stiff black-and-white
sateen, which, while decent as regards length and certainly not open to
the charge of skimpiness, contrived to emphasize every corner and angle
of her thin figure. Her hat was a little, flat, glossy, new sailor, the
extreme plainness of which had likewise much disappointed Anne, who
had permitted herself secret visions of ribbon and flowers. The latter,
however, were supplied before Anne reached the main road, for being
confronted halfway down the lane with a golden frenzy of wind-stirred
buttercups and a glory of wild roses, Anne promptly and liberally
garlanded her hat with a heavy wreath of them. Whatever other people
might have thought of the result it satisfied Anne, and she tripped
gaily down the road, holding her ruddy head with its decoration of pink
and yellow very proudly. When she had reached Mrs. Lynde's house she found that lady gone. Nothing daunted, Anne proceeded onward to the church alone. In the porch
she found a crowd of little girls, all more or less gaily attired in
whites and blues and pinks, and all staring with curious eyes at this
stranger in their midst, with her extraordinary head adornment. Avonlea
little girls had already heard queer stories about Anne. Mrs. Lynde said
she had an awful temper; Jerry Buote, the hired boy at Green Gables,
said she talked all the time to herself or to the trees and flowers
like a crazy girl. They looked at her and whispered to each other behind
their quarterlies. Nobody made any friendly advances, then or later
on when the opening exercises were over and Anne found herself in Miss
Rogerson's class. Miss Rogerson was a middle-aged lady who had taught a Sunday-school
class for twenty years. Her method of teaching was to ask the printed
questions from the quarterly and look sternly over its edge at the
particular little girl she thought ought to answer the question. She
looked very often at Anne, and Anne, thanks to Marilla's drilling,
answered promptly; but it may be questioned if she understood very much
about either question or answer. She did not think she liked Miss Rogerson, and she felt very miserable;
every other little girl in the class had puffed sleeves. Anne felt that
life was really not worth living without puffed sleeves. "Well, how did you like Sunday school?" Marilla wanted to know when Anne
came home. Her wreath having faded, Anne had discarded it in the lane,
so Marilla was spared the knowledge of that for a time. "I didn't like it a bit. It was horrid." "Anne Shirley!" said Marilla rebukingly. Anne sat down on the rocker with a long sigh, kissed one of Bonny's
leaves, and waved her hand to a blossoming fuchsia. "They might have been lonesome while I was away," she explained. "And
now about the Sunday school. I behaved well, just as you told me. Mrs.
Lynde was gone, but I went right on myself. I went into the church, with
a lot of other little girls, and I sat in the corner of a pew by the
window while the opening exercises went on. Mr. Bell made an awfully
long prayer. I would have been dreadfully tired before he got through
if I hadn't been sitting by that window. But it looked right out on the
Lake of Shining Waters, so I just gazed at that and imagined all sorts
of splendid things." "You shouldn't have done anything of the sort. You should have listened
to Mr. Bell." "But he wasn't talking to me," protested Anne. "He was talking to God
and he didn't seem to be very much inter-ested in it, either. I think
he thought God was too far off though. There was a long row of white
birches hanging over the lake and the sunshine fell down through
them, 'way, 'way down, deep into the water. Oh, Marilla, it was like a
beautiful dream! It gave me a thrill and I just said, 'Thank you for it,
God,' two or three times." "Not out loud, I hope," said Marilla anxiously. "Oh, no, just under my breath. Well, Mr. Bell did get through at last
and they told me to go into the classroom with Miss Rogerson's class. There were nine other girls in it. They all had puffed sleeves. I tried
to imagine mine were puffed, too, but I couldn't. Why couldn't I? It was
as easy as could be to imagine they were puffed when I was alone in
the east gable, but it was awfully hard there among the others who had
really truly puffs." "You shouldn't have been thinking about your sleeves in Sunday school. You should have been attending to the lesson. I hope you knew it." "Oh, yes; and I answered a lot of questions. Miss Rogerson asked ever so
many. I don't think it was fair for her to do all the asking. There were
lots I wanted to ask her, but I didn't like to because I didn't think
she was a kindred spirit. Then all the other little girls recited a
paraphrase. She asked me if I knew any. I told her I didn't, but I could
recite, 'The Dog at His Master's Grave' if she liked. That's in the
Third Royal Reader. It isn't a really truly religious piece of poetry,
but it's so sad and melancholy that it might as well be. She said it
wouldn't do and she told me to learn the nineteenth paraphrase for next
Sunday. I read it over in church afterwards and it's splendid. There are
two lines in particular that just thrill me. "'Quick as the slaughtered squadrons fell
   In Midian's evil day.' "I don't know what 'squadrons' means nor 'Midian,' either, but it sounds
SO tragical. I can hardly wait until next Sunday to recite it. I'll practice it all the week. After Sunday school I asked Miss
Rogerson--because Mrs. Lynde was too far away--to show me your pew. I sat just as still as I could and the text was Revelations, third
chapter, second and third verses. It was a very long text. If I was a
minister I'd pick the short, snappy ones. The sermon was awfully long,
too. I suppose the minister had to match it to the text. I didn't think
he was a bit interesting. The trouble with him seems to be that he
hasn't enough imagination. I didn't listen to him very much. I just let
my thoughts run and I thought of the most surprising things." Marilla felt helplessly that all this should be sternly reproved, but
she was hampered by the undeniable fact that some of the things Anne had
said, especially about the minister's sermons and Mr. Bell's prayers,
were what she herself had really thought deep down in her heart for
years, but had never given expression to. It almost seemed to her that
those secret, unuttered, critical thoughts had suddenly taken visible
and accusing shape and form in the person of this outspoken morsel of
neglected humanity. CHAPTER XII. A Solemn Vow and Promise


It was not until the next Friday that Marilla heard the story of the
flower-wreathed hat. She came home from Mrs. Lynde's and called Anne to
account. "Anne, Mrs. Rachel says you went to church last Sunday with your hat
rigged out ridiculous with roses and buttercups. What on earth put you
up to such a caper? A pretty-looking object you must have been!" "Oh. I know pink and yellow aren't becoming to me," began Anne. "Becoming fiddlesticks! It was putting flowers on your hat at all,
no matter what color they were, that was ridiculous. You are the most
aggravating child!" "I don't see why it's any more ridiculous to wear flowers on your hat
than on your dress," protested Anne. "Lots of little girls there had
bouquets pinned on their dresses. What's the difference?" Marilla was not to be drawn from the safe concrete into dubious paths of
the abstract. "Don't answer me back like that, Anne. It was very silly of you to do
such a thing. Never let me catch you at such a trick again. Mrs. Rachel
says she thought she would sink through the floor when she saw you come
in all rigged out like that. She couldn't get near enough to tell you
to take them off till it was too late. She says people talked about it
something dreadful. Of course they would think I had no better sense
than to let you go decked out like that." "Oh, I'm so sorry," said Anne, tears welling into her eyes. "I never
thought you'd mind. The roses and buttercups were so sweet and pretty
I thought they'd look lovely on my hat. Lots of the little girls had
artificial flowers on their hats. I'm afraid I'm going to be a dreadful
trial to you. Maybe you'd better send me back to the asylum. That would
be terrible; I don't think I could endure it; most likely I would go
into consumption; I'm so thin as it is, you see. But that would be
better than being a trial to you." "Nonsense," said Marilla, vexed at herself for having made the child
cry. "I don't want to send you back to the asylum, I'm sure. All I want
is that you should behave like other little girls and not make yourself
ridiculous. Don't cry any more. I've got some news for you. Diana Barry
came home this afternoon. I'm going up to see if I can borrow a skirt
pattern from Mrs. Barry, and if you like you can come with me and get
acquainted with Diana." Anne rose to her feet, with clasped hands, the tears still glistening on
her cheeks; the dish towel she had been hemming slipped unheeded to the
floor. "Oh, Marilla, I'm frightened--now that it has come I'm actually
frightened. What if she shouldn't like me! It would be the most tragical
disappointment of my life." "Now, don't get into a fluster. And I do wish you wouldn't use such long
words. It sounds so funny in a little girl. I guess Diana'll like you
well enough. It's her mother you've got to reckon with. If she doesn't
like you it won't matter how much Diana does. If she has heard about
your outburst to Mrs. Lynde and going to church with buttercups round
your hat I don't know what she'll think of you. You must be polite and
well behaved, and don't make any of your startling speeches. For pity's
sake, if the child isn't actually trembling!" Anne WAS trembling. Her face was pale and tense. "Oh, Marilla, you'd be excited, too, if you were going to meet a little
girl you hoped to be your bosom friend and whose mother mightn't like
you," she said as she hastened to get her hat. They went over to Orchard Slope by the short cut across the brook and up
the firry hill grove. Mrs. Barry came to the kitchen door in answer to
Marilla's knock. She was a tall black-eyed, black-haired woman, with a
very resolute mouth. She had the reputation of being very strict with
her children. "How do you do, Marilla?" she said cordially. "Come in. And this is the
little girl you have adopted, I suppose?" "Yes, this is Anne Shirley," said Marilla. "Spelled with an E," gasped Anne, who, tremulous and excited as she was,
was determined there should be no misunderstanding on that important
point. Mrs. Barry, not hearing or not comprehending, merely shook hands and
said kindly:

"How are you?" "I am well in body although considerable rumpled up in spirit, thank you
ma'am," said Anne gravely. Then aside to Marilla in an audible whisper,
"There wasn't anything startling in that, was there, Marilla?" Diana was sitting on the sofa, reading a book which she dropped when the
callers entered. She was a very pretty little girl, with her mother's
black eyes and hair, and rosy cheeks, and the merry expression which was
her inheritance from her father. "This is my little girl Diana," said Mrs. Barry. "Diana, you might take
Anne out into the garden and show her your flowers. It will be better
for you than straining your eyes over that book. She reads entirely
too much--" this to Marilla as the little girls went out--"and I can't
prevent her, for her father aids and abets her. She's always poring over
a book. I'm glad she has the prospect of a playmate--perhaps it will
take her more out-of-doors." Outside in the garden, which was full of mellow sunset light streaming
through the dark old firs to the west of it, stood Anne and Diana,
gazing bashfully at each other over a clump of gorgeous tiger lilies. The Barry garden was a bowery wilderness of flowers which would have
delighted Anne's heart at any time less fraught with destiny. It was
encircled by huge old willows and tall firs, beneath which flourished
flowers that loved the shade. Prim, right-angled paths neatly bordered
with clamshells, intersected it like moist red ribbons and in the beds
between old-fashioned flowers ran riot. There were rosy bleeding-hearts
and great splendid crimson peonies; white, fragrant narcissi and thorny,
sweet Scotch roses; pink and blue and white columbines and lilac-tinted
Bouncing Bets; clumps of southernwood and ribbon grass and mint; purple
Adam-and-Eve, daffodils, and masses of sweet clover white with its
delicate, fragrant, feathery sprays; scarlet lightning that shot
its fiery lances over prim white musk-flowers; a garden it was where
sunshine lingered and bees hummed, and winds, beguiled into loitering,
purred and rustled. "Oh, Diana," said Anne at last, clasping her hands and speaking almost
in a whisper, "oh, do you think you can like me a little--enough to be
my bosom friend?" Diana laughed. Diana always laughed before she spoke. "Why, I guess so," she said frankly. "I'm awfully glad you've come to
live at Green Gables. It will be jolly to have somebody to play with. There isn't any other girl who lives near enough to play with, and I've
no sisters big enough." "Will you swear to be my friend forever and ever?" demanded Anne
eagerly. Diana looked shocked. "Why it's dreadfully wicked to swear," she said rebukingly. "Oh no, not my kind of swearing. There are two kinds, you know." "I never heard of but one kind," said Diana doubtfully. "There really is another. Oh, it isn't wicked at all. It just means
vowing and promising solemnly." "Well, I don't mind doing that," agreed Diana, relieved. "How do you do
it?" "We must join hands--so," said Anne gravely. "It ought to be over
running water. We'll just imagine this path is running water. I'll
repeat the oath first. I solemnly swear to be faithful to my bosom
friend, Diana Barry, as long as the sun and moon shall endure. Now you
say it and put my name in." Diana repeated the "oath" with a laugh fore and aft. Then she said:

"You're a queer girl, Anne. I heard before that you were queer. But I
believe I'm going to like you real well." When Marilla and Anne went home Diana went with them as for as the log
bridge. The two little girls walked with their arms about each other. At the brook they parted with many promises to spend the next afternoon
together. "Well, did you find Diana a kindred spirit?" asked Marilla as they went
up through the garden of Green Gables. "Oh yes," sighed Anne, blissfully unconscious of any sarcasm on
Marilla's part. "Oh Marilla, I'm the happiest girl on Prince Edward
Island this very moment. I assure you I'll say my prayers with a right
good-will tonight. Diana and I are going to build a playhouse in Mr.
William Bell's birch grove tomorrow. Can I have those broken pieces of
china that are out in the woodshed? Diana's birthday is in February and
mine is in March. Don't you think that is a very strange coincidence? Diana is going to lend me a book to read. She says it's perfectly
splendid and tremendously exciting. She's going to show me a place back
in the woods where rice lilies grow. Don't you think Diana has got very
soulful eyes? I wish I had soulful eyes. Diana is going to teach me to
sing a song called 'Nelly in the Hazel Dell.' She's going to give me a
picture to put up in my room; it's a perfectly beautiful picture, she
says--a lovely lady in a pale blue silk dress. A sewing-machine agent
gave it to her. I wish I had something to give Diana. I'm an inch taller
than Diana, but she is ever so much fatter; she says she'd like to be
thin because it's so much more graceful, but I'm afraid she only said
it to soothe my feelings. We're going to the shore some day to gather
shells. We have agreed to call the spring down by the log bridge the
Dryad's Bubble. Isn't that a perfectly elegant name? I read a story
once about a spring called that. A dryad is sort of a grown-up fairy, I
think." "Well, all I hope is you won't talk Diana to death," said Marilla. "But
remember this in all your planning, Anne. You're not going to play all
the time nor most of it. You'll have your work to do and it'll have to
be done first." Anne's cup of happiness was full, and Matthew caused it to overflow. He
had just got home from a trip to the store at Carmody, and he sheepishly
produced a small parcel from his pocket and handed it to Anne, with a
deprecatory look at Marilla. "I heard you say you liked chocolate sweeties, so I got you some," he
said. "Humph," sniffed Marilla. "It'll ruin her teeth and stomach. There,
there, child, don't look so dismal. You can eat those, since Matthew
has gone and got them. He'd better have brought you peppermints. They're
wholesomer. Don't sicken yourself eating all them at once now." "Oh, no, indeed, I won't," said Anne eagerly. "I'll just eat one
tonight, Marilla. And I can give Diana half of them, can't I? The
other half will taste twice as sweet to me if I give some to her. It's
delightful to think I have something to give her." "I will say it for the child," said Marilla when Anne had gone to
her gable, "she isn't stingy. I'm glad, for of all faults I detest
stinginess in a child.