I rather enjoy a bit of noise, as a general rule. I remember Cats-meat
Potter-Pirbright bringing a police rattle into the Drones one night and
loosing it off behind my chair, and I just lay back and closed my eyes
with a pleasant smile, like someone in a box at the opera. And the same
applies to the time when my Aunt Agatha's son, young Thos., put a match
to the parcel of Guy Fawkes Day fireworks to see what would happen. But the Brinkley Court fire bell was too much for me. I gave about half a
dozen tugs, and then, feeling that enough was enough, sauntered round to
the front lawn to ascertain what solid results had been achieved. Brinkley Court had given of its best. A glance told me that we were
playing to capacity. The eye, roving to and fro, noted here Uncle Tom in
a purple dressing gown, there Aunt Dahlia in the old blue and yellow. It
also fell upon Anatole, Tuppy, Gussie, Angela, the Bassett and Jeeves, in
the order named. There they all were, present and correct. But--and this was what caused me immediate concern--I could detect no
sign whatever that there had been any rescue work going on. What I had been hoping, of course, was to see Tuppy bending solicitously
over Angela in one corner, while Gussie fanned the Bassett with a towel
in the other. Instead of which, the Bassett was one of the group which
included Aunt Dahlia and Uncle Tom and seemed to be busy trying to make
Anatole see the bright side, while Angela and Gussie were, respectively,
leaning against the sundial with a peeved look and sitting on the grass
rubbing a barked shin. Tuppy was walking up and down the path, all by
himself. A disturbing picture, you will admit. It was with a rather imperious
gesture that I summoned Jeeves to my side. "Well, Jeeves?" "Sir?" I eyed him sternly. "Sir?" forsooth! "It's no good saying 'Sir?' Jeeves. Look round you. See for yourself. Your scheme has proved a bust." "Certainly it would appear that matters have not arranged themselves
quite as we anticipated, sir." "We?" "As I had anticipated, sir." "That's more like it. Didn't I tell you it would be a flop?" "I remember that you did seem dubious, sir." "Dubious is no word for it, Jeeves. I hadn't a scrap of faith in the idea
from the start. When you first mooted it, I said it was rotten, and I was
right. I'm not blaming you, Jeeves. It is not your fault that you have
sprained your brain. But after this--forgive me if I hurt your feelings,
Jeeves----I shall know better than to allow you to handle any but the
simplest and most elementary problems. It is best to be candid about
this, don't you think? Kindest to be frank and straightforward?" "Certainly, sir." "I mean, the surgeon's knife, what?" "Precisely, sir." "I consider----"

"If you will pardon me for interrupting you, sir, I fancy Mrs. Travers is
endeavouring to attract your attention." And at this moment a ringing "Hoy!" which could have proceeded only from
the relative in question, assured me that his view was correct. "Just step this way a moment, Attila, if you don't mind," boomed that
well-known--and under certain conditions, well-loved--voice, and I moved
over. I was not feeling unmixedly at my ease. For the first time it was
beginning to steal upon me that I had not prepared a really good story in
support of my questionable behaviour in ringing fire bells at such an
hour, and I have known Aunt Dahlia to express herself with a hearty
freedom upon far smaller provocation. She exhibited, however, no signs of violence. More a sort of frozen calm,
if you know what I mean. You could see that she was a woman who had
suffered. "Well, Bertie, dear," she said, "here we all are." "Quite," I replied guardedly. "Nobody missing, is there?" "I don't think so." "Splendid. So much healthier for us out in the open like this than
frowsting in bed. I had just dropped off when you did your bell-ringing
act. For it was you, my sweet child, who rang that bell, was knot?" "I did ring the bell, yes." "Any particular reason, or just a whim?" "I thought there was a fire." "What gave you that impression, dear?" "I thought I saw flames." "Where, darling? Tell Aunt Dahlia." "In one of the windows." "I see. So we have all been dragged out of bed and scared rigid because
you have been seeing things." Here Uncle Tom made a noise like a cork coming out of a bottle, and
Anatole, whose moustache had hit a new low, said something about "some
apes" and, if I am not mistaken, a "_rogommier_"--whatever that is. "I admit I was mistaken. I am sorry." "Don't apologize, ducky. Can't you see how pleased we all are? What were
you doing out here, anyway?" "Just taking a stroll." "I see. And are you proposing to continue your stroll?" "No, I think I'll go in now." "That's fine. Because I was thinking of going in, too, and I don't
believe I could sleep knowing you were out here giving rein to that
powerful imagination of yours. The next thing that would happen would be
that you would think you saw a pink elephant sitting on the drawing-room
window-sill and start throwing bricks at it.... Well, come on, Tom, the
entertainment seems to be over.... But wait. The newt king wishes a word
with us.... Yes, Mr. Fink-Nottle?" Gussie, as he joined our little group, seemed upset about something. "I say!" "Say on, Augustus." "I say, what are we going to do?" "Speaking for myself, I intend to return to bed." "But the door's shut." "What door?" "The front door. Somebody must have shut it." "Then I shall open it." "But it won't open." "Then I shall try another door." "But all the other doors are shut." "What? Who shut them?" "I don't know." I advanced a theory! "The wind?" Aunt Dahlia's eyes met mine. "Don't try me too high," she begged. "Not now, precious." And, indeed,
even as I spoke, it did strike me that the night was pretty still. Uncle Tom said we must get in through a window. Aunt Dahlia sighed a bit. "How? Could Lloyd George do it, could Winston do it, could Baldwin do it? No. Not since you had those bars of yours put on." "Well, well, well. God bless my soul, ring the bell, then." "The fire bell?" "The door bell." "To what end, Thomas? There's nobody in the house. The servants are all
at Kingham." "But, confound it all, we can't stop out here all night." "Can't we? You just watch us. There is nothing--literally nothing--which
a country house party can't do with Attila here operating on the
premises. Seppings presumably took the back-door key with him. We must
just amuse ourselves till he comes back." Tuppy made a suggestion:

"Why not take out one of the cars and drive over to Kingham and get the
key from Seppings?" It went well. No question about that. For the first time, a smile lit up
Aunt Dahlia's drawn face. Uncle Tom grunted approvingly. Anatole said
something in Provençal that sounded complimentary. And I thought I
detected even on Angela's map a slight softening. "A very excellent idea," said Aunt Dahlia. "One of the best. Nip round to
the garage at once." After Tuppy had gone, some extremely flattering things were said about
his intelligence and resource, and there was a disposition to draw rather
invidious comparisons between him and Bertram. Painful for me, of course,
but the ordeal didn't last long, for it couldn't have been more than five
minutes before he was with us again. Tuppy seemed perturbed. "I say, it's all off." "Why?" "The garage is locked." "Unlock it." "I haven't the key." "Shout, then, and wake Waterbury." "Who's Waterbury?" "The chauffeur, ass. He sleeps over the garage." "But he's gone to the dance at Kingham." It was the final wallop. Until this moment, Aunt Dahlia had been able to
preserve her frozen calm. The dam now burst. The years rolled away from
her, and she was once more the Dahlia Wooster of the old yoicks-and-tantivy
days--the emotional, free-speaking girl who had so often risen in
her stirrups to yell derogatory personalities at people who were heading
hounds. "Curse all dancing chauffeurs! What on earth does a chauffeur want to
dance for? I mistrusted that man from the start. Something told me he was
a dancer. Well, this finishes it. We're out here till breakfast-time. If
those blasted servants come back before eight o'clock, I shall be vastly
surprised. You won't get Seppings away from a dance till you throw him
out. I know him. The jazz'll go to his head, and he'll stand clapping and
demanding encores till his hands blister. Damn all dancing butlers! What
is Brinkley Court? A respectable English country house or a crimson
dancing school? One might as well be living in the middle of the Russian
Ballet. Well, all right. If we must stay out here, we must. We shall all
be frozen stiff, except"--here she directed at me not one of her
friendliest glances----"except dear old Attila, who is, I observe, well and
warmly clad. We will resign ourselves to the prospect of freezing to
death like the Babes in the Wood, merely expressing a dying wish that our
old pal Attila will see that we are covered with leaves. No doubt he will
also toll that fire bell of his as a mark of respect--And what might you
want, my good man?" She broke off, and stood glaring at Jeeves. During the latter portion of
her address, he had been standing by in a respectful manner, endeavouring
to catch the speaker's eye. "If I might make a suggestion, madam." I am not saying that in the course of our long association I have always
found myself able to view Jeeves with approval. There are aspects of his
character which have frequently caused coldnesses to arise between us. He
is one of those fellows who, if you give them a thingummy, take a
what-d'you-call-it. His work is often raw, and he has been known to allude
to me as "mentally negligible". More than once, as I have shown, it has
been my painful task to squelch in him a tendency to get uppish and treat
the young master as a serf or peon. These are grave defects. But one thing I have never failed to hand the man. He is magnetic. There
is about him something that seems to soothe and hypnotize. To the best of
my knowledge, he has never encountered a charging rhinoceros, but should
this contingency occur, I have no doubt that the animal, meeting his eye,
would check itself in mid-stride, roll over and lie purring with its legs
in the air. At any rate he calmed down Aunt Dahlia, the nearest thing to a charging
rhinoceros, in under five seconds. He just stood there looking
respectful, and though I didn't time the thing--not having a stop-watch
on me--I should say it wasn't more than three seconds and a quarter
before her whole manner underwent an astounding change for the better. She melted before one's eyes. "Jeeves! You haven't got an idea?" "Yes, madam." "That great brain of yours has really clicked as ever in the hour of
need?" "Yes, madam." "Jeeves," said Aunt Dahlia in a shaking voice, "I am sorry I spoke so
abruptly. I was not myself. I might have known that you would not come
simply trying to make conversation. Tell us this idea of yours, Jeeves. Join our little group of thinkers and let us hear what you have to say. Make yourself at home, Jeeves, and give us the good word. Can you really
get us out of this mess?" "Yes, madam, if one of the gentlemen would be willing to ride a bicycle." "A bicycle?" "There is a bicycle in the gardener's shed in the kitchen garden, madam. Possibly one of the gentlemen might feel disposed to ride over to Kingham
Manor and procure the back-door key from Mr. Seppings." "Splendid, Jeeves!" "Thank you, madam." "Wonderful!" "Thank you, madam." "Attila!" said Aunt Dahlia, turning and speaking in a quiet,
authoritative manner. I had been expecting it. From the very moment those ill-judged words had
passed the fellow's lips, I had had a presentiment that a determined
effort would be made to elect me as the goat, and I braced myself to
resist and obstruct. And as I was about to do so, while I was in the very act of summoning up
all my eloquence to protest that I didn't know how to ride a bike and
couldn't possibly learn in the brief time at my disposal, I'm dashed if
the man didn't go and nip me in the bud. "Yes, madam, Mr. Wooster would perform the task admirably. He is an
expert cyclist. He has often boasted to me of his triumphs on the wheel." I hadn't. I hadn't done anything of the sort. It's simply monstrous how
one's words get twisted. All I had ever done was to mention to
him--casually, just as an interesting item of information, one day in New
York when we were watching the six-day bicycle race--that at the age of
fourteen, while spending my holidays with a vicar of sorts who had been
told off to teach me Latin, I had won the Choir Boys' Handicap at the
local school treat. A different thing from boasting of one's triumphs on the wheel. I mean, he was a man of the world and must have known that the form of
school treats is never of the hottest. And, if I'm not mistaken, I had
specifically told him that on the occasion referred to I had received
half a lap start and that Willie Punting, the odds-on favourite to whom
the race was expected to be a gift, had been forced to retire, owing to
having pinched his elder brother's machine without asking the elder
brother, and the elder brother coming along just as the pistol went and
giving him one on the side of the head and taking it away from him, thus
rendering him a scratched-at-the-post non-starter. Yet, from the way he
talked, you would have thought I was one of those chaps in sweaters with
medals all over them, whose photographs bob up from time to time in the
illustrated press on the occasion of their having ridden from Hyde Park
Corner to Glasgow in three seconds under the hour, or whatever it is. And as if this were not bad enough, Tuppy had to shove his oar in. "That's right," said Tuppy. "Bertie has always been a great cyclist. I
remember at Oxford he used to take all his clothes off on bump-supper
nights and ride around the quad, singing comic songs. Jolly fast he used
to go too." "Then he can go jolly fast now," said Aunt Dahlia with animation. "He
can't go too fast for me. He may also sing comic songs, if he likes....
And if you wish to take your clothes off, Bertie, my lamb, by all means
do so. But whether clothed or in the nude, whether singing comic songs or
not singing comic songs, get a move on." I found speech:

"But I haven't ridden for years." "Then it's high time you began again." "I've probably forgotten how to ride." "You'll soon get the knack after you've taken a toss or two. Trial and
error. The only way." "But it's miles to Kingham." "So the sooner you're off, the better." "But----"

"Bertie, dear." "But, dash it----"

"Bertie, darling." "Yes, but dash it----"

"Bertie, my sweet." And so it was arranged. Presently I was moving sombrely off through the
darkness, Jeeves at my side, Aunt Dahlia calling after me something about
trying to imagine myself the man who brought the good news from Ghent to
Aix. The first I had heard of the chap. "So, Jeeves," I said, as we reached the shed, and my voice was cold and
bitter, "this is what your great scheme has accomplished! Tuppy, Angela,
Gussie and the Bassett not on speaking terms, and self faced with an
eight-mile ride----"

"Nine, I believe, sir." "--a nine-mile ride, and another nine-mile ride back." "I am sorry, sir." "No good being sorry now. Where is this foul bone-shaker?" "I will bring it out, sir." He did so. I eyed it sourly. "Where's the lamp?" "I fear there is no lamp, sir." "No lamp?" "No, sir." "But I may come a fearful stinker without a lamp. Suppose I barge into
something." I broke off and eyed him frigidly. "You smile, Jeeves. The thought amuses you?" "I beg your pardon, sir. I was thinking of a tale my Uncle Cyril used to
tell me as a child. An absurd little story, sir, though I confess that I
have always found it droll. According to my Uncle Cyril, two men named
Nicholls and Jackson set out to ride to Brighton on a tandem bicycle, and
were so unfortunate as to come into collision with a brewer's van. And
when the rescue party arrived on the scene of the accident, it was
discovered that they had been hurled together with such force that it was
impossible to sort them out at all adequately. The keenest eye could not
discern which portion of the fragments was Nicholls and which Jackson. So
they collected as much as they could, and called it Nixon. I remember
laughing very much at that story when I was a child, sir." I had to pause a moment to master my feelings. "You did, eh?" "Yes, sir." "You thought it funny?" "Yes, sir." "And your Uncle Cyril thought it funny?" "Yes, sir." "Golly, what a family! Next time you meet your Uncle Cyril, Jeeves, you
can tell him from me that his sense of humour is morbid and unpleasant." "He is dead, sir." "Thank heaven for that.... Well, give me the blasted machine." "Very good, sir." "Are the tyres inflated?" "Yes, sir." "The nuts firm, the brakes in order, the sprockets running true with the
differential gear?" "Yes, sir." "Right ho, Jeeves." In Tuppy's statement that, when at the University of Oxford, I had been
known to ride a bicycle in the nude about the quadrangle of our mutual
college, there had been, I cannot deny, a certain amount of substance. Correct, however, though his facts were, so far as they went, he had not
told all. What he had omitted to mention was that I had invariably been
well oiled at the time, and when in that condition a chap is capable of
feats at which in cooler moments his reason would rebel. Stimulated by the juice, I believe, men have even been known to ride
alligators. As I started now to pedal out into the great world, I was icily sober,
and the old skill, in consequence, had deserted me entirely. I found
myself wobbling badly, and all the stories I had ever heard of nasty
bicycle accidents came back to me with a rush, headed by Jeeves's Uncle
Cyril's cheery little anecdote about Nicholls and Jackson. Pounding wearily through the darkness, I found myself at a loss to fathom
the mentality of men like Jeeves's Uncle Cyril. What on earth he could
see funny in a disaster which had apparently involved the complete
extinction of a human creature--or, at any rate, of half a human creature
and half another human creature--was more than I could understand. To me,
the thing was one of the most poignant tragedies that had ever been
brought to my attention, and I have no doubt that I should have continued
to brood over it for quite a time, had my thoughts not been diverted by
the sudden necessity of zigzagging sharply in order to avoid a pig in the
fairway. For a moment it looked like being real Nicholls-and-Jackson stuff, but,
fortunately, a quick zig on my part, coinciding with an adroit zag on the
part of the pig, enabled me to win through, and I continued my ride safe,
but with the heart fluttering like a captive bird. The effect of this narrow squeak upon me was to shake the nerve to the
utmost. The fact that pigs were abroad in the night seemed to bring home
to me the perilous nature of my enterprise. It set me thinking of all the
other things that could happen to a man out and about on a velocipede
without a lamp after lighting-up time. In particular, I recalled the
statement of a pal of mine that in certain sections of the rural
districts goats were accustomed to stray across the road to the extent of
their chains, thereby forming about as sound a booby trap as one could
well wish. He mentioned, I remember, the case of a friend of his whose machine got
entangled with a goat chain and who was dragged seven miles--like
skijoring in Switzerland--so that he was never the same man again. And
there was one chap who ran into an elephant, left over from a travelling
circus. Indeed, taking it for all in all, it seemed to me that, with the possible
exception of being bitten by sharks, there was virtually no front-page
disaster that could not happen to a fellow, once he had allowed his dear
ones to override his better judgment and shove him out into the great
unknown on a push-bike, and I am not ashamed to confess that, taking it
by and large, the amount of quailing I did from this point on was pretty
considerable. However, in respect to goats and elephants, I must say things panned out
unexpectedly well. Oddly enough, I encountered neither. But when you have said that you have
said everything, for in every other way the conditions could scarcely
have been fouler. Apart from the ceaseless anxiety of having to keep an eye skinned for
elephants, I found myself much depressed by barking dogs, and once I
received a most unpleasant shock when, alighting to consult a signpost, I
saw sitting on top of it an owl that looked exactly like my Aunt Agatha. So agitated, indeed, had my frame of mind become by this time that I
thought at first it was Aunt Agatha, and only when reason and reflection
told me how alien to her habits it would be to climb signposts and sit on
them, could I pull myself together and overcome the weakness. In short, what with all this mental disturbance added to the more purely
physical anguish in the billowy portions and the calves and ankles, the
Bertram Wooster who eventually toppled off at the door of Kingham Manor
was a very different Bertram from the gay and insouciant _boulevardier_
of Bond Street and Piccadilly. Even to one unaware of the inside facts, it would have been evident that
Kingham Manor was throwing its weight about a bit tonight. Lights shone
in the windows, music was in the air, and as I drew nearer my ear
detected the sibilant shuffling of the feet of butlers, footmen,
chauffeurs, parlourmaids, housemaids, tweenies and, I have no doubt,
cooks, who were busily treading the measure.