"She was kidding you." "She was not kidding me. Shortly after the conclusion of this afternoon's
binge at Market Snodsbury Grammar School he asked her to marry him, and
she appears to have right-hoed without a murmur." "There must be some mistake." "There was. The snake Fink-Nottle made it, and by now I bet he realizes
it. I've been chasing him since 5.30." "Chasing him?" "All over the place. I want to pull his head off." "I see. Quite." "You haven't seen him, by any chance?" "No." "Well, if you do, say goodbye to him quickly and put in your order for
lilies.... Oh, Jeeves." "Sir?" I hadn't heard the door open, but the man was on the spot once more. My
private belief, as I think I have mentioned before, is that Jeeves
doesn't have to open doors. He's like one of those birds in India who
bung their astral bodies about--the chaps, I mean, who having gone into
thin air in Bombay, reassemble the parts and appear two minutes later in
Calcutta. Only some such theory will account for the fact that he's not
there one moment and is there the next. He just seems to float from Spot
A to Spot B like some form of gas. "Have you seen Mr. Fink-Nottle, Jeeves?" "No, sir." "I'm going to murder him." "Very good, sir." Tuppy withdrew, banging the door behind him, and I put Jeeves abreast. "Jeeves," I said, "do you know what? Mr. Fink-Nottle is engaged to my
Cousin Angela." "Indeed, sir?" "Well, how about it? Do you grasp the psychology? Does it make sense? Only a few hours ago he was engaged to Miss Bassett." "Gentlemen who have been discarded by one young lady are often apt to
attach themselves without delay to another, sir. It is what is known as a
gesture." I began to grasp. "I see what you mean. Defiant stuff." "Yes, sir." "A sort of 'Oh, right-ho, please yourself, but if you don't want me,
there are plenty who do.'" "Precisely, sir. My Cousin George----"

"Never mind about your Cousin George, Jeeves." "Very good, sir." "Keep him for the long winter evenings, what?" "Just as you wish, sir." "And, anyway, I bet your Cousin George wasn't a shrinking,
non-goose-bo-ing jellyfish like Gussie. That is what astounds me,
Jeeves--that it should be Gussie who has been putting in all this heavy
gesture-making stuff." "You must remember, sir, that Mr. Fink-Nottle is in a somewhat inflamed
cerebral condition." "That's true. A bit above par at the moment, as it were?" "Exactly, sir." "Well, I'll tell you one thing--he'll be in a jolly sight more inflamed
cerebral condition if Tuppy gets hold of him.... What's the time?" "Just on eight o'clock, sir." "Then Tuppy has been chasing him for two hours and a half. We must save
the unfortunate blighter, Jeeves." "Yes, sir." "A human life is a human life, what?" "Exceedingly true, sir." "The first thing, then, is to find him. After that we can discuss plans
and schemes. Go forth, Jeeves, and scour the neighbourhood." "It will not be necessary, sir. If you will glance behind you, you will
see Mr. Fink-Nottle coming out from beneath your bed." And, by Jove, he was absolutely right. There was Gussie, emerging as stated. He was covered with fluff and
looked like a tortoise popping forth for a bit of a breather. "Gussie!" I said. "Jeeves," said Gussie. "Sir?" said Jeeves. "Is that door locked, Jeeves?" "No, sir, but I will attend to the matter immediately." Gussie sat down on the bed, and I thought for a moment that he was going
to be in the mode by burying his face in his hands. However, he merely
brushed a dead spider from his brow. "Have you locked the door, Jeeves?" "Yes, sir." "Because you can never tell that that ghastly Glossop may not take it
into his head to come----"

The word "back" froze on his lips. He hadn't got any further than
a _b_-ish sound, when the handle of the door began to twist and rattle. He sprang from the bed, and for an instant stood looking exactly like a
picture my Aunt Agatha has in her dining-room--The Stag at Bay--Landseer. Then he made a dive for the cupboard and was inside it before one really
got on to it that he had started leaping. I have seen fellows late for
the 9.15 move less nippily. I shot a glance at Jeeves. He allowed his right eyebrow to flicker
slightly, which is as near as he ever gets to a display of the emotions. "Hullo?" I yipped. "Let me in, blast you!" responded Tuppy's voice from without. "Who locked
this door?" I consulted Jeeves once more in the language of the eyebrow. He raised
one of his. I raised one of mine. He raised his other. I raised my other. Then we both raised both. Finally, there seeming no other policy to
pursue, I flung wide the gates and Tuppy came shooting in. "Now what?" I said, as nonchalantly as I could manage. "Why was the door locked?" demanded Tuppy. I was in pretty good eyebrow-raising form by now, so I gave him a touch
of it. "Is one to have no privacy, Glossop?" I said coldly. "I instructed Jeeves
to lock the door because I was about to disrobe." "A likely story!" said Tuppy, and I'm not sure he didn't add "Forsooth!" "You needn't try to make me believe that you're afraid people are going
to run excursion trains to see you in your underwear. You locked that
door because you've got the snake Fink-Nottle concealed in here. I
suspected it the moment I'd left, and I decided to come back and
investigate. I'm going to search this room from end to end. I believe
he's in that cupboard.... What's in this cupboard?" "Just clothes," I said, having another stab at the nonchalant, though
extremely dubious as to whether it would come off. "The usual wardrobe of
the English gentleman paying a country-house visit." "You're lying!" Well, I wouldn't have been if he had only waited a minute before
speaking, because the words were hardly out of his mouth before Gussie
was out of the cupboard. I have commented on the speed with which he had
gone in. It was as nothing to the speed with which he emerged. There was
a sort of whir and blur, and he was no longer with us. I think Tuppy was surprised. In fact, I'm sure he was. Despite the
confidence with which he had stated his view that the cupboard contained
Fink-Nottles, it plainly disconcerted him to have the chap fizzing out at
him like this. He gargled sharply, and jumped back about five feet. The
next moment, however, he had recovered his poise and was galloping down
the corridor in pursuit. It only needed Aunt Dahlia after them, shouting
"Yoicks!" or whatever is customary on these occasions, to complete the
resemblance to a brisk run with the Quorn. I sank into a handy chair. I am not a man whom it is easy to discourage,
but it seemed to me that things had at last begun to get too complex for
Bertram. "Jeeves," I said, "all this is a bit thick." "Yes, sir." "The head rather swims." "Yes, sir." "I think you had better leave me, Jeeves. I shall need to devote the very
closest thought to the situation which has arisen." "Very good, sir." The door closed. I lit a cigarette and began to ponder. -19-


Most chaps in my position, I imagine, would have pondered all the rest of
the evening without getting a bite, but we Woosters have an uncanny knack
of going straight to the heart of things, and I don't suppose it was much
more than ten minutes after I had started pondering before I saw what had
to be done. What was needed to straighten matters out, I perceived, was a heart-to-
heart talk with Angela. She had caused all the trouble by her mutton-
headed behaviour in saying "Yes" instead of "No" when Gussie, in the
grip of mixed drinks and cerebral excitement, had suggested teaming up. She must obviously be properly ticked off and made to return him to store. A quarter of an hour later, I had tracked her down to the summer-house in
which she was taking a cooler and was seating myself by her side. "Angela," I said, and if my voice was stern, well, whose wouldn't have
been, "this is all perfect drivel." She seemed to come out of a reverie. She looked at me inquiringly. "I'm sorry, Bertie, I didn't hear. What were you talking drivel about?" "I was not talking drivel." "Oh, sorry, I thought you said you were." "Is it likely that I would come out here in order to talk drivel?" "Very likely." I thought it best to haul off and approach the matter from another angle. "I've just been seeing Tuppy." "Oh?" "And Gussie Fink-Nottle." "Oh, yes?" "It appears that you have gone and got engaged to the latter." "Quite right." "Well, that's what I meant when I said it was all perfect drivel. You
can't possibly love a chap like Gussie." "Why not?" "You simply can't." Well, I mean to say, of course she couldn't. Nobody could love a freak
like Gussie except a similar freak like the Bassett. The shot wasn't on
the board. A splendid chap, of course, in many ways--courteous, amiable,
and just the fellow to tell you what to do till the doctor came, if you
had a sick newt on your hands--but quite obviously not of Mendelssohn's
March timber. I have no doubt that you could have flung bricks by the
hour in England's most densely populated districts without endangering
the safety of a single girl capable of becoming Mrs. Augustus Fink-Nottle
without an anaesthetic. I put this to her, and she was forced to admit the justice of it. "All right, then. Perhaps I don't." "Then what," I said keenly, "did you want to go and get engaged to him
for, you unreasonable young fathead?" "I thought it would be fun." "Fun!" "And so it has been. I've had a lot of fun out of it. You should have
seen Tuppy's face when I told him." A sudden bright light shone upon me. "Ha! A gesture!" "What?" "You got engaged to Gussie just to score off Tuppy?" "I did." "Well, then, that was what I was saying. It was a gesture." "Yes, I suppose you could call it that." "And I'll tell you something else I'll call it--viz. a dashed low trick. I'm surprised at you, young Angela." "I don't see why." I curled the lip about half an inch. "Being a female, you wouldn't. You
gentler sexes are like that. You pull off the rawest stuff without a
pang. You pride yourselves on it. Look at Jael, the wife of Heber." "Where did you ever hear of Jael, the wife of Heber?" "Possibly you are not aware that I once won a Scripture-knowledge prize
at school?" "Oh, yes. I remember Augustus mentioning it in his speech." "Quite," I said, a little hurriedly. I had no wish to be reminded of
Augustus's speech. "Well, as I say, look at Jael, the wife of Heber. Dug
spikes into the guest's coconut while he was asleep, and then went
swanking about the place like a Girl Guide. No wonder they say, 'Oh,
woman, woman!'" "Who?" "The chaps who do. Coo, what a sex! But you aren't proposing to keep this
up, of course?" "Keep what up?" "This rot of being engaged to Gussie." "I certainly am." "Just to make Tuppy look silly." "Do you think he looks silly?" "I do." "So he ought to." I began to get the idea that I wasn't making real headway. I remember
when I won that Scripture-knowledge prize, having to go into the facts
about Balaam's ass. I can't quite recall what they were, but I still
retain a sort of general impression of something digging its feet in and
putting its ears back and refusing to co-operate; and it seemed to me
that this was what Angela was doing now. She and Balaam's ass were, so to
speak, sisters under the skin. There's a word beginning with r----"re"
something----"recal" something--No, it's gone. But what I am driving at is
that is what this Angela was showing herself. "Silly young geezer," I said. She pinkened. "I'm not a silly young geezer." "You are a silly young geezer. And, what's more, you know it." "I don't know anything of the kind." "Here you are, wrecking Tuppy's life, wrecking Gussie's life, all for the
sake of a cheap score." "Well, it's no business of yours." I sat on this promptly:

"No business of mine when I see two lives I used to go to school with
wrecked? Ha! Besides, you know you're potty about Tuppy." "I'm not!" "Is that so? If I had a quid for every time I've seen you gaze at him
with the lovelight in your eyes----"

She gazed at me, but without the lovelight. "Oh, for goodness sake, go away and boil your head, Bertie!" I drew myself up. "That," I replied, with dignity, "is just what I am going to go away and
boil. At least, I mean, I shall now leave you. I have said my say." "Good." "But permit me to add----"

"I won't." "Very good," I said coldly. "In that case, tinkerty tonk." And I meant it to sting. "Moody" and "discouraged" were about the two adjectives you would have
selected to describe me as I left the summer-house. It would be idle to
deny that I had expected better results from this little chat. I was surprised at Angela. Odd how you never realize that every girl is
at heart a vicious specimen until something goes wrong with her love
affair. This cousin and I had been meeting freely since the days when I
wore sailor suits and she hadn't any front teeth, yet only now was I
beginning to get on to her hidden depths. A simple, jolly, kindly young
pimple she had always struck me as--the sort you could more or less rely
on not to hurt a fly. But here she was now laughing heartlessly--at
least, I seemed to remember hearing her laugh heartlessly--like something
cold and callous out of a sophisticated talkie, and fairly spitting on
her hands in her determination to bring Tuppy's grey hairs in sorrow to
the grave. I've said it before, and I'll say it again--girls are rummy. Old Pop
Kipling never said a truer word than when he made that crack about the f.
of the s. being more d. than the m.

It seemed to me in the circs. that there was but one thing to do--that is
head for the dining-room and take a slash at the cold collation of which
Jeeves had spoken. I felt in urgent need of sustenance, for the recent
interview had pulled me down a bit. There is no gainsaying the fact that
this naked-emotion stuff reduces a chap's vitality and puts him in the
vein for a good whack at the beef and ham. To the dining-room, accordingly, I repaired, and had barely crossed the
threshold when I perceived Aunt Dahlia at the sideboard, tucking into
salmon mayonnaise. The spectacle drew from me a quick "Oh, ah," for I was somewhat
embarrassed. The last time this relative and I had enjoyed a
_tête-à-tête,_ it will be remembered, she had sketched out plans for
drowning me in the kitchen-garden pond, and I was not quite sure what
my present standing with her was. I was relieved to find her in genial mood. Nothing could have exceeded
the cordiality with which she waved her fork. "Hallo, Bertie, you old ass," was her very matey greeting. "I thought I
shouldn't find you far away from the food. Try some of this salmon. Excellent." "Anatole's?" I queried. "No. He's still in bed. But the kitchen maid has struck an inspired
streak. It suddenly seems to have come home to her that she isn't
catering for a covey of buzzards in the Sahara Desert, and she has put
out something quite fit for human consumption. There is good in the girl,
after all, and I hope she enjoys herself at the dance." I ladled out a portion of salmon, and we fell into pleasant conversation,
chatting of this servants' ball at the Stretchley-Budds and speculating
idly, I recall, as to what Seppings, the butler, would look like, doing
the rumba. It was not till I had cleaned up the first platter and was embarking on a
second that the subject of Gussie came up. Considering what had passed at
Market Snodsbury that afternoon, it was one which I had been expecting
her to touch on earlier. When she did touch on it, I could see that she
had not yet been informed of Angela's engagement. "I say, Bertie," she said, meditatively chewing fruit salad. "This
Spink-Bottle." "Nottle." "Bottle," insisted the aunt firmly. "After that exhibition of his this
afternoon, Bottle, and nothing but Bottle, is how I shall always think of
him. However, what I was going to say was that, if you see him, I wish
you would tell him that he has made an old woman very, very happy. Except
for the time when the curate tripped over a loose shoelace and fell down
the pulpit steps, I don't think I have ever had a more wonderful moment
than when good old Bottle suddenly started ticking Tom off from the
platform. In fact, I thought his whole performance in the most perfect
taste." I could not but demur. "Those references to myself----"

"Those were what I liked next best. I thought they were fine. Is it true
that you cheated when you won that Scripture-knowledge prize?" "Certainly not. My victory was the outcome of the most strenuous and
unremitting efforts." "And how about this pessimism we hear of? Are you a pessimist, Bertie?" I could have told her that what was occurring in this house was rapidly
making me one, but I said no, I wasn't. "That's right. Never be a pessimist. Everything is for the best in this
best of all possible worlds. It's a long lane that has no turning. It s
always darkest before the dawn. Have patience and all will come right. The sun will shine, although the day's a grey one.... Try some of this
salad." I followed her advice, but even as I plied the spoon my thoughts were
elsewhere. I was perplexed. It may have been the fact that I had recently
been hobnobbing with so many bowed-down hearts that made this cheeriness
of hers seem so bizarre, but bizarre was certainly what I found it. "I thought you might have been a trifle peeved," I said. "Peeved?" "By Gussie's manoeuvres on the platform this afternoon. I confess that I
had rather expected the tapping foot and the drawn brow." "Nonsense. What was there to be peeved about? I took the whole thing as a
great compliment, proud to feel that any drink from my cellars could have
produced such a majestic jag. It restores one's faith in post-war whisky. Besides, I couldn't be peeved at anything tonight. I am like a little
child clapping its hands and dancing in the sunshine. For though it has
been some time getting a move on, Bertie, the sun has at last broken
through the clouds. Ring out those joy bells. Anatole has withdrawn his
notice." "What?