Purvis
climbed the platform. The spelling-and-dictation champ was about three foot six in his
squeaking shoes, with a pink face and sandy hair. Gussie patted his hair. He seemed to have taken an immediate fancy to the lad. "You P.K. Purvis?" "Sir, yes, sir." "It's a beautiful world, P.K. Purvis." "Sir, yes, sir." "Ah, you've noticed it, have you? Good. You married, by any chance?" "Sir, no, sir." "Get married, P.K. Purvis," said Gussie earnestly. "It's the only life
... Well, here's your book. Looks rather bilge to me from a glance at
the title page, but, such as it is, here you are." P.K. Purvis squeaked off amidst sporadic applause, but one could not fail
to note that the sporadic was followed by a rather strained silence. It
was evident that Gussie was striking something of a new note in Market
Snodsbury scholastic circles. Looks were exchanged between parent and
parent. The bearded bloke had the air of one who has drained the bitter
cup. As for Aunt Dahlia, her demeanour now told only too clearly that her
last doubts had been resolved and her verdict was in. I saw her whisper
to the Bassett, who sat on her right, and the Bassett nodded sadly and
looked like a fairy about to shed a tear and add another star to the
Milky Way. Gussie, after the departure of P.K. Purvis, had fallen into a sort of
daydream and was standing with his mouth open and his hands in his
pockets. Becoming abruptly aware that a fat kid in knickerbockers was at
his elbow, he started violently. "Hullo!" he said, visibly shaken. "Who are you?" "This," said the bearded bloke, "is R.V. Smethurst." "What's he doing here?" asked Gussie suspiciously. "You are presenting him with the drawing prize, Mr. Fink-Nottle." This apparently struck Gussie as a reasonable explanation. His face
cleared. "That's right, too," he said.... "Well, here it is, cocky. You off?" he
said, as the kid prepared to withdraw. "Sir, yes, sir." "Wait, R.V. Smethurst. Not so fast. Before you go, there is a question I
wish to ask you." But the beard bloke's aim now seemed to be to rush the ceremonies a bit. He hustled R.V. Smethurst off stage rather like a chucker-out in a pub
regretfully ejecting an old and respected customer, and starting paging
G.G. Simmons. A moment later the latter was up and coming, and conceive
my emotion when it was announced that the subject on which he had clicked
was Scripture knowledge. One of us, I mean to say. G.G. Simmons was an unpleasant, perky-looking stripling, mostly front
teeth and spectacles, but I gave him a big hand. We Scripture-knowledge
sharks stick together. Gussie, I was sorry to see, didn't like him. There was in his manner, as
he regarded G.G. Simmons, none of the chumminess which had marked it
during his interview with P.K. Purvis or, in a somewhat lesser degree,
with R.V. Smethurst. He was cold and distant. "Well, G.G. Simmons." "Sir, yes, sir." "What do you mean--sir, yes, sir? Dashed silly thing to say. So you've
won the Scripture-knowledge prize, have you?" "Sir, yes, sir." "Yes," said Gussie, "you look just the sort of little tick who would. And
yet," he said, pausing and eyeing the child keenly, "how are we to know
that this has all been open and above board? Let me test you, G.G. Simmons. What was What's-His-Name--the chap who begat Thingummy? Can you
answer me that, Simmons?" "Sir, no, sir." Gussie turned to the bearded bloke. "Fishy," he said. "Very fishy. This boy appears to be totally lacking in
Scripture knowledge." The bearded bloke passed a hand across his forehead. "I can assure you, Mr. Fink-Nottle, that every care was taken to ensure a
correct marking and that Simmons outdistanced his competitors by a wide
margin." "Well, if you say so," said Gussie doubtfully. "All right, G.G. Simmons,
take your prize." "Sir, thank you, sir." "But let me tell you that there's nothing to stick on side about in
winning a prize for Scripture knowledge. Bertie Wooster----"

I don't know when I've had a nastier shock. I had been going on the
assumption that, now that they had stopped him making his speech,
Gussie's fangs had been drawn, as you might say. To duck my head down and
resume my edging toward the door was with me the work of a moment. "Bertie Wooster won the Scripture-knowledge prize at a kids' school we
were at together, and you know what he's like. But, of course, Bertie
frankly cheated. He succeeded in scrounging that Scripture-knowledge
trophy over the heads of better men by means of some of the rawest and
most brazen swindling methods ever witnessed even at a school where such
things were common. If that man's pockets, as he entered the
examination-room, were not stuffed to bursting-point with lists of the
kings of Judah----"

I heard no more. A moment later I was out in God's air, fumbling with a
fevered foot at the self-starter of the old car. The engine raced. The clutch slid into position. I tooted and drove off. My ganglions were still vibrating as I ran the car into the stables of
Brinkley Court, and it was a much shaken Bertram who tottered up to his
room to change into something loose. Having donned flannels, I lay down
on the bed for a bit, and I suppose I must have dozed off, for the next
thing I remember is finding Jeeves at my side. I sat up. "My tea, Jeeves?" "No, sir. It is nearly dinner-time." The mists cleared away. "I must have been asleep." "Yes, sir." "Nature taking its toll of the exhausted frame." "Yes, sir." "And enough to make it." "Yes, sir." "And now it's nearly dinner-time, you say? All right. I am in no mood for
dinner, but I suppose you had better lay out the clothes." "It will not be necessary, sir. The company will not be dressing tonight. A cold collation has been set out in the dining-room." "Why's that?" "It was Mrs. Travers's wish that this should be done in order to minimize
the work for the staff, who are attending a dance at Sir Percival
Stretchley-Budd's residence tonight." "Of course, yes. I remember. My Cousin Angela told me. Tonight's the
night, what? You going, Jeeves?" "No, sir. I am not very fond of this form of entertainment in the rural
districts, sir." "I know what you mean. These country binges are all the same. A piano,
one fiddle, and a floor like sandpaper. Is Anatole going? Angela hinted
not." "Miss Angela was correct, sir. Monsieur Anatole is in bed." "Temperamental blighters, these Frenchmen." "Yes, sir." There was a pause. "Well, Jeeves," I said, "it was certainly one of those afternoons, what?" "Yes, sir." "I cannot recall one more packed with incident. And I left before the
finish." "Yes, sir. I observed your departure." "You couldn't blame me for withdrawing." "No, sir. Mr. Fink-Nottle had undoubtedly become embarrassingly
personal." "Was there much more of it after I went?" "No, sir. The proceedings terminated very shortly. Mr. Fink-Nottle's
remarks with reference to Master G.G. Simmons brought about an early
closure." "But he had finished his remarks about G.G. Simmons." "Only temporarily, sir. He resumed them immediately after your departure. If you recollect, sir, he had already proclaimed himself suspicious of
Master Simmons's bona fides, and he now proceeded to deliver a violent
verbal attack upon the young gentleman, asserting that it was impossible
for him to have won the Scripture-knowledge prize without systematic
cheating on an impressive scale. He went so far as to suggest that Master
Simmons was well known to the police." "Golly, Jeeves!" "Yes, sir. The words did create a considerable sensation. The reaction of
those present to this accusation I should describe as mixed. The young
students appeared pleased and applauded vigorously, but Master Simmons's
mother rose from her seat and addressed Mr. Fink-Nottle in terms of
strong protest." "Did Gussie seem taken aback? Did he recede from his position?" "No, sir. He said that he could see it all now, and hinted at a guilty
liaison between Master Simmons's mother and the head master, accusing the
latter of having cooked the marks, as his expression was, in order to
gain favour with the former." "You don't mean that?" "Yes, sir." "Egad, Jeeves! And then----"

"They sang the national anthem, sir." "Surely not?" "Yes, sir." "At a moment like that?" "Yes, sir." "Well, you were there and you know, of course, but I should have thought
the last thing Gussie and this woman would have done in the circs. would
have been to start singing duets." "You misunderstand me, sir. It was the entire company who sang. The head
master turned to the organist and said something to him in a low tone. Upon which the latter began to play the national anthem, and the
proceedings terminated." "I see. About time, too." "Yes, sir. Mrs. Simmons's attitude had become unquestionably menacing." I pondered. What I had heard was, of course, of a nature to excite pity
and terror, not to mention alarm and despondency, and it would be
paltering with the truth to say that I was pleased about it. On the other
hand, it was all over now, and it seemed to me that the thing to do was
not to mourn over the past but to fix the mind on the bright future. I
mean to say, Gussie might have lowered the existing Worcestershire record
for goofiness and definitely forfeited all chance of becoming Market
Snodsbury's favourite son, but you couldn't get away from the fact that
he had proposed to Madeline Bassett, and you had to admit that she had
accepted him. I put this to Jeeves. "A frightful exhibition," I said, "and one which will very possibly ring
down history's pages. But we must not forget, Jeeves, that Gussie, though
now doubtless looked upon in the neighbourhood as the world's worst
freak, is all right otherwise." "No, sir." I did not get quite this. "When you say 'No, sir,' do you mean 'Yes, sir'?" "No, sir. I mean 'No, sir.'" "He is not all right otherwise?" "No, sir." "But he's betrothed." "No longer, sir. Miss Bassett has severed the engagement." "You don't mean that?" "Yes, sir." I wonder if you have noticed a rather peculiar thing about this
chronicle. I allude to the fact that at one time or another practically
everybody playing a part in it has had occasion to bury his or her face
in his or her hands. I have participated in some pretty glutinous affairs
in my time, but I think that never before or since have I been mixed up
with such a solid body of brow clutchers. Uncle Tom did it, if you remember. So did Gussie. So did Tuppy. So,
probably, though I have no data, did Anatole, and I wouldn't put it past
the Bassett. And Aunt Dahlia, I have no doubt, would have done it, too,
but for the risk of disarranging the carefully fixed coiffure. Well, what I am trying to say is that at this juncture I did it myself. Up went the hands and down went the head, and in another jiffy I was
clutching as energetically as the best of them. And it was while I was still massaging the coconut and wondering what the
next move was that something barged up against the door like the delivery
of a ton of coals. "I think this may very possibly be Mr. Fink-Nottle himself, sir," said
Jeeves. His intuition, however, had led him astray. It was not Gussie but Tuppy. He came in and stood breathing asthmatically. It was plain that he was
deeply stirred. -18-


I eyed him narrowly. I didn't like his looks. Mark you, I don't say I
ever had, much, because Nature, when planning this sterling fellow,
shoved in a lot more lower jaw than was absolutely necessary and made the
eyes a bit too keen and piercing for one who was neither an Empire
builder nor a traffic policeman. But on the present occasion, in addition
to offending the aesthetic sense, this Glossop seemed to me to be wearing
a distinct air of menace, and I found myself wishing that Jeeves wasn't
always so dashed tactful. I mean, it's all very well to remove yourself
like an eel sliding into mud when the employer has a visitor, but there
are moments--and it looked to me as if this was going to be one of
them--when the truer tact is to stick round and stand ready to lend a
hand in the free-for-all. For Jeeves was no longer with us. I hadn't seen him go, and I hadn't
heard him go, but he had gone. As far as the eye could reach, one noted
nobody but Tuppy. And in Tuppy's demeanour, as I say, there was a certain
something that tended to disquiet. He looked to me very much like a man
who had come to reopen that matter of my tickling Angela's ankles. However, his opening remark told me that I had been alarming myself
unduly. It was of a pacific nature, and came as a great relief. "Bertie," he said, "I owe you an apology. I have come to make it." My relief on hearing these words, containing as they did no reference of
any sort to tickled ankles, was, as I say, great. But I don't think it
was any greater than my surprise. Months had passed since that painful
episode at the Drones, and until now he hadn't given a sign of remorse
and contrition. Indeed, word had reached me through private sources that
he frequently told the story at dinners and other gatherings and, when
doing so, laughed his silly head off. I found it hard to understand, accordingly, what could have caused him to
abase himself at this later date. Presumably he had been given the elbow
by his better self, but why? Still, there it was. "My dear chap," I said, gentlemanly to the gills, "don't mention it." "What's the sense of saying, 'Don't mention it'? I have mentioned it." "I mean, don't mention it any more. Don't give the matter another
thought. We all of us forget ourselves sometimes and do things which, in
our calmer moments, we regret. No doubt you were a bit tight at the
time." "What the devil do you think you're talking about?" I didn't like his tone. Brusque. "Correct me if I am wrong," I said, with a certain stiffness, "but I
assumed that you were apologizing for your foul conduct in looping back
the last ring that night in the Drones, causing me to plunge into the
swimming b. in the full soup and fish." "Ass! Not that, at all." "Then what?" "This Bassett business." "What Bassett business?" "Bertie," said Tuppy, "when you told me last night that you were in love
with Madeline Bassett, I gave you the impression that I believed you, but
I didn't. The thing seemed too incredible. However, since then I have
made inquiries, and the facts appear to square with your statement. I
have now come to apologize for doubting you." "Made inquiries?" "I asked her if you had proposed to her, and she said, yes, you had." "Tuppy! You didn't?" "I did." "Have you no delicacy, no proper feeling?" "No." "Oh? Well, right-ho, of course, but I think you ought to have." "Delicacy be dashed. I wanted to be certain that it was not you who stole
Angela from me. I now know it wasn't." So long as he knew that, I didn't so much mind him having no delicacy. "Ah," I said. "Well, that's fine. Hold that thought." "I have found out who it was." "What?" He stood brooding for a moment. His eyes were smouldering with a dull
fire. His jaw stuck out like the back of Jeeves's head. "Bertie," he said, "do you remember what I swore I would do to the chap
who stole Angela from me?" "As nearly as I recall, you planned to pull him inside out----"

"--and make him swallow himself. Correct. The programme still holds
good." "But, Tuppy, I keep assuring you, as a competent eyewitness, that nobody
snitched Angela from you during that Cannes trip." "No. But they did after she got back." "What?" "Don't keep saying, 'What?' You heard." "But she hasn't seen anybody since she got back." "Oh, no? How about that newt bloke?" "Gussie?" "Precisely. The serpent Fink-Nottle." This seemed to me absolute gibbering. "But Gussie loves the Bassett." "You can't all love this blighted Bassett. What astonishes me is that
anyone can do it. He loves Angela, I tell you. And she loves him." "But Angela handed you your hat before Gussie ever got here." "No, she didn't. Couple of hours after." "He couldn't have fallen in love with her in a couple of hours." "Why not? I fell in love with her in a couple of minutes. I worshipped
her immediately we met, the popeyed little excrescence." "But, dash it----"

"Don't argue, Bertie. The facts are all docketed. She loves this
newt-nuzzling blister." "Quite absurd, laddie--quite absurd." "Oh?" He ground a heel into the carpet--a thing I've often read about,
but had never seen done before. "Then perhaps you will explain how it is
that she happens to come to be engaged to him?" You could have knocked me down with a f.

"Engaged to him?" "She told me herself."