life in the
capital is gay; the Russian dancers...." These are our stays and props. These lace our days together and make of life a perfect globe. And yet,
and yet ... when we go to dinner, when pressing finger-tips we hope to
meet somewhere soon, a doubt insinuates itself; is this the way to spend
our days? the rare, the limited, so soon dealt out to us--drinking tea? dining out? And the notes accumulate. And the telephones ring. And
everywhere we go wires and tubes surround us to carry the voices that
try to penetrate before the last card is dealt and the days are over. "Try to penetrate," for as we lift the cup, shake the hand, express the
hope, something whispers, Is this all? Can I never know, share, be
certain? Am I doomed all my days to write letters, send voices, which
fall upon the tea-table, fade upon the passage, making appointments,
while life dwindles, to come and dine? Yet letters are venerable; and
the telephone valiant, for the journey is a lonely one, and if bound
together by notes and telephones we went in company, perhaps--who
knows?--we might talk by the way. Well, people have tried. Byron wrote letters. So did Cowper. For
centuries the writing-desk has contained sheets fit precisely for the
communications of friends. Masters of language, poets of long ages, have
turned from the sheet that endures to the sheet that perishes, pushing
aside the tea-tray, drawing close to the fire (for letters are written
when the dark presses round a bright red cave), and addressed themselves
to the task of reaching, touching, penetrating the individual heart. Were it possible! But words have been used too often; touched and
turned, and left exposed to the dust of the street. The words we seek
hang close to the tree. We come at dawn and find them sweet beneath the
leaf. Mrs. Flanders wrote letters; Mrs. Jarvis wrote them; Mrs. Durrant too;
Mother Stuart actually scented her pages, thereby adding a flavour which
the English language fails to provide; Jacob had written in his day long
letters about art, morality, and politics to young men at college. Clara
Durrant's letters were those of a child. Florinda--the impediment
between Florinda and her pen was something impassable. Fancy a
butterfly, gnat, or other winged insect, attached to a twig which,
clogged with mud, it rolls across a page. Her spelling was abominable. Her sentiments infantile. And for some reason when she wrote she
declared her belief in God. Then there were crosses--tear stains; and
the hand itself rambling and redeemed only by the fact--which always did
redeem Florinda--by the fact that she cared. Yes, whether it was for
chocolate creams, hot baths, the shape of her face in the looking-glass,
Florinda could no more pretend a feeling than swallow whisky. Incontinent was her rejection. Great men are truthful, and these little
prostitutes, staring in the fire, taking out a powder-puff, decorating
lips at an inch of looking-glass, have (so Jacob thought) an inviolable
fidelity. Then he saw her turning up Greek Street upon another man's arm. The light from the arc lamp drenched him from head to toe. He stood for
a minute motionless beneath it. Shadows chequered the street. Other
figures, single and together, poured out, wavered across, and
obliterated Florinda and the man. The light drenched Jacob from head to toe. You could see the pattern on
his trousers; the old thorns on his stick; his shoe laces; bare hands;
and face. It was as if a stone were ground to dust; as if white sparks flew from a
livid whetstone, which was his spine; as if the switchback railway,
having swooped to the depths, fell, fell, fell. This was in his face. Whether we know what was in his mind is another question. Granted ten
years' seniority and a difference of sex, fear of him comes first; this
is swallowed up by a desire to help--overwhelming sense, reason, and the
time of night; anger would follow close on that--with Florinda, with
destiny; and then up would bubble an irresponsible optimism. "Surely
there's enough light in the street at this moment to drown all our cares
in gold!" Ah, what's the use of saying it? Even while you speak and look
over your shoulder towards Shaftesbury Avenue, destiny is chipping a
dent in him. He has turned to go. As for following him back to his
rooms, no--that we won't do. Yet that, of course, is precisely what one does. He let himself in and
shut the door, though it was only striking ten on one of the city
clocks. No one can go to bed at ten. Nobody was thinking of going to
bed. It was January and dismal, but Mrs. Wagg stood on her doorstep, as
if expecting something to happen. A barrel-organ played like an obscene
nightingale beneath wet leaves. Children ran across the road. Here and
there one could see brown panelling inside the hall door.... The march
that the mind keeps beneath the windows of others is queer enough. Now
distracted by brown panelling; now by a fern in a pot; here improvising
a few phrases to dance with the barrel-organ; again snatching a detached
gaiety from a drunken man; then altogether absorbed by words the poor
shout across the street at each other (so outright, so lusty)--yet all
the while having for centre, for magnet, a young man alone in his room. "Life is wicked--life is detestable," cried Rose Shaw. The strange thing about life is that though the nature of it must have
been apparent to every one for hundreds of years, no one has left any
adequate account of it. The streets of London have their map; but our
passions are uncharted. What are you going to meet if you turn this
corner? "Holborn straight ahead of you," says the policeman. Ah, but where are
you going if instead of brushing past the old man with the white beard,
the silver medal, and the cheap violin, you let him go on with his
story, which ends in an invitation to step somewhere, to his room,
presumably, off Queen's Square, and there he shows you a collection of
birds' eggs and a letter from the Prince of Wales's secretary, and this
(skipping the intermediate stages) brings you one winter's day to the
Essex coast, where the little boat makes off to the ship, and the ship
sails and you behold on the skyline the Azores; and the flamingoes rise;
and there you sit on the verge of the marsh drinking rum-punch, an
outcast from civilization, for you have committed a crime, are infected
with yellow fever as likely as not, and--fill in the sketch as you like. As frequent as street corners in Holborn are these chasms in the
continuity of our ways. Yet we keep straight on. Rose Shaw, talking in rather an emotional manner to Mr. Bowley at Mrs.
Durrant's evening party a few nights back, said that life was wicked
because a man called Jimmy refused to marry a woman called (if memory
serves) Helen Aitken. Both were beautiful. Both were inanimate. The oval tea-table invariably
separated them, and the plate of biscuits was all he ever gave her. He
bowed; she inclined her head. They danced. He danced divinely. They sat
in the alcove; never a word was said. Her pillow was wet with tears. Kind Mr. Bowley and dear Rose Shaw marvelled and deplored. Bowley had
rooms in the Albany. Rose was re-born every evening precisely as the
clock struck eight. All four were civilization's triumphs, and if you
persist that a command of the English language is part of our
inheritance, one can only reply that beauty is almost always dumb. Male
beauty in association with female beauty breeds in the onlooker a sense
of fear. Often have I seen them--Helen and Jimmy--and likened them to
ships adrift, and feared for my own little craft. Or again, have you
ever watched fine collie dogs couchant at twenty yards' distance? As she
passed him his cup there was that quiver in her flanks. Bowley saw what
was up-asked Jimmy to breakfast. Helen must have confided in Rose. For
my own part, I find it exceedingly difficult to interpret songs without
words. And now Jimmy feeds crows in Flanders and Helen visits hospitals. Oh, life is damnable, life is wicked, as Rose Shaw said. The lamps of London uphold the dark as upon the points of burning
bayonets. The yellow canopy sinks and swells over the great four-poster. Passengers in the mail-coaches running into London in the eighteenth
century looked through leafless branches and saw it flaring beneath
them. The light burns behind yellow blinds and pink blinds, and above
fanlights, and down in basement windows. The street market in Soho is
fierce with light. Raw meat, china mugs, and silk stockings blaze in it. Raw voices wrap themselves round the flaring gas-jets. Arms akimbo, they
stand on the pavement bawling--Messrs. Kettle and Wilkinson; their wives
sit in the shop, furs wrapped round their necks, arms folded, eyes
contemptuous. Such faces as one sees. The little man fingering the meat
must have squatted before the fire in innumerable lodging-houses, and
heard and seen and known so much that it seems to utter itself even
volubly from dark eyes, loose lips, as he fingers the meat silently, his
face sad as a poet's, and never a song sung. Shawled women carry babies
with purple eyelids; boys stand at street corners; girls look across the
road--rude illustrations, pictures in a book whose pages we turn over
and over as if we should at last find what we look for. Every face,
every shop, bedroom window, public-house, and dark square is a picture
feverishly turned--in search of what? It is the same with books. What do
we seek through millions of pages? Still hopefully turning the
pages--oh, here is Jacob's room. He sat at the table reading the Globe. The pinkish sheet was spread flat
before him. He propped his face in his hand, so that the skin of his
cheek was wrinkled in deep folds. Terribly severe he looked, set, and
defiant. (What people go through in half an hour! But nothing could save
him. These events are features of our landscape. A foreigner coming to
London could scarcely miss seeing St. Paul's.) He judged life. These
pinkish and greenish newspapers are thin sheets of gelatine pressed
nightly over the brain and heart of the world. They take the impression
of the whole. Jacob cast his eye over it. A strike, a murder, football,
bodies found; vociferation from all parts of England simultaneously. How
miserable it is that the Globe newspaper offers nothing better to Jacob
Flanders! When a child begins to read history one marvels, sorrowfully,
to hear him spell out in his new voice the ancient words. The Prime Minister's speech was reported in something over five columns. Feeling in his pocket, Jacob took out a pipe and proceeded to fill it. Five minutes, ten minutes, fifteen minutes passed. Jacob took the paper
over to the fire. The Prime Minister proposed a measure for giving Home
Rule to Ireland. Jacob knocked out his pipe. He was certainly thinking
about Home Rule in Ireland--a very difficult matter. A very cold night. The snow, which had been falling all night, lay at three o'clock in the
afternoon over the fields and the hill. Clumps of withered grass stood
out upon the hill-top; the furze bushes were black, and now and then a
black shiver crossed the snow as the wind drove flurries of frozen
particles before it. The sound was that of a broom sweeping--sweeping. The stream crept along by the road unseen by any one. Sticks and leaves
caught in the frozen grass. The sky was sullen grey and the trees of
black iron. Uncompromising was the severity of the country. At four
o'clock the snow was again falling. The day had gone out. A window tinged yellow about two feet across alone combated the white
fields and the black trees .... At six o'clock a man's figure carrying a
lantern crossed the field .... A raft of twig stayed upon a stone,
suddenly detached itself, and floated towards the culvert .... A load of
snow slipped and fell from a fir branch .... Later there was a mournful
cry .... A motor car came along the road shoving the dark before it .... The dark shut down behind it.... Spaces of complete immobility separated each of these movements. The
land seemed to lie dead .... Then the old shepherd returned stiffly
across the field. Stiffly and painfully the frozen earth was trodden
under and gave beneath pressure like a treadmill. The worn voices of
clocks repeated the fact of the hour all night long. Jacob, too, heard them, and raked out the fire. He rose. He stretched
himself. He went to bed. CHAPTER NINE


The Countess of Rocksbier sat at the head of the table alone with Jacob. Fed upon champagne and spices for at least two centuries (four, if you
count the female line), the Countess Lucy looked well fed. A
discriminating nose she had for scents, prolonged, as if in quest of
them; her underlip protruded a narrow red shelf; her eyes were small,
with sandy tufts for eyebrows, and her jowl was heavy. Behind her (the
window looked on Grosvenor Square) stood Moll Pratt on the pavement,
offering violets for sale; and Mrs. Hilda Thomas, lifting her skirts,
preparing to cross the road. One was from Walworth; the other from
Putney. Both wore black stockings, but Mrs. Thomas was coiled in furs. The comparison was much in Lady Rocksbier's favour. Moll had more
humour, but was violent; stupid too. Hilda Thomas was mealy-mouthed, all
her silver frames aslant; egg-cups in the drawing-room; and the windows
shrouded. Lady Rocksbier, whatever the deficiencies of her profile, had
been a great rider to hounds. She used her knife with authority, tore
her chicken bones, asking Jacob's pardon, with her own hands. "Who is that driving by?" she asked Boxall, the butler. "Lady Firtlemere's carriage, my lady," which reminded her to send a card
to ask after his lordship's health. A rude old lady, Jacob thought. The
wine was excellent. She called herself "an old woman"--"so kind to lunch
with an old woman"--which flattered him. She talked of Joseph
Chamberlain, whom she had known. She said that Jacob must come and
meet--one of our celebrities. And the Lady Alice came in with three dogs
on a leash, and Jackie, who ran to kiss his grandmother, while Boxall
brought in a telegram, and Jacob was given a good cigar. A few moments before a horse jumps it slows, sidles, gathers itself
together, goes up like a monster wave, and pitches down on the further
side. Hedges and sky swoop in a semicircle. Then as if your own body ran
into the horse's body and it was your own forelegs grown with his that
sprang, rushing through the air you go, the ground resilient, bodies a
mass of muscles, yet you have command too, upright stillness, eyes
accurately judging. Then the curves cease, changing to downright hammer
strokes, which jar; and you draw up with a jolt; sitting back a little,
sparkling, tingling, glazed with ice over pounding arteries, gasping:
"Ah!