That his taste in literature affected
his friendships, and made him silent, secretive, fastidious, and only
quite at his ease with one or two young men of his own way of thinking,
was the charge against him. But then Jacob Flanders was not at all of his own way of thinking--far
from it, Bonamy sighed, laying the thin sheets of notepaper on the table
and falling into thought about Jacob's character, not for the first
time. The trouble was this romantic vein in him. "But mixed with the stupidity
which leads him into these absurd predicaments," thought Bonamy, "there
is something--something"--he sighed, for he was fonder of Jacob than of
any one in the world. Jacob went to the window and stood with his hands in his pockets. There
he saw three Greeks in kilts; the masts of ships; idle or busy people of
the lower classes strolling or stepping out briskly, or falling into
groups and gesticulating with their hands. Their lack of concern for him
was not the cause of his gloom; but some more profound conviction--it
was not that he himself happened to be lonely, but that all people are. Yet next day, as the train slowly rounded a hill on the way to Olympia,
the Greek peasant women were out among the vines; the old Greek men were
sitting at the stations, sipping sweet wine. And though Jacob remained
gloomy he had never suspected how tremendously pleasant it is to be
alone; out of England; on one's own; cut off from the whole thing. There
are very sharp bare hills on the way to Olympia; and between them blue
sea in triangular spaces. A little like the Cornish coast. Well now, to
go walking by oneself all day--to get on to that track and follow it up
between the bushes--or are they small trees?--to the top of that
mountain from which one can see half the nations of antiquity--

"Yes," said Jacob, for his carriage was empty, "let's look at the map." Blame it or praise it, there is no denying the wild horse in us. To
gallop intemperately; fall on the sand tired out; to feel the earth
spin; to have--positively--a rush of friendship for stones and grasses,
as if humanity were over, and as for men and women, let them go
hang--there is no getting over the fact that this desire seizes us
pretty often. The evening air slightly moved the dirty curtains in the hotel window at
Olympia. "I am full of love for every one," thought Mrs. Wentworth Williams,
"--for the poor most of all--for the peasants coming back in the evening
with their burdens. And everything is soft and vague and very sad. It is
sad, it is sad. But everything has meaning," thought Sandra Wentworth
Williams, raising her head a little and looking very beautiful, tragic,
and exalted. "One must love everything." She held in her hand a little book convenient for travelling--stories by
Tchekov--as she stood, veiled, in white, in the window of the hotel at
Olympia. How beautiful the evening was! and her beauty was its beauty. The tragedy of Greece was the tragedy of all high souls. The inevitable
compromise. She seemed to have grasped something. She would write it
down. And moving to the table where her husband sat reading she leant
her chin in her hands and thought of the peasants, of suffering, of her
own beauty, of the inevitable compromise, and of how she would write it
down. Nor did Evan Williams say anything brutal, banal, or foolish when
he shut his book and put it away to make room for the plates of soup
which were now being placed before them. Only his drooping bloodhound
eyes and his heavy sallow cheeks expressed his melancholy tolerance, his
conviction that though forced to live with circumspection and
deliberation he could never possibly achieve any of those objects which,
as he knew, are the only ones worth pursuing. His consideration was
flawless; his silence unbroken. "Everything seems to mean so much," said Sandra. But with the sound of
her own voice the spell was broken. She forgot the peasants. Only there
remained with her a sense of her own beauty, and in front, luckily,
there was a looking-glass. "I am very beautiful," she thought. She shifted her hat slightly. Her husband saw her looking in the glass;
and agreed that beauty is important; it is an inheritance; one cannot
ignore it. But it is a barrier; it is in fact rather a bore. So he drank
his soup; and kept his eyes fixed upon the window. "Quails," said Mrs. Wentworth Williams languidly. "And then goat, I
suppose; and then..."

"Caramel custard presumably," said her husband in the same cadence, with
his toothpick out already. She laid her spoon upon her plate, and her soup was taken away half
finished. Never did she do anything without dignity; for hers was the
English type which is so Greek, save that villagers have touched their
hats to it, the vicarage reveres it; and upper-gardeners and
under-gardeners respectfully straighten their backs as she comes down
the broad terrace on Sunday morning, dallying at the stone urns with the
Prime Minister to pick a rose--which, perhaps, she was trying to forget,
as her eye wandered round the dining-room of the inn at Olympia, seeking
the window where her book lay, where a few minutes ago she had
discovered something--something very profound it had been, about love
and sadness and the peasants. But it was Evan who sighed; not in despair nor indeed in rebellion. But,
being the most ambitious of men and temperamentally the most sluggish,
he had accomplished nothing; had the political history of England at his
finger-ends, and living much in company with Chatham, Pitt, Burke, and
Charles James Fox could not help contrasting himself and his age with
them and theirs. "Yet there never was a time when great men are more
needed," he was in the habit of saying to himself, with a sigh. Here he
was picking his teeth in an inn at Olympia. He had done. But Sandra's
eyes wandered. "Those pink melons are sure to be dangerous," he said gloomily. And as
he spoke the door opened and in came a young man in a grey check suit. "Beautiful but dangerous," said Sandra, immediately talking to her
husband in the presence of a third person. ("Ah, an English boy on
tour," she thought to herself.) And Evan knew all that too. Yes, he knew all that; and he admired her. Very pleasant, he thought, to
have affairs. But for himself, what with his height (Napoleon was five
feet four, he remembered), his bulk, his inability to impose his own
personality (and yet great men are needed more than ever now, he
sighed), it was useless. He threw away his cigar, went up to Jacob and
asked him, with a simple sort of sincerity which Jacob liked, whether he
had come straight out from England. "How very English!" Sandra laughed when the waiter told them next
morning that the young gentleman had left at five to climb the mountain. "I am sure he asked you for a bath?" at which the waiter shook his head,
and said that he would ask the manager. "You do not understand," laughed Sandra. "Never mind." Stretched on the top of the mountain, quite alone, Jacob enjoyed himself
immensely. Probably he had never been so happy in the whole of his life. But at dinner that night Mr. Williams asked him whether he would like to
see the paper; then Mrs. Williams asked him (as they strolled on the
terrace smoking--and how could he refuse that man's cigar?) whether he'd
seen the theatre by moonlight; whether he knew Everard Sherborn; whether
he read Greek and whether (Evan rose silently and went in) if he had to
sacrifice one it would be the French literature or the Russian? "And now," wrote Jacob in his letter to Bonamy, "I shall have to read
her cursed book"--her Tchekov, he meant, for she had lent it him. Though the opinion is unpopular it seems likely enough that bare places,
fields too thick with stones to be ploughed, tossing sea-meadows
half-way between England and America, suit us better than cities. There is something absolute in us which despises qualification. It is
this which is teased and twisted in society. People come together in a
room. "So delighted," says somebody, "to meet you," and that is a lie. And then: "I enjoy the spring more than the autumn now. One does, I
think, as one gets older." For women are always, always, always talking
about what one feels, and if they say "as one gets older," they mean you
to reply with something quite off the point. Jacob sat himself down in the quarry where the Greeks had cut marble for
the theatre. It is hot work walking up Greek hills at midday. The wild
red cyclamen was out; he had seen the little tortoises hobbling from
clump to clump; the air smelt strong and suddenly sweet, and the sun,
striking on jagged splinters of marble, was very dazzling to the eyes. Composed, commanding, contemptuous, a little melancholy, and bored with
an august kind of boredom, there he sat smoking his pipe. Bonamy would have said that this was the sort of thing that made him
uneasy--when Jacob got into the doldrums, looked like a Margate
fisherman out of a job, or a British Admiral. You couldn't make him
understand a thing when he was in a mood like that. One had better leave
him alone. He was dull. He was apt to be grumpy. He was up very early, looking at the statues with his Baedeker. Sandra Wentworth Williams, ranging the world before breakfast in quest
of adventure or a point of view, all in white, not so very tall perhaps,
but uncommonly upright--Sandra Williams got Jacob's head exactly on a
level with the head of the Hermes of Praxiteles. The comparison was all
in his favour. But before she could say a single word he had gone out of
the Museum and left her. Still, a lady of fashion travels with more than one dress, and if white
suits the morning hour, perhaps sandy yellow with purple spots on it, a
black hat, and a volume of Balzac, suit the evening. Thus she was
arranged on the terrace when Jacob came in. Very beautiful she looked. With her hands folded she mused, seemed to listen to her husband, seemed
to watch the peasants coming down with brushwood on their backs, seemed
to notice how the hill changed from blue to black, seemed to
discriminate between truth and falsehood, Jacob thought, and crossed his
legs suddenly, observing the extreme shabbiness of his trousers. "But he is very distinguished looking," Sandra decided. And Evan Williams, lying back in his chair with the paper on his knees,
envied them. The best thing he could do would be to publish, with
Macmillans, his monograph upon the foreign policy of Chatham. But
confound this tumid, queasy feeling--this restlessness, swelling, and
heat--it was jealousy! jealousy! jealousy! which he had sworn never to
feel again. "Come with us to Corinth, Flanders," he said with more than his usual
energy, stopping by Jacob's chair. He was relieved by Jacob's reply, or
rather by the solid, direct, if shy manner in which he said that he
would like very much to come with them to Corinth. "Here is a fellow," thought Evan Williams, "who might do very well in
politics." "I intend to come to Greece every year so long as I live," Jacob wrote
to Bonamy. "It is the only chance I can see of protecting oneself from
civilization." "Goodness knows what he means by that," Bonamy sighed. For as he never
said a clumsy thing himself, these dark sayings of Jacob's made him feel
apprehensive, yet somehow impressed, his own turn being all for the
definite, the concrete, and the rational. Nothing could be much simpler than what Sandra said as she descended the
Acro-Corinth, keeping to the little path, while Jacob strode over
rougher ground by her side. She had been left motherless at the age of
four; and the Park was vast. "One never seemed able to get out of it," she laughed. Of course there
was the library, and dear Mr. Jones, and notions about things. "I used
to stray into the kitchen and sit upon the butler's knees," she laughed,
sadly though. Jacob thought that if he had been there he would have saved her; for she
had been exposed to great dangers, he felt, and, he thought to himself,
"People wouldn't understand a woman talking as she talks." She made little of the roughness of the hill; and wore breeches, he saw,
under her short skirts. "Women like Fanny Elmer don't," he thought. "What's-her-name Carslake
didn't; yet they pretend..."

Mrs. Williams said things straight out. He was surprised by his own
knowledge of the rules of behaviour; how much more can be said than one
thought; how open one can be with a woman; and how little he had known
himself before. Evan joined them on the road; and as they drove along up hill and down
hill (for Greece is in a state of effervescence, yet astonishingly
clean-cut, a treeless land, where you see the ground between the blades,
each hill cut and shaped and outlined as often as not against sparkling
deep blue waters, islands white as sand floating on the horizon,
occasional groves of palm trees standing in the valleys, which are
scattered with black goats, spotted with little olive trees and
sometimes have white hollows, rayed and criss-crossed, in their flanks),
as they drove up hill and down he scowled in the corner of the carriage,
with his paw so tightly closed that the skin was stretched between the
knuckles and the little hairs stood upright. Sandra rode opposite,
dominant, like a Victory prepared to fling into the air. "Heartless!" thought Evan (which was untrue). "Brainless!" he suspected (and that was not true either). "Still...!" He
envied her. When bedtime came the difficulty was to write to Bonamy, Jacob found. Yet he had seen Salamis, and Marathon in the distance. Poor old Bonamy! No; there was something queer about it. He could not write to Bonamy. "I shall go to Athens all the same," he resolved, looking very set, with
this hook dragging in his side. The Williamses had already been to Athens. Athens is still quite capable of striking a young man as the oddest
combination, the most incongruous assortment. Now it is suburban; now
immortal. Now cheap continental jewellery is laid upon plush trays. Now
the stately woman stands naked, save for a wave of drapery above the
knee. No form can he set on his sensations as he strolls, one blazing
afternoon, along the Parisian boulevard and skips out of the way of the
royal landau which, looking indescribably ramshackle, rattles along the
pitted roadway, saluted by citizens of both sexes cheaply dressed in
bowler hats and continental costumes; though a shepherd in kilt, cap,
and gaiters very nearly drives his herd of goats between the royal
wheels; and all the time the Acropolis surges into the air, raises
itself above the town, like a large immobile wave with the yellow
columns of the Parthenon firmly planted upon it. The yellow columns of the Parthenon are to be seen at all hours of the
day firmly planted upon the Acropolis; though at sunset, when the ships
in the Piraeus fire their guns, a bell rings, a man in uniform (the
waistcoat unbuttoned) appears; and the women roll up the black stockings
which they are knitting in the shadow of the columns, call to the
children, and troop off down the hill back to their houses. There they are again, the pillars, the pediment, the Temple of Victory
and the Erechtheum, set on a tawny rock cleft with shadows, directly you
unlatch your shutters in the morning and, leaning out, hear the clatter,
the clamour, the whip cracking in the street below. There they are. The extreme definiteness with which they stand, now a brilliant white,
again yellow, and in some lights red, imposes ideas of durability, of
the emergence through the earth of some spiritual energy elsewhere
dissipated in elegant trifles. But this durability exists quite
independently of our admiration. Although the beauty is sufficiently
humane to weaken us, to stir the deep deposit of mud--memories,
abandonments, regrets, sentimental devotions--the Parthenon is separate
from all that; and if you consider how it has stood out all night, for
centuries, you begin to connect the blaze (at midday the glare is
dazzling and the frieze almost invisible) with the idea that perhaps it
is beauty alone that is immortal. Added to this, compared with the blistered stucco, the new love songs
rasped out to the strum of guitar and gramophone, and the mobile yet
insignificant faces of the street, the Parthenon is really astonishing
in its silent composure; which is so vigorous that, far from being
decayed, the Parthenon appears, on the contrary, likely to outlast the
entire world. "And the Greeks, like sensible men, never bothered to finish the backs
of their statues," said Jacob, shading his eyes and observing that the
side of the figure which is turned away from view is left in the rough. He noted the slight irregularity in the line of the steps which "the
artistic sense of the Greeks preferred to mathematical accuracy," he
read in his guide-book. He stood on the exact spot where the great statue of Athena used to
stand, and identified the more famous landmarks of the scene beneath. In short he was accurate and diligent; but profoundly morose. Moreover
he was pestered by guides. This was on Monday. But on Wednesday he wrote a telegram to Bonamy, telling him to come at
once. And then he crumpled it in his hand and threw it in the gutter. "For one thing he wouldn't come," he thought. "And then I daresay this
sort of thing wears off." "This sort of thing" being that uneasy,
painful feeling, something like selfishness--one wishes almost that the
thing would stop--it is getting more and more beyond what is
possible--"If it goes on much longer I shan't be able to cope with
it--but if some one else were seeing it at the same time--Bonamy is
stuffed in his room in Lincoln's Inn--oh, I say, damn it all, I
say,"--the sight of Hymettus, Pentelicus, Lycabettus on one side, and
the sea on the other, as one stands in the Parthenon at sunset, the sky
pink feathered, the plain all colours, the marble tawny in one's eyes,
is thus oppressive. Luckily Jacob had little sense of personal
association; he seldom thought of Plato or Socrates in the flesh; on the
other hand his feeling for architecture was very strong; he preferred
statues to pictures; and he was beginning to think a great deal about
the problems of civilization, which were solved, of course, so very
remarkably by the ancient Greeks, though their solution is no help to
us. Then the hook gave a great tug in his side as he lay in bed on
Wednesday night; and he turned over with a desperate sort of tumble,
remembering Sandra Wentworth Williams with whom he was in love. Next day he climbed Pentelicus. The day after he went up to the Acropolis. The hour was early; the place
almost deserted; and possibly there was thunder in the air. But the sun
struck full upon the Acropolis. Jacob's intention was to sit down and read, and, finding a drum of
marble conveniently placed, from which Marathon could be seen, and yet
it was in the shade, while the Erechtheum blazed white in front of him,
there he sat. And after reading a page he put his thumb in his book. Why
not rule countries in the way they should be ruled? And he read again. No doubt his position there overlooking Marathon somehow raised his
spirits. Or it may have been that a slow capacious brain has these
moments of flowering. Or he had, insensibly, while he was abroad, got
into the way of thinking about politics.