And then looking up and seeing the sharp outline, his meditations were
given an extraordinary edge; Greece was over; the Parthenon in ruins;
yet there he was. (Ladies with green and white umbrellas passed through the
courtyard--French ladies on their way to join their husbands in
Constantinople.) Jacob read on again. And laying the book on the ground he began, as if
inspired by what he had read, to write a note upon the importance of
history--upon democracy--one of those scribbles upon which the work of a
lifetime may be based; or again, it falls out of a book twenty years
later, and one can't remember a word of it. It is a little painful. It
had better be burnt. Jacob wrote; began to draw a straight nose; when all the French ladies
opening and shutting their umbrellas just beneath him exclaimed, looking
at the sky, that one did not know what to expect--rain or fine weather? Jacob got up and strolled across to the Erechtheum. There are still
several women standing there holding the roof on their heads. Jacob
straightened himself slightly; for stability and balance affect the body
first. These statues annulled things so! He stared at them, then turned,
and there was Madame Lucien Grave perched on a block of marble with her
kodak pointed at his head. Of course she jumped down, in spite of her
age, her figure, and her tight boots--having, now that her daughter was
married, lapsed with a luxurious abandonment, grand enough in its way,
into the fleshy grotesque; she jumped down, but not before Jacob had
seen her. "Damn these women--damn these women!" he thought. And he went to fetch
his book which he had left lying on the ground in the Parthenon. "How they spoil things," he murmured, leaning against one of the
pillars, pressing his book tight between his arm and his side. (As for
the weather, no doubt the storm would break soon; Athens was under
cloud.) "It is those damned women," said Jacob, without any trace of bitterness,
but rather with sadness and disappointment that what might have been
should never be. (This violent disillusionment is generally to be expected in young men
in the prime of life, sound of wind and limb, who will soon become
fathers of families and directors of banks.) Then, making sure that the Frenchwomen had gone, and looking cautiously
round him, Jacob strolled over to the Erechtheum and looked rather
furtively at the goddess on the left-hand side holding the roof on her
head. She reminded him of Sandra Wentworth Williams. He looked at her,
then looked away. He looked at her, then looked away. He was
extraordinarily moved, and with the battered Greek nose in his head,
with Sandra in his head, with all sorts of things in his head, off he
started to walk right up to the top of Mount Hymettus, alone, in the
heat. That very afternoon Bonamy went expressly to talk about Jacob to tea
with Clara Durrant in the square behind Sloane Street where, on hot
spring days, there are striped blinds over the front windows, single
horses pawing the macadam outside the doors, and elderly gentlemen in
yellow waistcoats ringing bells and stepping in very politely when the
maid demurely replies that Mrs. Durrant is at home. Bonamy sat with Clara in the sunny front room with the barrel organ
piping sweetly outside; the water-cart going slowly along spraying the
pavement; the carriages jingling, and all the silver and chintz, brown
and blue rugs and vases filled with green boughs, striped with trembling
yellow bars. The insipidity of what was said needs no illustration--Bonamy kept on
gently returning quiet answers and accumulating amazement at an
existence squeezed and emasculated within a white satin shoe (Mrs.
Durrant meanwhile enunciating strident politics with Sir Somebody in the
back room) until the virginity of Clara's soul appeared to him candid;
the depths unknown; and he would have brought out Jacob's name had he
not begun to feel positively certain that Clara loved him--and could do
nothing whatever. "Nothing whatever!" he exclaimed, as the door shut, and, for a man of
his temperament, got a very queer feeling, as he walked through the
park, of carriages irresistibly driven; of flower beds uncompromisingly
geometrical; of force rushing round geometrical patterns in the most
senseless way in the world. "Was Clara," he thought, pausing to watch
the boys bathing in the Serpentine, "the silent woman?--would Jacob
marry her?" But in Athens in the sunshine, in Athens, where it is almost impossible
to get afternoon tea, and elderly gentlemen who talk politics talk them
all the other way round, in Athens sat Sandra Wentworth Williams,
veiled, in white, her legs stretched in front of her, one elbow on the
arm of the bamboo chair, blue clouds wavering and drifting from her
cigarette. The orange trees which flourish in the Square of the Constitution, the
band, the dragging of feet, the sky, the houses, lemon and rose
coloured--all this became so significant to Mrs. Wentworth Williams
after her second cup of coffee that she began dramatizing the story of
the noble and impulsive Englishwoman who had offered a seat in her
carriage to the old American lady at Mycenae (Mrs. Duggan)--not
altogether a false story, though it said nothing of Evan, standing first
on one foot, then on the other, waiting for the women to stop
chattering. "I am putting the life of Father Damien into verse," Mrs. Duggan had
said, for she had lost everything--everything in the world, husband and
child and everything, but faith remained. Sandra, floating from the particular to the universal, lay back in a
trance. The flight of time which hurries us so tragically along; the eternal
drudge and drone, now bursting into fiery flame like those brief balls
of yellow among green leaves (she was looking at orange trees); kisses
on lips that are to die; the world turning, turning in mazes of heat and
sound--though to be sure there is the quiet evening with its lovely
pallor, "For I am sensitive to every side of it," Sandra thought, "and
Mrs. Duggan will write to me for ever, and I shall answer her letters." Now the royal band marching by with the national flag stirred wider
rings of emotion, and life became something that the courageous mount
and ride out to sea on--the hair blown back (so she envisaged it, and
the breeze stirred slightly among the orange trees) and she herself was
emerging from silver spray--when she saw Jacob. He was standing in the
Square with a book under his arm looking vacantly about him. That he was
heavily built and might become stout in time was a fact. But she suspected him of being a mere bumpkin. "There is that young man," she said, peevishly, throwing away her
cigarette, "that Mr. Flanders." "Where?" said Evan. "I don't see him." "Oh, walking away--behind the trees now. No, you can't see him. But we
are sure to run into him," which, of course, they did. But how far was he a mere bumpkin? How far was Jacob Flanders at the age
of twenty-six a stupid fellow? It is no use trying to sum people up. One
must follow hints, not exactly what is said, nor yet entirely what is
done. Some, it is true, take ineffaceable impressions of character at
once. Others dally, loiter, and get blown this way and that. Kind old
ladies assure us that cats are often the best judges of character. A cat
will always go to a good man, they say; but then, Mrs. Whitehorn,
Jacob's landlady, loathed cats. There is also the highly respectable opinion that character-mongering is
much overdone nowadays. After all, what does it matter--that Fanny Elmer
was all sentiment and sensation, and Mrs. Durrant hard as iron? that
Clara, owing (so the character-mongers said) largely to her mother's
influence, never yet had the chance to do anything off her own bat, and
only to very observant eyes displayed deeps of feeling which were
positively alarming; and would certainly throw herself away upon some
one unworthy of her one of these days unless, so the character-mongers
said, she had a spark of her mother's spirit in her--was somehow heroic. But what a term to apply to Clara Durrant! Simple to a degree, others
thought her. And that is the very reason, so they said, why she attracts
Dick Bonamy--the young man with the Wellington nose. Now HE'S a dark
horse if you like. And there these gossips would suddenly pause. Obviously they meant to hint at his peculiar disposition--long rumoured
among them. "But sometimes it is precisely a woman like Clara that men of that
temperament need..." Miss Julia Eliot would hint. "Well," Mr. Bowley would reply, "it may be so." For however long these gossips sit, and however they stuff out their
victims' characters till they are swollen and tender as the livers of
geese exposed to a hot fire, they never come to a decision. "That young man, Jacob Flanders," they would say, "so distinguished
looking--and yet so awkward." Then they would apply themselves to Jacob
and vacillate eternally between the two extremes. He rode to
hounds--after a fashion, for he hadn't a penny. "Did you ever hear who his father was?" asked Julia Eliot. "His mother, they say, is somehow connected with the Rocksbiers,"
replied Mr. Bowley. "He doesn't overwork himself anyhow." "His friends are very fond of him." "Dick Bonamy, you mean?" "No, I didn't mean that. It's evidently the other way with Jacob. He is
precisely the young man to fall headlong in love and repent it for the
rest of his life." "Oh, Mr. Bowley," said Mrs. Durrant, sweeping down upon them in her
imperious manner, "you remember Mrs. Adams? Well, that is her niece." And Mr. Bowley, getting up, bowed politely and fetched strawberries. So we are driven back to see what the other side means--the men in clubs
and Cabinets--when they say that character-drawing is a frivolous
fireside art, a matter of pins and needles, exquisite outlines enclosing
vacancy, flourishes, and mere scrawls. The battleships ray out over the North Sea, keeping their stations
accurately apart. At a given signal all the guns are trained on a target
which (the master gunner counts the seconds, watch in hand--at the sixth
he looks up) flames into splinters. With equal nonchalance a dozen young
men in the prime of life descend with composed faces into the depths of
the sea; and there impassively (though with perfect mastery of
machinery) suffocate uncomplainingly together. Like blocks of tin
soldiers the army covers the cornfield, moves up the hillside, stops,
reels slightly this way and that, and falls flat, save that, through
field glasses, it can be seen that one or two pieces still agitate up
and down like fragments of broken match-stick. These actions, together with the incessant commerce of banks,
laboratories, chancellories, and houses of business, are the strokes
which oar the world forward, they say. And they are dealt by men as
smoothly sculptured as the impassive policeman at Ludgate Circus. But
you will observe that far from being padded to rotundity his face is
stiff from force of will, and lean from the efforts of keeping it so. When his right arm rises, all the force in his veins flows straight from
shoulder to finger-tips; not an ounce is diverted into sudden impulses,
sentimental regrets, wire-drawn distinctions. The buses punctually stop. It is thus that we live, they say, driven by an unseizable force. They
say that the novelists never catch it; that it goes hurtling through
their nets and leaves them torn to ribbons. This, they say, is what we
live by--this unseizable force. "Where are the men?" said old General Gibbons, looking round the
drawing-room, full as usual on Sunday afternoons of well-dressed people. "Where are the guns?" Mrs. Durrant looked too. Clara, thinking that her mother wanted her, came in; then went out
again. They were talking about Germany at the Durrants, and Jacob (driven by
this unseizable force) walked rapidly down Hermes Street and ran
straight into the Williamses. "Oh!" cried Sandra, with a cordiality which she suddenly felt. And Evan
added, "What luck!" The dinner which they gave him in the hotel which looks on to the Square
of the Constitution was excellent. Plated baskets contained fresh rolls. There was real butter. And the meat scarcely needed the disguise of
innumerable little red and green vegetables glazed in sauce. It was strange, though. There were the little tables set out at
intervals on the scarlet floor with the Greek King's monogram wrought in
yellow. Sandra dined in her hat, veiled as usual. Evan looked this way
and that over his shoulder; imperturbable yet supple; and sometimes
sighed. It was strange. For they were English people come together in
Athens on a May evening. Jacob, helping himself to this and that,
answered intelligently, yet with a ring in his voice. The Williamses were going to Constantinople early next morning, they
said. "Before you are up," said Sandra. They would leave Jacob alone, then. Turning very slightly, Evan ordered
something--a bottle of wine--from which he helped Jacob, with a kind of
solicitude, with a kind of paternal solicitude, if that were possible. To be left alone--that was good for a young fellow. Never was there a
time when the country had more need of men. He sighed. "And you have been to the Acropolis?" asked Sandra. "Yes," said Jacob. And they moved off to the window together, while Evan
spoke to the head waiter about calling them early. "It is astonishing," said Jacob, in a gruff voice. Sandra opened her eyes very slightly. Possibly her nostrils expanded a
little too. "At half-past six then," said Evan, coming towards them, looking as if
he faced something in facing his wife and Jacob standing with their
backs to the window. Sandra smiled at him. And, as he went to the window and had nothing to say she added, in
broken half-sentences:

"Well, but how lovely--wouldn't it be? The Acropolis, Evan--or are you
too tired?" At that Evan looked at them, or, since Jacob was staring ahead of him,
at his wife, surlily, sullenly, yet with a kind of distress--not that
she would pity him. Nor would the implacable spirit of love, for
anything he could do, cease its tortures. They left him and he sat in the smoking-room, which looks out on to the
Square of the Constitution. "Evan is happier alone," said Sandra. "We have been separated from the
newspapers. Well, it is better that people should have what they
want.... You have seen all these wonderful things since we met.... What
impression ... I think that you are changed." "You want to go to the Acropolis," said Jacob. "Up here then." "One will remember it all one's life," said Sandra. "Yes," said Jacob. "I wish you could have come in the day-time." "This is more wonderful," said Sandra, waving her hand. Jacob looked vaguely. "But you should see the Parthenon in the day-time," he said. "You
couldn't come to-morrow--it would be too early?" "You have sat there for hours and hours by yourself?" "There were some awful women this morning," said Jacob. "Awful women?" Sandra echoed. "Frenchwomen." "But something very wonderful has happened," said Sandra. Ten minutes,
fifteen minutes, half an hour--that was all the time before her. "Yes," he said. "When one is your age--when one is young. What will you do? You will
fall in love--oh yes! But don't be in too great a hurry. I am so much
older." She was brushed off the pavement by parading men. "Shall we go on?" Jacob asked. "Let us go on," she insisted. For she could not stop until she had told him--or heard him say--or was
it some action on his part that she required? Far away on the horizon
she discerned it and could not rest. "You'd never get English people to sit out like this," he said.