"'But I did get your letter,' ses the cap'n. "'He said you didn't,' ses Miss Lamb. "'Look 'ere,' I ses. 'Why don't you keep quiet and let me explain? I
can explain everything.' "'I'm glad o' that, for your sake, my man,' ses the cap'n, looking at me
very hard. 'I 'ope you will be able to explain 'ow it was you came to
leave the wharf for three hours.' "I saw it all then. If I split about Mrs. Plimmer, he'd split to the
guv'nor about my leaving my dooty, and I should get the sack. I thought
I should ha' choked, and, judging by the way they banged me on the back,
Bob and the cook thought so too. They 'elped me to a chair when I got
better, and I sat there 'elpless while the cap'n went on talking. "'I'm no mischief-maker,' he ses; 'and, besides, p'r'aps he's been
punished enough. And as far as I'm concerned he can take this lady to a
music-'all every night of the week if 'e likes. I've done with her.' "There was an eggsterrordinary noise from where my missis was standing;
like the gurgling water makes sometimes running down the kitchen sink at
'ome, only worse. Then they all started talking together, and
'arf-a- dozen times or more Miss Lamb called me to back 'er up in wot
she was saying, but I only shook my 'ead, and at last, arter tossing her
'ead at Cap'n Tarbell and telling 'im she wouldn't 'ave 'im if he'd got
fifty million a year, the five of 'em 'eld my missis while she went off. "They gave 'er ten minutes' start, and then Cap'n Tarbell, arter looking
at me and shaking his 'ead, said he was afraid they must be going. "'And I 'ope this night'll be a lesson to you,' he ses. 'Don't neglect
your dooty again. I shall keep my eye on you, and if you be'ave yourself
I sha'n't say anything. Why, for all you know or could ha' done the
wharf might ha' been burnt to the ground while you was away!' "He nodded to his crew, and they all walked out laughing and left me
alone--with the missis." [Illustration: Mr. Chase, with his friend in his powerful grasp, was
doing his best, as he expressed it, to shake the life out of him]



FAIRY GOLD


"Come and have a pint and talk it over," said Mr. Augustus Teak. "I've
got reasons in my 'ead that you don't dream of, Alf." Mr. Chase grunted and stole a side-glance at the small figure of his
companion. "All brains, you are, Gussie," he remarked. "That's why it
is you're so well off." "Come and have a pint," repeated the other, and with surprising ease
pushed his bulky friend into the bar of the "Ship and Anchor." Mr.
Chase, mellowed by a long draught, placed his mug on the counter and
eyeing him kindly, said--

"I've been in my lodgings thirteen years." "I know," said Mr. Teak; "but I've got a partikler reason for wanting
you. Our lodger, Mr. Dunn, left last week, and I only thought of you
yesterday. I mentioned you to my missis, and she was quite pleased. You
see, she knows I've known you for over twenty years, and she wants to
make sure of only 'aving honest people in the 'ouse. She has got a
reason for it." He closed one eye and nodded with great significance at his friend. "Oh!" said Mr. Chase, waiting. "She's a rich woman," said Mr. Teak, pulling the other's ear down to his
mouth. "She--"

"When you've done tickling me with your whiskers," said Mr. Chase,
withdrawing his head and rubbing his ear vigorously, "I shall be glad." Mr. Teak apologized. "A rich woman," he repeated. "She's been stinting
me for twenty-nine years and saving the money--my money!--money that I
'ave earned with the sweat of my brow. She 'as got over three 'undred
pounds!" "'Ow much?" demanded Mr. Chase. "Three 'undred pounds and more," repeated the other; "and if she had 'ad
the sense to put it in a bank it would ha' been over four 'undred by this
time. Instead o' that she keeps it hid in the 'Ouse." "Where?" inquired the greatly interested Mr. Chase. Mr. Teak shook his head. "That's just what I want to find out," he
answered. "She don't know I know it; and she mustn't know, either. That's important." "How did you find out about it, then?" inquired his friend. "My wife's sister's husband, Bert Adams, told me. His wife told 'im in
strict confidence; and I might 'ave gone to my grave without knowing
about it, only she smacked his face for 'im the other night." "If it's in the house you ought to be able to find it easy enough," said
Mr. Chase. "Yes, it's all very well to talk," retorted Mr. Teak. "My missis never
leaves the 'ouse unless I'm with her, except when I'm at work; and if she
thought I knew of it she'd take and put it in some bank or somewhere
unbeknown to me, and I should be farther off it than ever." "Haven't you got no idea?" said Mr. Chase. "Not the leastest bit," said the other. "I never thought for a moment
she was saving money. She's always asking me for more, for one thing;
but, then women alway do. And look 'ow bad it is for her--saving money
like that on the sly. She might grow into a miser, pore thing. For 'er
own sake I ought to get hold of it, if it's only to save her from
'erself." Mr. Chase's face reflected the gravity of his own. "You're the only man I can trust," continued Mr. Teak, "and I thought if
you came as lodger you might be able to find out where it is hid, and get
hold of it for me." "Me steal it, d'ye mean?" demanded the gaping Mr. Chase. "And suppose
she got me locked up for it? I should look pretty, shouldn't I?" "No; you find out where it is hid," said the other; "that's all you need
do. I'll find someway of getting hold of it then." "But if you can't find it, how should I be able to?" inquired Mr. Chase. "'Cos you'll 'ave opportunities," said the other. "I take her out some
time when you're supposed to be out late; you come 'ome, let yourself in
with your key, and spot the hiding-place. I get the cash, and give you
ten-golden-sovereigns--all to your little self. It only occurred to me
after Bert told me about it, that I ain't been in the house alone for
years." He ordered some more beer, and, drawing Mr. Chase to a bench, sat down to
a long and steady argument. It shook his faith in human nature to find
that his friend estimated the affair as a twenty-pound job, but he was in
no position to bargain. They came out smoking twopenny cigars whose
strength was remarkable for their age, and before they parted Mr. Chase
was pledged to the hilt to do all that he could to save Mrs. Teak from
the vice of avarice. It was a more difficult undertaking than he had supposed. The house,
small and compact, seemed to offer few opportunities for the concealment
of large sums of money, and after a fortnight's residence he came to the
conclusion that the treasure must have been hidden in the garden. The
unalloyed pleasure, however, with which Mrs. Teak regarded the efforts
of her husband to put under cultivation land that had lain fallow for
twenty years convinced both men that they were on a wrong scent. Mr.
Teak, who did the digging, was the first to realize it, but his friend,
pointing out the suspicions that might be engendered by a sudden
cessation of labour, induced him to persevere. "And try and look as if you liked it," he said, severely. "Why, from the
window even the back view of you looks disagreeable." "I'm fair sick of it," declared Mr. Teak. "Anybody might ha' known she
wouldn't have buried it in the garden. She must 'ave been saving for
pretty near thirty years, week by week, and she couldn't keep coming out
here to hide it. 'Tain't likely." Mr. Chase pondered. "Let her know, casual like, that I sha'n't be 'ome
till late on Saturday," he said, slowly. "Then you come 'ome in the
afternoon and take her out. As soon as you're gone I'll pop in and have
a thorough good hunt round. Is she fond of animals?" "I b'lieve so," said the other, staring. "Why?" "Take 'er to the Zoo," said Mr. Chase, impressively. "Take two-penn'orth
o' nuts with you for the monkeys, and some stale buns for--for--for
animals as likes 'em. Give 'er a ride on the elephant and a ride on the
camel." "Anything else?" inquired Mr. Teak disagreeably. "Any more ways you can
think of for me to spend my money?" "You do as I tell you," said his friend. "I've got an idea now where it
is. If I'm able to show you where to put your finger on three 'undred
pounds when you come 'ome it'll be the cheapest outing you have ever 'ad. Won't it?" Mr. Teak made no reply, but, after spending the evening in deliberation,
issued the invitation at the supper-table. His wife's eyes sparkled at
first; then the light slowly faded from them and her face fell. "I can't go," she said, at last. "I've got nothing to go in." "Rubbish!" said her husband, starting uneasily. "It's a fact," said Mrs. Teak. "I should like to go, too--it's years
since I was at the Zoo. I might make my jacket do; it's my hat I'm
thinking about." Mr. Chase, meeting Mr. Teak's eye, winked an obvious suggestion. "So, thanking you all the same," continued Mrs. Teak, with amiable
cheerfulness, "I'll stay at 'ome." "'Ow-'ow much are they?" growled her husband, scowling at Mr. Chase. "All prices," replied his wife. "Yes, I know," said Mr. Teak, in a grating voice. "You go in to buy a
hat at one and eleven-pence; you get talked over and flattered by a man
like a barber's block, and you come out with a four-and-six penny one. The only real difference in hats is the price, but women can never see
it." Mrs. Teak smiled faintly, and again expressed her willingness to stay at
home. They could spend the afternoon working in the garden, she said. Her husband, with another indignant glance at the right eye of Mr. Chase,
which was still enacting the part of a camera-shutter, said that she
could have a hat, but asked her to remember when buying it that nothing
suited her so well as a plain one. The remainder of the week passed away slowly; and Mr. Teak, despite his
utmost efforts, was unable to glean any information from Mr. Chase as to
that gentleman's ideas concerning the hiding-place. At every suggestion
Mr. Chase's smile only got broader and more indulgent. "You leave it to me," he said. "You leave it to me, and when you come
home from a happy outing I 'ope to be able to cross your little hand with
three 'undred golden quids." "But why not tell me?" urged Mr. Teak. "'Cos I want to surprise you," was the reply. "But mind, whatever you
do, don't let your wife run away with the idea that I've been mixed up in
it at all. Now, if you worry me any more I shall ask you to make it
thirty pounds for me instead of twenty." The two friends parted at the corner of the road on Saturday afternoon,
and Mr. Teak, conscious of his friend's impatience, sought to hurry his
wife by occasionally calling the wrong time up the stairs. She came down
at last, smiling, in a plain hat with three roses, two bows, and a
feather. "I've had the feather for years," she remarked. "This is the fourth hat
it has been on--but, then, I've taken care of it." Mr. Teak grunted, and, opening the door, ushered her into the street. A
sense of adventure, and the hope of a profitable afternoon made his
spirits rise. He paid a compliment to the hat, and then, to the surprise
of both, followed it up with another--a very little one--to his wife. They took a tram at the end of the street, and for the sake of the air
mounted to the top. Mrs. Teak leaned back in her seat with placid
enjoyment, and for the first ten minutes amused herself with the life in
the streets. Then she turned suddenly to her husband and declared that
she had felt a spot of rain. "'Magination," he said, shortly. Something cold touched him lightly on the eyelid, a tiny pattering
sounded from the seats, and then swish, down came the rain. With an
angry exclamation he sprang up and followed his wife below. "Just our luck," she said, mournfully. "Best thing we can do is to stay
in the car and go back with it." "Nonsense!" said her husband, in a startled' voice; "it'll be over in a
minute." Events proved the contrary. By the time the car reached the terminus it
was coming down heavily. Mrs. Teak settled herself squarely in her seat,
and patches of blue sky, visible only to the eye of faith and her
husband, failed to move her. Even his reckless reference to a cab
failed. "It's no good," she said, tartly. "We can't go about the grounds in a
cab, and I'm not going to slop about in the wet to please anybody. We
must go another time. It's hard luck, but there's worse things in life." Mr. Teak, wondering as to the operations of Mr. Chase, agreed dumbly. He
stopped the car at the corner of their road, and, holding his head down
against the rain, sprinted towards home. Mrs. Teak, anxious for her hat,
passed him. "What on earth's the matter?" she inquired, fumbling in her pocket for
the key as her husband executed a clumsy but noisy breakdown on the front
step. "Chill," replied Mr. Teak. "I've got wet." He resumed his lumberings and, the door being opened, gave vent to his
relief at being home again in the dry, in a voice that made the windows
rattle. Then with anxious eyes he watched his wife pass upstairs. "Wonder what excuse old Alf'll make for being in?" he thought. He stood with one foot on the bottom stair, listening acutely.