Dressed
in his best, with a bulging pocket-book in his breast-pocket, he set out
with Mr. Wright on the following evening to make his first call. Mr. Wright, who was also in his best clothes, led the way to a small
tobacconist's in a side street off the Mile End Road, and, raising his
hat with some ceremony, shook hands with a good-looking young woman who
stood behind the counter: Mr. Kemp, adopting an air of scornful dignity
intended to indicate the possession of great wealth, waited. "This is my uncle," said Mr. Wright, speaking rapidly, "from New Zealand,
the one I spoke to you about. He turned up last night, and you might
have knocked me down with a feather. The last person in the world I
expected to see." Mr. Kemp, in a good rolling voice, said, "Good evening, miss; I hope you
are well," and, subsiding into a chair, asked for a cigar. His surprise
when he found that the best cigar they stocked only cost sixpence almost
assumed the dimensions of a grievance. "It'll do to go on with," he said, smelling it suspiciously. "Have you
got change for a fifty-pound note?" Miss Bradshaw, concealing her surprise by an effort, said that she would
see, and was scanning the contents of a drawer, when Mr. Kemp in some
haste discovered a few odd sovereigns in his waistcoat-pocket. Five
minutes later he was sitting in the little room behind the shop, holding
forth to an admiring audience. "So far as I know," he said, in reply to a question of Mrs. Bradshaw's,
"George is the only relation I've got. Him and me are quite alone, and I
can tell you I was glad to find him." Mrs. Bradshaw sighed. "It's a pity you are so far apart," she said. "It's not for long," said Mr. Kemp. "I'm just going back for about a
year to wind up things out there, and then I'm coming back to leave my
old bones over here. George has very kindly offered to let me live with
him." "He won't suffer for it, I'll be bound," said Mrs. Bradshaw, archly. "So far as money goes he won't," said the old man. "Not that that would
make any difference to George." "It would be the same to me if you hadn't got a farthing," said Mr.
Wright, promptly. [Illustration: "It'll do to go on with," he said]

Mr. Kemp, somewhat affected, shook hands with him, and leaning back in
the most comfortable chair in the room, described his life and struggles
in New Zealand. Hard work, teetotalism, and the simple life combined
appeared to be responsible for a fortune which he affected to be too old
to enjoy. Misunderstandings of a painful nature were avoided by a timely
admission that under medical advice he was now taking a fair amount of
stimulant. [Illustration: "'Ow much did you say you'd got in the bank?"] "Mind," he said, as he walked home with the elated George, "it's your
game, not mine, and it's sure to come a bit expensive. I can't be a rich
uncle without spending a bit. 'Ow much did you say you'd got in the
bank?" "We must be as careful as we can," said Mr. Wright, hastily. "One thing
is they can't leave the shop to go out much. It's a very good little
business, and it ought to be all right for me and Bella one of these
days, eh?" Mr. Kemp, prompted by a nudge in the ribs, assented. "It's wonderful how
they took it all in about me," he said; "but I feel certain in my own
mind that I ought to chuck some money about." "Tell 'em of the money you have chucked about," said Mr. Wright. "It'll
do just as well, and come a good deal cheaper. And you had better go
round alone to-morrow evening. It'll look better. Just go in for
another one of their sixpenny cigars." Mr. Kemp obeyed, and the following evening, after sitting a little while
chatting in the shop, was invited into the parlour, where, mindful of Mr.
Wright's instructions, he held his listeners enthralled by tales of past
expenditure. A tip of fifty pounds to his bedroom steward coming over
was characterized by Mrs. Bradshaw as extravagant. "Seems to be going all right," said Mr. Wright, as the old man made his
report; "but be careful; don't go overdoing it." Mr. Kemp nodded. "I can turn 'em round my little finger," he said. "You'll have Bella all to yourself to-morrow evening." Mr. Wright flushed. "How did you manage that?" he inquired. "It's the
first time she has ever been out with me alone." "She ain't coming out," said Mr. Kemp. "She's going to stay at home and
mind the shop; it's the mother what's coming out. Going to spend the
evening with me!" Mr. Wright frowned. "What did you do that for?" he demanded, hotly. "I didn't do it," said Mr. Kemp, equably; "they done it. The old lady
says that, just for once in her life, she wants to see how it feels to
spend money like water." "_Money like water!_"  repeated the horrified Mr. Wright. "Money like--
I'll 'money' her--I'll----"

"It don't matter to me," said Mr. Kemp. "I can have a headache or a
chill, or something of that sort, if you like. I don't want to go. It's
no pleasure to me." "What will it cost?" demanded Mr. Wright, pacing up and down the room. The rich uncle made a calculation. "She wants to go to a place called
the Empire," he said, slowly, "and have something for supper, and there'd
be cabs and things. I dessay it would cost a couple o' pounds, and it
might be more. But I'd just as soon ave' a chill--just." Mr. Wright groaned, and after talking of Mrs. Bradshaw as though she were
already his mother-in-law, produced the money. His instructions as to
economy lasted almost up to the moment when he stood with Bella outside
the shop on the following evening and watched the couple go off. "It's wonderful how well they get on together," said Bella, as they
re-entered the shop and passed into the parlour. "I've never seen mother
take to anybody so quick as she has to him." "I hope you like him, too," said Mr. Wright. "He's a dear," said Bella. "Fancy having all that money. I wonder what
it feels like?" "I suppose I shall know some day," said the young man, slowly; "but it
won't be much good to me unless----"

"Unless?" said Bella, after a pause. "Unless it gives me what I want," replied the other. "I'd sooner be a
poor man and married to the girl I love, than a millionaire." Miss Bradshaw stole an uneasy glance at his somewhat sallow features, and
became thoughtful. "It's no good having diamonds and motor-cars and that sort of thing
unless you have somebody to share them with," pursued Mr. Wright. Miss Bradshaw's eyes sparkled, and at that moment the shop-bell tinkled
and a lively whistle sounded. She rose and went into the shop, and Mr.
Wright settled back in his chair and scowled darkly as he saw the
intruder. "Good evening," said the latter. "I want a sixpenny smoke for twopence,
please. How are we this evening? Sitting up and taking nourishment?" Miss Bradshaw told him to behave himself. "Always do," said the young man. "That's why I can never get anybody to
play with. I had such an awful dream about you last night that I
couldn't rest till I saw you. Awful it was." "What was it?" inquired Miss Bradshaw. "Dreamt you were married," said Mr. Hills, smiling at her. Miss Bradshaw tossed her head. "Who to, pray?" she inquired. "Me," said Mr. Hills, simply. "I woke up in a cold perspiration. Halloa! is that Georgie in there? How are you, George? Better?" "I'm all right," said Mr. Wright, with dignity, as the other hooked the
door open with his stick and nodded at him. "Well, why don't you look it?" demanded the lively Mr. Hills. "Have you
got your feet wet, or what?" "Oh, be quiet," said Miss Bradshaw, smiling at him. "Right-o," said Mr. Hills, dropping into a chair by the counter and
caressing his moustache. "But you wouldn't speak to me like that if you
knew what a terrible day I've had." "What have you been doing?" asked the girl. "Working," said the other, with a huge sigh. "Where's the millionaire? I came round on purpose to have a look at him." "Him and mother have gone to the Empire?" said Miss Bradshaw. Mr. Hills gave three long, penetrating whistles, and then, placing his
cigar with great care on the counter, hid his face in a huge
handkerchief. Miss Bradshaw, glanced from him to the frowning Mr.
Wright, and then, entering the parlour, closed the door with a bang. Mr.
Hills took the hint, and with a somewhat thoughtful grin departed. He came in next evening for another cigar, and heard all that there was
to hear about the Empire. Mrs. Bradshaw would have treated him but
coldly, but the innocent Mr. Kemp, charmed by his manner, paid him great
attention. "He's just like what I was at his age," he said. "Lively." "I'm not a patch on you," said Mr. Hills, edging his way by slow degrees
into the parlour. "I don't take young ladies to the Empire. Were you
telling me you came over here to get married, or did I dream it?" "'Ark at him," said the blushing Mr. Kemp, as Mrs. Bradshaw shook her
head at the offender and told him to behave himself. "He's a man any woman might be happy with," said Mr. Hills. "He never
knows how much there is in his trousers-pocket. Fancy sewing on buttons
for a man like that. Gold-mining ain't in it." Mrs. Bradshaw shook her head at him again, and Mr. Hills, after
apologizing to her for revealing her innermost thoughts before the most
guileless of men, began to question Mr. Kemp as to the prospects of a
bright and energetic young man, with a distaste for work, in New Zealand. The audience listened with keen attention to the replies, the only
disturbing factor being a cough of Mr. Wright's, which became more and
more troublesome as the evening wore on. By the time uncle and nephew
rose to depart the latter was so hoarse that he could scarcely speak. "Why didn't you tell 'em you had got a letter calling you home, as I told
you?" he vociferated, as soon as they were clear of the shop. "I--I forgot it," said the old man. "Forgot it!" repeated the incensed Mr. Wright. "What did you think I was coughing like that for--fun?" "I forgot it," said the old man, doggedly. "Besides, if you take my
advice, you'd better let me stay a little longer to make sure of things." Mr. Wright laughed disagreeably. "I dare say," he said; "but I am
managing this affair, not you. Now, you go round to-morrow afternoon and
tell them you're off. D'ye hear? D'ye think I'm made of money? And
what do you mean by making such a fuss of that fool, Charlie Hills? You
know he is after Bella." He walked the rest of the way home in indignant silence, and, after
giving minute instructions to Mr. Kemp next morning at breakfast, went
off to work in a more cheerful frame of mind. Mr. Kemp was out when he
returned, and after making his toilet he followed him to Mrs. Bradshaw's. To his annoyance, he found Mr. Hills there again; and, moreover, it soon
became clear to him that Mr. Kemp had said nothing about his approaching
departure. Coughs and scowls passed unheeded, and at last in a
hesitating voice, he broached the subject himself. There was a general
chorus of lamentation. "I hadn't got the heart to tell you," said Mr. Kemp. "I don't know when
I've been so happy." "But you haven't got to go back immediate," said Mrs. Bradshaw. "To-morrow," said Mr. Wright, before the old man could reply. "Business." "Must you go," said Mrs. Bradshaw. Mr. Kemp smiled feebly. "I suppose I ought to," he replied, in a
hesitating voice. "Take my tip and give yourself a bit of a holiday before you go back,"
urged Mr. Hills. "Just for a few days," pleaded Bella. "To please us," said Mrs. Bradshaw. "Think 'ow George'll miss you." "Lay hold of him and don't let him go," said Mr. Hills. He took Mr. Kemp round the waist, and the laughing Bella and her mother
each secured an arm. An appeal to Mr. Wright to secure his legs passed
unheeded. "We don't let you go till you promise," said Mrs. Bradshaw. Mr. Kemp smiled and shook his head. "Promise?" said Bella. "Well, well," said Mr. Kemp; "p'r'aps--"

"He must go back," shouted the alarmed  Mr. Wright. "Let him speak for himself," exclaimed Bella, indignantly.