"Oh, I might 'ave known it was a joke," cried Mrs. Gibbs, in a faint
voice, as she tottered to a chair. "Oh,'ow cruel of you to tell me my
pore Joe was alive! Oh, 'ow could you?" "Lor' lumme," said the incensed Mr. Kidd, pushing Mr. Gibbs forward. "Here he is. Same as you saw 'im last, except for 'is whiskers. Don't
make that sobbing noise; people'll be coming in." "Oh! Oh! Oh! Take 'im away," cried Mrs. Gibbs. "Go and play your
tricks with somebody else's broken 'art." "But it's your husband," said Mr. Brown. "Take 'im away," wailed Mrs. Gibbs. Mr. Kidd, grinding his teeth, tried to think. "'Ave you got any marks on
your body, Joe?" he inquired. "I ain't got a mark on me," said Mr. Gibbs with a satisfied air, "or a
blemish. My skin is as whi--"

"That's enough about your skin," interrupted Mr. Kidd, rudely. "If you ain't all of you gone before I count ten," said Mrs. Gibbs, in a
suppressed voice, "I'll scream. 'Ow dare you come into a respectable
woman's place and talk about your skins? Are you going? One! Two! Three! Four! Five!" Her voice rose with each numeral; and Mr. Gibbs himself led the way
downstairs, and, followed by his friends, slipped nimbly round the
corner. "It's a wonder she didn't rouse the whole 'ouse," he said, wiping his
brow on his sleeve; "and where should we ha' been then? I thought at the
time it was a mistake you making me 'ave my whiskers off, but I let you
know best. She's never seen me without 'em. I 'ad a remarkable strong
growth when I was quite a boy. While other boys was--"

"Shut-up!" vociferated Mr. Kidd. "Sha'n't!" said Mr. Gibbs, defiantly. "I've 'ad enough of being away
from my comfortable little 'ome and my wife; and I'm going to let 'em
start growing agin this very night. She'll never reckernize me without
'em, that's certain." "He's right, Bob," said Mr. Brown, with conviction. "D'ye mean to tell me we've got to wait till 'is blasted whiskers grow?" cried Mr. Kidd, almost dancing with fury. "And go on keeping 'im in
idleness till they do?" "You'll get it all back out o' my share," said Mr. Gibbs, with dignity. "But you can please yourself. If you like to call it quits now, I don't
mind." Mr. Brown took his seething friend aside, and conferred with him in low
but earnest tones. Mr. Gibbs, with an indifferent air, stood by
whistling softly. "'Ow long will they take to grow?" inquired Mr. Kidd, turning to him
with a growl. Mr. Gibbs shrugged his shoulders. "Can't say," he replied; "but I should
think two or three weeks would be enough for 'er to reckernize me by. If
she don't, we must wait another week or so, that's all." "Well, there won't be much o' your share left, mind that," said Mr. Kidd,
glowering at him. "I can't help it," said Mr. Gibbs. "You needn't keep reminding me of
it." They walked the rest of the way in silence; and for the next fortnight
Mr. Gibbs's friends paid nightly visits to note the change in his
appearance, and grumble at its slowness. "We'll try and pull it off to-morrow night," said Mr. Kidd, at the end of
that period. "I'm fair sick o' lending you money." Mr. Gibbs shook his head and spoke sagely about not spoiling the ship for
a ha'porth o' tar; but Mr. Kidd was obdurate. "There's enough for 'er to reckernize you by," he said, sternly, "and we
don't want other people to. Meet us at the Monument at eight o'clock
to-morrow night, and we'll get it over." "Give your orders," said Mr. Gibbs, in a nasty voice. "Keep your 'at well over your eyes," commanded Mr. Kidd, sternly. "Put
them spectacles on wot I lent you, and it wouldn't be a bad idea if you
tied your face up in a piece o' red flannel." "I know wot I'm going to do without you telling me," said Mr. Gibbs,
nodding. "I'll bet you pots round that you don't either of you
reckernize me tomorrow night." The bet was taken at once, and from eight o'clock until ten minutes to
nine the following night Messrs. Kidd and Brown did their best to win it. Then did Mr. Kidd, turning to Mr. Brown in perplexity, inquire with many
redundant words what it all meant. [Illustration: "Gone!" exclaimed both gentlemen. "Where?"] "He must 'ave gone on by 'imself," said Mr. Brown. "We'd better go and
see." In a state of some disorder they hurried back to Wapping, and, mounting
the stairs to Mrs. Gibbs's room, found the door fast. To their fervent
and repeated knocking there was no answer. "Ah, you won't make her 'ear," said a woman, thrusting an untidy head
over the balusters on the next landing. "She's gone." "Gone!" exclaimed both gentlemen. "Where?" "Canada," said the woman. "She went off this morning." Mr. Kidd leaned up against the wall for support; Mr. Brown stood
open-mouthed and voiceless. "It was a surprise to me," said the woman, "but she told me this morning
she's been getting ready on the quiet for the last fortnight. Good
spirits she was in, too; laughing like anything." "Laughing!" repeated Mr. Kidd, in a terrible voice. The woman nodded. "And when I spoke about it and reminded 'er that she
'ad only just lost 'er pore husband, I thought she would ha' burst," she
said, severely. "She sat down on that stair and laughed till the tears
ran dowwn 'er face like water." Mr. Brown turned a bewildered face upon his partner. "Laughing!" he
said, slowly. "Wot 'ad she got to laugh at?" "Two born-fools," replied Mr. Kidd. GOOD INTENTIONS


"Jealousy; that's wot it is," said the night-watchman, trying to sneer--
"pure jealousy." He had left his broom for a hurried half-pint at the
"Bull's Head"--left it leaning in a negligent attitude against the
warehouse-wall; now, lashed to the top of the crane at the jetty end, it
pointed its soiled bristles towards the evening sky and defied capture. "And I know who it is, and why 'e's done it," he continued. "Fust and
last, I don't suppose I was talking to the gal for more than ten minutes,
and 'arf of that was about the weather. "I don't suppose anybody 'as suffered more from jealousy than wot I 'ave:
Other people's jealousy, I mean. Ever since I was married the missis has
been setting traps for me, and asking people to keep an eye on me. I
blacked one of the eyes once--like a fool--and the chap it belonged to
made up a tale about me that I ain't lived down yet. "Years ago, when I was out with the missis one evening, I saved a gal's
life for her. She slipped as she was getting off a bus, and I caught 'er
just in time. Fine strapping gal she was, and afore I could get my
balance we 'ad danced round and round 'arfway acrost the road with our
arms round each other's necks, and my missis watching us from the
pavement. When we were safe, she said the gal 'adn't slipped at all;
and, as soon as the gal 'ad got 'er breath, I'm blest if she didn't say
so too. "You can't argufy with jealous people, and you can't shame 'em. When I
told my missis once that I should never dream of being jealous of her,
instead of up and thanking me for it, she spoilt the best frying-pan we
ever had. When the widder-woman next-door but two and me 'ad rheumatics
at the same time, she went and asked the doctor whether it was catching. "The worse trouble o' that kind I ever got into was all through trying to
do somebody else a kindness. I went out o' my way to do it; I wasted the
whole evening for the sake of other people, and got into such trouble
over it that even now it gives me the cold shivers to think of. "Cap'n Tarbell was the man I tried to do a good turn to; a man what used
to be master of a ketch called the _Lizzie and Annie,_ trading between
'ere and Shoremouth. 'Artful Jack' he used to be called, and if ever a
man deserved the name, he did. A widder-man of about fifty, and as silly
as a boy of fifteen. He 'ad been talking of getting married agin for
over ten years, and, thinking it was only talk, I didn't give 'im any
good advice. Then he told me one night that 'e was keeping company with
a woman named Lamb, who lived at a place near Shoremouth. When I asked
'im what she looked like, he said that she had a good 'art, and, knowing
wot that meant, I wasn't at all surprised when he told me some time arter
that 'e had been a silly fool. "'Well, if she's got a good 'art,' I ses, 'p'r'aps she'll let you go.' "'Talk sense,' he ses. 'It ain't good enough for that. Why, she
worships the ground I tread on. She thinks there is nobody like me in
the whole wide world.' "'Let's 'ope she'll think so arter you're married,' I ses, trying to
cheer him up. "'I'm not going to get married,' he ses. 'Leastways, not to 'er. But
'ow to get out of it without breaking her 'art and being had up for
breach o' promise I can't think. And if the other one got to 'ear of it,
I should lose her too.' "'Other one?' I ses, 'wot other one?' "Cap'n Tarbell shook his 'ead and smiled like a silly gal. "'She fell in love with me on top of a bus in the Mile End Road,' he ses. 'Love at fust sight it was. She's a widder lady with a nice little 'ouse
at Bow, and plenty to live on-her 'usband having been a builder. I don't
know what to do. You see, if I married both of 'em it's sure to be found
out sooner or later.' "'You'll be found out as it is,' I ses, 'if you ain't careful. I'm
surprised at you.' "'Yes,' he ses, getting up and walking backwards and forwards;
'especially as Mrs. Plimmer is always talking about coming down to see
the ship. One thing is, the crew won't give me away; they've been with
me too long for that. P'r'aps you could give me a little advice, Bill.' "I did. I talked to that man for an hour and a'arf, and when I 'ad
finished he said he didn't want that kind of advice at all. Wot 'e
wanted was for me to tell 'im 'ow to get rid of Miss Lamb and marry Mrs.
Plimmer without anybody being offended or having their feelings hurt. "Mrs. Plimmer came down to the ship the very next evening. Fine-looking
woman she was, and, wot with 'er watch and chain and di'mond rings and
brooches and such-like, I should think she must 'ave 'ad five or six
pounds' worth of jewell'ry on 'er. She gave me a very pleasant smile,
and I gave 'er one back, and we stood chatting there like old friends
till at last she tore 'erself away and went on board the ship. "She came off by and by hanging on Cap'n Tarbell's arm. The cap'n was
dressed up in 'is Sunday clothes, with one of the cleanest collars on I
'ave ever seen in my life, and smoking a cigar that smelt like an escape
of gas. He came back alone at ha'past eleven that night, and 'e told me
that if it wasn't for the other one down Shoremouth way he should be the
'appiest man on earth. "'Mrs. Plimmer's only got one fault,' he ses, shaking his 'cad, 'and
that's jealousy. If she got to know of Laura Lamb, it would be all U.P. It makes me go cold all over when I think of it. The only thing is to
get married as quick as I can; then she can't help 'erself.' "'It wouldn't prevent the other one making a fuss, though,' I ses. "'No,' he ses, very thoughtfully, 'it wouldn't. I shall 'ave to do
something there, but wot, I don't know.' "He climbed on board like a man with a load on his mind, and arter a look
at the sky went below and forgot both 'is troubles in sleep. "Mrs. Plimmer came down to the wharf every time the ship was up, arter
that. Sometimes she'd spend the evening aboard, and sometimes they'd go
off and spend it somewhere else. She 'ad a fancy for the cabin, I think,
and the cap'n told me that she 'ad said when they were married she was
going to sail with 'im sometimes. "'But it ain't for six months yet,' he ses, 'and a lot o' things might
'appen to the other one in that time, with luck.' "It was just about a month arter that that 'e came to me one evening
trembling all over. I 'ad just come on dooty, and afore I could ask 'im
wot was the matter he 'ad got me in the 'Bull's Head' and stood me three
'arf-pints, one arter the other. "'I'm ruined,' he ses in a 'usky whisper; 'I'm done for. Why was wimmen
made? Wot good are they? Fancy 'ow bright and 'appy we should all be
without 'em.' "'I started to p'int out one or two things to 'im that he seemed to 'ave
forgot, but 'e wouldn't listen. He was so excited that he didn't seem to
know wot 'e was doing, and arter he 'ad got three more 'arf-pints waiting
for me, all in a row on the counter, I 'ad to ask 'im whether he thought
I was there to do conjuring tricks, or wot?' "'There was a letter waiting for me in the office,' he ses. 'From Miss
Lamb--she's in London. She's coming to pay me a surprise visit this
evening--I know who'll get the surprise. Mrs. Plimmer's coming too.' "I gave 'im one of my 'arf-pints and made 'im drink it. He chucked the
pot on the floor when he 'ad done, in a desprit sort o' way, and 'im and
the landlord 'ad a little breeze then that did 'im more good than wot the
beer 'ad. When we came outside 'e seemed more contented with 'imself,
but he shook his 'ead and got miserable as soon as we got to the wharf
agin. "'S'pose they both come along at the same time,' he ses.