"'Go away,' ses Mr. Bunnett; 'I've'eard all about you. Go away at once.' "'Heard all about me?' ses Bob Pretty, looking puzzled. 'Well, you can't
'ave heard no 'arm, that's one comfort.' "'I've been told your true character,' ses the old gen'leman, very firm. 'And I'm ashamed that I should have let myself be deceived by you. I
hope you'll try and do better while there is still time.' "'If anybody 'as got anything to say agin my character,' says Bob, 'I
wish as they'd say it to my face. I'm a pore, hard-working man, and my
character's all I've got.' "'You're poorer than you thought you was then,' says Mr. Bunnett. 'I
wish you good arternoon.' "'Good arternoon, sir,' ses Bob, very humble. 'I'm afraid some on 'em
'ave been telling lies about me, and I didn't think I'd got a enemy in
the world. Come on, Joseph. Come on, old pal. We ain't wanted here.' "He shook 'is 'ead with sorrow, and made a little sucking noise between
'is teeth, and afore you could wink, his dog 'ad laid hold of the old
gen'leman's leg and kep' quiet waiting orders. "'Help!' screams Mr. Bunnett. 'Call, 'im off! Call 'im off!' "Bob said arterwards that 'e was foolish enough to lose 'is presence o'
mind for a moment, and instead o' doing anything he stood there gaping
with 'is mouth open. "'Call 'im off!' screams Mr. Bunnett, trying to push the dog away. 'Why
don't you call him off?' "'Don't move,' ses Bob Pretty in a frightened voice. 'Don't move,
wotever you do.' "'Call him off! Take 'im away!' ses Mr. Bunnett. "'Why, Joseph! Joseph! Wotever are you a-thinking of?' ses Bob, shaking
'is 'ead at the dog. 'I'm surprised at you! Don't you know Mr. Bunnett
wot is so fond of animals?' "'If you don't call 'im off, ses Mr. Bunnett, trembling all over, 'I'll
have you locked up.' "'I am a-calling 'im off,' ses Bob, looking very puzzled. 'Didn't you
'ear me? It's you making that noise that excites 'im, I think. P'r'aps
if you keep quiet he'll leave go. Come off, Joseph, old boy, there's a
good doggie. That ain't a bone.' "'It's no good talking to 'im like that,' ses Mr. Bunnett, keeping quiet
but trembling worse than ever. 'Make him let go.' "'I don't want to 'urt his feelings,' ses Bob; 'they've got their
feelings the same as wot we 'ave. Besides, p'r'aps it ain't 'is fault--
p'r'aps he's gone mad.' "'HELP!' ses the old gen'leman, in a voice that might ha' been heard a
mile away. 'HELP!' "'Why don't you keep quiet?' ses Bob. 'You're on'y frightening the pore
animal and making things worse. Joseph, leave go and I'll see whether
there's a biskit in my pocket. Why don't you leave go?' "'Pull him off. Hit 'im,' ses Mr. Bunnett, shouting. "'Wot?' ses Bob Pretty, with a start. 'Hit a poor, dumb animal wot don't
know no better! Why, you'd never forgive me, sir, and I should lose the
gold watch besides.' "'No, you won't,' ses Mr. Bunnett, speaking very fast. 'You'll 'ave as
much chance of it as ever you had. Hit 'im! Quick!' "'It 'ud break my 'art,' ses Bob. 'He'd never forgive me; but if you'll
take the responserbility, and then go straight 'ome and give me the gold
watch now for kindness to animals, I will.' "He shook his 'ead with sorrow and made that sucking noise agin.' "'All right, you shall 'ave it,' ses Mr. Bunnett, shouting. 'You shall
'ave it.' "'For kindness to animals?' ses Bob. 'Honour bright?' "'Yes,' ses Mr. Bunnett. [Illustration:"Bob Pretty lifted 'is foot and caught Joseph one behind
that surprised 'im."] "Bob Pretty lifted 'is foot and caught Joseph one behind that surprised
'im. Then he 'elped Mr. Bunnett look at 'is leg, and arter pointing out
that the skin wasn't hardly broken, and saying that Joseph 'ad got the
best mouth of any dog in Claybury, 'e walked 'ome with the old gen'leman
and got the watch. He said Mr. Bunnett made a little speech when 'e gave
it to 'im wot he couldn't remember, and wot he wouldn't repeat if 'e
could. "He came up to this 'ere Cauliflower public-'ouse the same night for the
money 'e had won, and Bill Chambers made another speech, but, as Smith
the landlord put' in outside for it, it didn't do Bob Pretty the good it
ought to ha' done." THE BEQUEST

R. Robert Clarkson sat by his fire, smoking thoughtfully. His lifelong
neighbour and successful rival in love had passed away a few days before,
and Mr. Clarkson, fresh from the obsequies, sat musing on the fragility
of man and the inconvenience that sometimes attended his departure. His meditations were disturbed by a low knocking on the front door, which
opened on to the street. In response to his invitation it opened slowly,
and a small middle-aged man of doleful aspect entered softly and closed
it behind him. "Evening, Bob," he said, in stricken accents. "I thought I'd just step
round to see how you was bearing up. Fancy pore old Phipps! Why, I'd
a'most as soon it had been me. A'most." Mr. Clarkson nodded. "Here to-day and gone to-morrow," continued Mr. Smithson, taking a seat. "Well, well! So you'll have her at last-pore thing." "That was his wish," said Mr. Clarkson, in a dull voice. "And very generous of him too," said Mr. Smithson. "Everybody is saying
so. Certainly he couldn't take her away with him. How long is it since
you was both of you courting her?" "Thirty years come June," replied the other. "Shows what waiting does, and patience," commented Mr. Smithson. "If
you'd been like some chaps and gone abroad, where would you have been
now? Where would have been the reward of your faithful heart?" Mr. Clarkson, whose pipe had gone out, took a coal from the fire and lit
it again. "I can't understand him dying at his age," he said, darkly. "He ought to
have lived to ninety if he'd been taken care of." "Well, he's gone, pore chap," said his friend. "What a blessing it must
ha' been to him in his last moments to think that he had made provision
for his wife." "Provision!" exclaimed Mr. Clarkson. "Why he's left her nothing but the
furniture and fifty pounds insurance money--nothing in the world." Mr. Smithson fidgeted. "I mean you," he said, staring. "Oh!" said the other. "Oh, yes--yes, of course." "And he doesn't want you to eat your heart out in waiting," said Mr.
Smithson. "'Never mind about me,' he said to her; 'you go and make Bob
happy.' Wonderful pretty girl she used to be, didn't she?" Mr. Clarkson
assented. "And I've no doubt she looks the same to you as ever she did," pursued
the sentimental Mr. Smithson. "That's the extraordinary part of it." Mr. Clarkson turned and eyed him; removed the pipe from his mouth, and,
after hesitating a moment, replaced it with a jerk. "She says she'd rather be faithful to his memory," continued the
persevering Mr. Smithson, "but his wishes are her law. She said so to my
missis only yesterday." "Still, she ought to be considered," said Mr. Clarkson, shaking his head. "I think that somebody ought to put it to her. She has got her feelings,
poor thing, and, if she would rather not marry again, she oughtn't to be
compelled to." "Just what my missis did say to her," said the other; "but she didn't pay
much attention. She said it was Henry's wish and she didn't care what
happened to her now he's gone. Besides, if you come to think of it, what
else is she to do? Don't you worry, Bob; you won't lose her again." Mr. Clarkson, staring at the fire, mused darkly. For thirty years he had
played the congenial part of the disappointed admirer but faithful
friend. He had intended to play it for at least fifty or sixty. He
wished that he had had the strength of mind to refuse the bequest when
the late Mr. Phipps first mentioned it, or taken a firmer line over the
congratulations of his friends. As it was, Little Molton quite
understood that after thirty years' waiting the faithful heart was to be
rewarded at last. Public opinion seemed to be that the late Mr. Phipps
had behaved with extraordinary generosity. "It's rather late in life for me to begin," said Mr. Clarkson at last. "Better late than never," said the cheerful Mr. Smithson. "And something seems to tell me that I ain't long for this world,"
continued Mr. Clarkson, eyeing him with some disfavour. "Stuff and nonsense," said Mr. Smithson. "You'll lose all them ideas as
soon as you're married. You'll have somebody to look after you and help
you spend your money." Mr. Clarkson emitted a dismal groan, and clapping his hand over his mouth
strove to make it pass muster as a yawn. It was evident that the
malicious Mr. Smithson was deriving considerable pleasure from his
discomfiture--the pleasure natural to the father of seven over the
troubles of a comfortable bachelor. Mr. Clarkson, anxious to share his
troubles with somebody, came to a sudden and malicious determination to
share them with Mr. Smithson. "I don't want anybody to help me spend my money," he said, slowly. "First and last I've saved a tidy bit. I've got this house, those three
cottages in Turner's Lane, and pretty near six hundred pounds in the
bank." Mr. Smithson's eyes glistened. "I had thought--it had occurred to me," said Mr. Clarkson, trying to keep
as near the truth as possible, "to leave my property to a friend o' mine
--a hard-working man with a large family. However, it's no use talking
about that now. It's too late." "Who--who was it?" inquired his friend, trying to keep his voice steady. Mr. Clarkson shook his head. "It's no good talking about that now,
George," he said, eyeing him with sly enjoyment. "I shall have to leave
everything to my wife now. After all, perhaps it does more harm than
good to leave money to people." "Rubbish!" said Mr. Smithson, sharply. "Who was it?" "You, George," said Mr. Clarkson, softly. "Me?" said the other, with a gasp. "Me?" He jumped up from his chair,
and, seizing the other's hand, shook it fervently. "I oughtn't to have told you, George," said Mr. Clarkson, with great
satisfaction. "It'll only make you miserable. It's just one o' the
might ha' beens." Mr. Smithson, with his back to the fire and his hands twisted behind him,
stood with his eyes fixed in thought. "It's rather cool of Phipps," he said, after a long silence; "rather
cool, I think, to go out of the world and just leave his wife to you to
look after. Some men wouldn't stand it. You're too easy-going, Bob,
that's what's the matter with you." Mr. Clarkson sighed. "And get took advantage of," added his friend. "It's all very well to talk," said Mr. Clarkson, "but what can I do? I
ought to have spoke up at the time.