"Sit down," growled Mr. Culpepper. "Talking about my husband's faults," said his wife. "So I was," said Mr. Sharp, putting his hand to his brow. "Don't be
alarm'," he continued, turning to his host; "nothing to be alarm' about. I'm not going to talk about 'em. Not so silly as that, I hope. I don't
want spoil your life." "Sit down," repeated Mr. Culpepper. "You're very anxious he should sit down," said his wife, sharply. "No, I'm not," said Mr. Culpepper; "only he's talking nonsense." Mr. Sharp, still on his legs, took another sip of port and, avoiding the
eye of Mr. Culpepper, which was showing signs of incipient inflammation,
looked for encouragement to Miss Garland. "He's a man we all look up to and respect," he continued. "If he does go
off to London every now and then on business, that's his lookout. My
idea is he always ought to take Mrs. Culpepper with him. "He'd have pleasure of her company and, same time, he'd be money in pocket
by it. And why shouldn't she go to music-halls sometimes? Why shouldn't
she--"

"You get off home," said the purple Mr. Culpepper, rising and hammering
the table with his fist. "Get off home; and if you so much as show your
face inside this 'ouse again there'll be trouble. Go on. Out you go!" "Home?" repeated Mr. Sharp, sitting down suddenly. "Won't go home till
morning." "Oh, we'll soon see about that," said Mr. Culpepper, taking him by the
shoulders. "Come on, now." Mr. Sharp subsided lumpishly into his chair, and Mr. Culpepper, despite
his utmost efforts, failed to move him. The two ladies exchanged a
glance, and then, with their heads in the air, sailed out of the room,
the younger pausing at the door to bestow a mirthful glance upon Mr.
Sharp ere she disappeared. "Come--out," said Mr. Culpepper, panting. "You trying to tickle me?" inquired Mr. Sharp. "You get off home," said the other. "You've been doing nothing but make
mischief ever since you came in. What put such things into your silly
head I don't know. I shall never hear the end of 'em as long as I live." "Silly head?" repeated Mr. Sharp, with an alarming change of manner. "Say it again." Mr. Culpepper repeated it with gusto. "Very good," said Mr. Sharp. He seized him suddenly and, pushing him
backwards into his easychair, stood over him with such hideous
contortions of visage that Mr. Culpepper was horrified. "Now you sit
there and keep quite still," he said, with smouldering ferocity. "Where
did you put carving-knife? Eh? Where's carving-knife?" "No, no, Bert," said Mr. Culpepper, clutching at his sleeve. "I--I was
only joking. You--you ain't quite yourself, Bert." "What?" demanded the other, rolling his eyes, and clenching his fists. "I--I mean you've improved," said Mr. Culpepper, hurriedly. "Wonderful,
you have." Mr. Sharp's countenance cleared a little. "Let's make a night of it," he
said. "Don't move, whatever you do." [Illustration: He felt the large and clumsy hand of Mr. Butler take him
by the collar]

He closed the door and, putting the wine and a couple of glasses on the
mantelpiece, took a chair by Mr. Culpepper and prepared to spend the
evening. His instructions were too specific to be disregarded, and three
times he placed his arm about the waist of the frenzied Mr. Culpepper and
took him for a lumbering dance up and down the room. In the intervals
between dances he regaled him with interminable extracts from speeches
made at the debating society and recitations learned at school. Suggestions relating to bed, thrown out by Mr. Culpepper from time to
time, were repelled with scorn. And twice, in deference to Mr. Sharp's
desires, he had to join in the chorus of a song. Ten o'clock passed, and the hands of the clock crawled round to eleven. The hour struck, and, as though in answer, the door opened and the
agreeable face of Florrie Garland appeared. Behind her, to the intense
surprise of both gentlemen, loomed the stalwart figure of Mr. Jack
Butler. "I thought he might be useful, uncle," said Miss Garland, coming into the
room. "Auntie wouldn't let me come down before." Mr. Sharp rose in a dazed fashion and saw Mr. Culpepper grasp Mr. Butler
by the hand. More dazed still, he felt the large and clumsy hand of Mr.
Butler take him by the collar and propel him with some violence along the
small passage, while another hand, which he dimly recognized as belonging
to Mr. Culpepper, was inserted in the small of his back. Then the front
door opened and he was thrust out into the night. The door closed, and a
low feminine laugh sounded from a window above. [Illustration: 'I tell you, I am as innercent as a new-born babe'.] SKILLED ASSISTANCE

The night-watchman, who had left his seat on the jetty to answer the
gate-bell, came back with disgust written on a countenance only too well
designed to express it. "If she's been up 'ere once in the last week to, know whether the
_Silvia_ is up she's been four or five times," he growled. "He's
forty-seven if he's a day; 'is left leg is shorter than 'is right, and
he talks with a stutter. When she's with 'im you'd think as butter
wouldn't melt in 'er mouth; but the way she talked to me just now you'd
think I was paid a-purpose to wait on her. I asked 'er at last wot she
thought I was here for, and she said she didn't know, and nobody else
neither. And afore she went off she told the potman from the 'Albion,'
wot was listening, that I was known all over Wapping as the Sleeping
Beauty. "She ain't the fust I've 'ad words with, not by a lot. They're all the
same; they all start in a nice, kind, soapy sort o' way, and, as soon as
they don't get wot they want, fly into a temper and ask me who, I think I
am. I told one woman once not to be silly, and I shall never forget it
as long as I live-never. For all I know, she's wearing a bit o' my 'air
in a locket to this day, and very likely boasting that I gave it to her. "Talking of her reminds me of another woman. There was a Cap'n Pinner,
used to trade between 'ere and Hull on a schooner named the Snipe. Nice
little craft she was, and 'e was a very nice feller. Many and many's the
pint we've 'ad together, turn and turn-about, and the on'y time we ever
'ad a cross word was when somebody hid his clay pipe in my beer and 'e
was foolish enough to think I'd done it. "He 'ad a nice little cottage, 'e told me about, near Hull, and 'is
wife's father, a man of pretty near seventy, lived with 'em. Well-off
the old man was, and, as she was his only daughter, they looked to 'ave
all his money when he'd gorn. Their only fear was that 'e might marry
agin, and, judging from wot 'e used to tell me about the old man, I
thought it more than likely. "'If it wasn't for my missis he'd ha' been married over and over agin,'
he ses one day. 'He's like a child playing with gunpowder.' "''Ow would it be to let 'im burn hisself a bit?' I ses. "'If you was to see some o' the gunpowder he wants to play with, you
wouldn't talk like that,' ses the cap'n. 'You'd know better. The on'y
thing is to keep 'em apart, and my pore missis is wore to a shadder
a-doing of it.' "It was just about a month arter that that he brought the old man up to
London with 'im. They 'ad some stuff to put out at Smith's Wharf,
t'other side of the river, afore they came to us, and though they was
on'y there four or five days, it was long enough for that old man to get
into trouble. "The skipper told me about it ten minutes arter they was made snug in the
inner berth 'ere. He walked up and down like a man with a raging
toothache, and arter follering 'im up and down the wharf till I was tired
out, I discovered that 'is father-in-law 'ad got 'imself mixed up with a
widder-woman ninety years old and weighing twenty stun. Arter he 'ad
cooled down a bit, and I 'ad given 'im a few little pats on the shoulder,
'e made it forty-eight years old and fourteen stun. "'He's getting ready to go and meet her now,' he ses, 'and wot my
missis'll say to me, I don't know.' "His father-in-law came up on deck as 'e spoke, and began to brush
'imself all over with a clothesbrush. Nice-looking little man 'e was,
with blue eyes, and a little white beard, cut to a point, and dressed up
in a serge suit with brass buttons, and a white yachting cap. His real
name was Mr. Finch, but the skipper called 'im Uncle Dick, and he took
such a fancy to me that in five minutes I was calling 'im Uncle Dick too. "'Time I was moving,' he ses, by and by. 'I've got an app'intment.' "'Oh! who with?' ses the skipper, pretending not to know. "'Friend o' mine, in the army,' ses the old man, with a wink at me. 'So
long.' "He went off as spry as a boy, and as soon as he'd gorn the skipper
started walking back'ards and for'ards agin, and raving. "'Let's 'ope as he's on'y amusing 'imself,' I ses. "'Wait till you see 'er,' ses the skipper; 'then you won't talk
foolishness.' "As it 'appened she came back with Uncle Dick that evening, to see 'im
safe, and I see at once wot sort of a woman it was. She 'adn't been on
the wharf five minutes afore you'd ha' thought it belonged to 'er, and
when she went and sat on the schooner it seemed to be about 'arf its
size. She called the skipper Tom, and sat there as cool as you please
holding Uncle Dick's 'and, and patting it. "I took the skipper round to the 'Bull's Head' arter she 'ad gorn, and I
wouldn't let 'im say a word until he had 'ad two pints. He felt better
then, and some o' the words 'e used surprised me. "'Wot's to be done?' he ses at last. 'You see 'ow it is, Bill.' "'Can't you get 'im away?' I ses. 'Who is she, and wot's 'er name?' "'Her name,' ses the skipper, 'her name is Jane Maria Elizabeth Muffit,
and she lives over at Rotherhithe.' "'She's very likely married already,' I ses. "'Her 'usband died ten years ago,' ses the skipper; 'passed away in 'is
sleep. Overlaid, I should say.' "He sat there smoking, and I sat there thinking. Twice 'e spoke to me,
and I held my 'and up and said 'H'sh.' Then I turned to 'im all of a
sudden and pinched his arm so hard he nearly dropped 'is beer. "'Is Uncle Dick a nervous man?' I ses. "'Nervous is no name for it,' he ses, staring. "'Very good, then,' I ses. 'I'll send 'er husband to frighten 'im.' "The skipper looked at me very strange. 'Yes,' he ses. 'Yes. Yes.' "'Frighten 'im out of 'is boots, and make him give 'er up,' I ses. 'Or
better still, get 'im to run away and go into hiding for a time. That
'ud be best, in case 'e found out.' "'Found out wot?' ses the skipper. "'Found out it wasn't 'er husband,' I ses. "'Bill,' ses the skipper, very earnest, 'this is the fust beer I've 'ad
to-day, and I wish I could say the same for you.' "I didn't take 'im at fast, but when I did I gave a laugh that brought in
two more customers to see wot was the matter. Then I took 'im by the
arm--arter a little trouble--and, taking 'im back to the wharf, explained
my meaning to 'im. "'I know the very man,' I ses. 'He comes into a public-'ouse down my way
sometimes. Artful 'Arry, he's called, and, for 'arf-a-quid, say, he'd
frighten Uncle Dick 'arf to death. He's big and ugly, and picks up a
living by selling meerschaum pipes he's found to small men wot don't want
'em. Wonderful gift o' the gab he's got.' "We went acrost to the 'Albion' to talk it over. There's several bars
there, and the landlady always keeps cotton-wool in 'er ears, not 'aving
been brought up to the public line. The skipper told me all 'e knew
about Mrs. Muffit, and we arranged that Artful 'Arry should come down at
seven o'clock next night, if so be as I could find 'im in time. "I got up early the next arternoon, and as it 'appened, he came into the
'Duke of Edinburgh' five minutes arter I got there. Nasty temper 'e was
in, too. He'd just found a meerschaum pipe, as usual, and the very fust
man 'e tried to sell it to said that it was the one 'e lost last
Christmas, and gave 'im a punch in the jaw for it. "'He's a thief, that's wot he is,' ses 'Arry; 'and I 'ate thiefs. 'Ow's
a honest tradesman to make a living when there's people like that about?' "I stood 'im 'arf a pint, and though it hurt 'im awful to drink it, he
said 'ed 'ave another just to see if he could bear the pain. Arter he
had 'ad three 'e began for to take a more cheerful view o' life, and told
me about a chap that spent three weeks in the London 'Orsepittle for
calling 'im a liar. "'Treat me fair,' he ses, 'and I'll treat other people fair. I never
broke my word without a good reason for it, and that's more than
everybody can say. If I told you the praise I've 'ad from some people
you wouldn't believe it.' "I let 'im go on till he 'ad talked 'imself into a good temper, and then I
told 'im of the little job I 'ad got for 'im. He listened quiet till I
'ad finished, and then he shook 'is 'ead. "'It ain't in my line,' he ses. "'There's 'arf a quid 'anging to it,' I ses. "'Arry shook his 'ead agin. 'Tain't enough, mate,' he ses. 'If you was
to make it a quid I won't say as I mightn't think of it.' "I 'ad told the skipper that it might cost 'im a quid, so I knew 'ow far
I could go; and at last, arter 'Arry 'ad got as far as the door three
times, I gave way. "'And I'll 'ave it now,' he ses, 'to prevent mistakes.' "'No, 'Arry,' I ses, very firm. 'Besides, it ain't my money, you see.' "'You mean to say you don't trust me,' 'e ses, firing up.