He walked up, and a little boy, playing unconcernedly in the
sunshine, started at his approach and fled quickly away:
to him the stranger was the enemy. Dr. Coutras had a sense that
the child was stealthily watching him from behind a tree. The door was wide open. He called out, but no one answered. He stepped in. He knocked at a door, but again there was no
answer. He turned the handle and entered. The stench that
assailed him turned him horribly sick. He put his
handkerchief to his nose and forced himself to go in. The
light was dim, and after the brilliant sunshine for a while he
could see nothing. Then he gave a start. He could not make
out where he was. He seemed on a sudden to have entered a
magic world. He had a vague impression of a great primeval
forest and of naked people walking beneath the trees. Then he
saw that there were paintings on the walls. "<i Mon Dieu>, I hope the sun hasn't affected me," he muttered. A slight movement attracted his attention, and he saw that Ata
was lying on the floor, sobbing quietly. "Ata," he called. "Ata." She took no notice. Again the beastly stench almost made him
faint, and he lit a cheroot. His eyes grew accustomed to the
darkness, and now he was seized by an overwhelming sensation
as he stared at the painted walls. He knew nothing of
pictures, but there was something about these that
extraordinarily affected him. From floor to ceiling the walls
were covered with a strange and elaborate composition. It was
indescribably wonderful and mysterious. It took his breath away. It filled him with an emotion which he could not
understand or analyse. He felt the awe and the delight which
a man might feel who watched the beginning of a world. It was
tremendous, sensual, passionate; and yet there was something
horrible there, too, something which made him afraid. It was
the work of a man who had delved into the hidden depths of
nature and had discovered secrets which were beautiful and
fearful too. It was the work of a man who knew things which
it is unholy for men to know. There was something primeval
there and terrible. It was not human. It brought to his mind
vague recollections of black magic. It was beautiful and obscene. "<i Mon Dieu>, this is genius." The words were wrung from him, and he did not know he had spoken. Then his eyes fell on the bed of mats in the corner, and he
went up, and he saw the dreadful, mutilated, ghastly object
which had been Strickland. He was dead. Dr. Coutras made an
effort of will and bent over that battered horror. Then he
started violently, and terror blazed in his heart, for he felt
that someone was behind him. It was Ata. He had not heard
her get up. She was standing at his elbow, looking at what
he looked at. "Good Heavens, my nerves are all distraught," he said. "You nearly frightened me out of my wits." He looked again at the poor dead thing that had been man, and
then he started back in dismay. "But he was blind." "Yes; he had been blind for nearly a year." Chapter LVII


AT that moment we were interrupted by the appearance of
Madame Coutras, who had been paying visits. She came in,
like a ship in full sail, an imposing creature, tall and stout,
with an ample bust and an obesity girthed in alarmingly by
straight-fronted corsets. She had a bold hooked nose and three chins. She held herself upright. She had not yielded for an instant
to the enervating charm of the tropics, but contrariwise was
more active, more worldly, more decided than anyone in a
temperate clime would have thought it possible to be. She was
evidently a copious talker, and now poured forth a breathless
stream of anecdote and comment. She made the conversation we
had just had seem far away and unreal. Presently Dr. Coutras turned to me. "I still have in my <i bureau> the picture that Strickland
gave me," he said. "Would you like to see it?" "Willingly." We got up, and he led me on to the verandah which surrounded
his house. We paused to look at the gay flowers that rioted
in his garden. "For a long time I could not get out of my head the
recollection of the extraordinary decoration with which
Strickland had covered the walls of his house," he said
reflectively. I had been thinking of it, too. It seemed to me that here
Strickland had finally put the whole expression of himself. Working silently, knowing that it was his last chance, I
fancied that here he must have said all that he knew of life
and all that he divined. And I fancied that perhaps here he
had at last found peace. The demon which possessed him was
exorcised at last, and with the completion of the work, for
which all his life had been a painful preparation, rest
descended on his remote and tortured soul. He was willing to
die, for he had fulfilled his purpose. "What was the subject?" I asked. "I scarcely know. It was strange and fantastic. It was a
vision of the beginnings of the world, the Garden of Eden,
with Adam and Eve -- <i que sais-je?> -- it was a hymn to the
beauty of the human form, male and female, and the praise of
Nature, sublime, indifferent, lovely, and cruel. It gave you
an awful sense of the infinity of space and of the endlessness
of time. Because he painted the trees I see about me every
day, the cocoa-nuts, the banyans, the flamboyants, the
alligator-pears, I have seen them ever since differently, as
though there were in them a spirit and a mystery which I am
ever on the point of seizing and which forever escapes me. The colours were the colours familiar to me, and yet they
were different. They had a significance which was all their own. And those nude men and women. They were of the earth, and yet
apart from it. They seemed to possess something of the clay
of which they were created, and at the same time something divine. You saw man in the nakedness of his primeval instincts,
and you were afraid, for you saw yourself." Dr. Coutras shrugged his shoulders and smiled. "You will laugh at me. I am a materialist, and I am a gross,
fat man -- Falstaff, eh? -- the lyrical mode does not become me. I make myself ridiculous. But I have never seen painting
which made so deep an impression upon me. <i Tenez>, I had just
the same feeling as when I went to the Sistine Chapel in Rome. There too I was awed by the greatness of the man who
had painted that ceiling. It was genius, and it was
stupendous and overwhelming. I felt small and insignificant. But you are prepared for the greatness of Michael Angelo. Nothing had prepared me for the immense surprise of these
pictures in a native hut, far away from civilisation, in a
fold of the mountain above Taravao. And Michael Angelo is
sane and healthy. Those great works of his have the calm of
the sublime; but here, notwithstanding beauty, was something
troubling. I do not know what it was. It made me uneasy. It gave me the impression you get when you are sitting next door
to a room that you know is empty, but in which, you know not
why, you have a dreadful consciousness that notwithstanding
there is someone. You scold yourself; you know it is only
your nerves -- and yet, and yet... In a little while it is
impossible to resist the terror that seizes you, and you are
helpless in the clutch of an unseen horror. Yes; I confess I
was not altogether sorry when I heard that those strange
masterpieces had been destroyed." "Destroyed?" I cried. "<i Mais oui>; did you not know?" "How should I know? It is true I had never heard of this work;
but I thought perhaps it had fallen into the hands of a
private owner. Even now there is no certain list of
Strickland's paintings." "When he grew blind he would sit hour after hour in those two
rooms that he had painted, looking at his works with sightless
eyes, and seeing, perhaps, more than he had ever seen in his
life before. Ata told me that he never complained of his
fate, he never lost courage. To the end his mind remained
serene and undisturbed. But he made her promise that when she
had buried him -- did I tell you that I dug his grave with my
own hands, for none of the natives would approach the infected
house, and we buried him, she and I, sewn up in three
<i pareos> joined together, under the mango-tree -- he made her
promise that she would set fire to the house and not leave it
till it was burned to the ground and not a stick remained." I did not speak for a while, for I was thinking. Then I said:

"He remained the same to the end, then." "Do you understand? I must tell you that I thought it my duty
to dissuade her." "Even after what you have just said?" "Yes; for I knew that here was a work of genius, and I did not
think we had the right to deprive the world of it. But Ata
would not listen to me. She had promised. I would not stay
to witness the barbarous deed, and it was only afterwards that
I heard what she had done. She poured paraffin on the dry
floors and on the pandanus-mats, and then she set fire. In a
little while nothing remained but smouldering embers, and a
great masterpiece existed no longer. "I think Strickland knew it was a masterpiece. He had
achieved what he wanted. His life was complete. He had made
a world and saw that it was good. Then, in pride and
contempt, he destroyed it." "But I must show you my picture," said Dr. Coutras, moving on. "What happened to Ata and the child?" "They went to the Marquesas. She had relations there. I have
heard that the boy works on one of Cameron's schooners. They say he is very like his father in appearance." At the door that led from the verandah to the doctor's
consulting-room, he paused and smiled. "It is a fruit-piece. You would think it not a very suitable
picture for a doctor's consulting-room, but my wife will not
have it in the drawing-room. She says it is frankly obscene." "A fruit-piece!" I exclaimed in surprise. We entered the room, and my eyes fell at once on the picture. I looked at it for a long time. It was a pile of mangoes, bananas, oranges, and I know not what
and at first sight it was an innocent picture enough. It would
have been passed in an exhibition of the Post-Impressionists by a
careless person as an excellent but not very remarkable example
of the school; but perhaps afterwards it would come back to his
recollection, and he would wonder why. I do not think then he
could ever entirely forget it. The colours were so strange that words can hardly tell what a
troubling emotion they gave. They were sombre blues, opaque
like a delicately carved bowl in lapis lazuli, and yet with a
quivering lustre that suggested the palpitation of mysterious
life; there were purples, horrible like raw and putrid flesh,
and yet with a glowing, sensual passion that called up vague
memories of the Roman Empire of Heliogabalus; there were reds,
shrill like the berries of holly -- one thought of Christmas
in England, and the snow, the good cheer, and the pleasure of
children -- and yet by some magic softened till they had the
swooning tenderness of a dove's breast; there were deep
yellows that died with an unnatural passion into a green as
fragrant as the spring and as pure as the sparkling water of a
mountain brook. Who can tell what anguished fancy made these
fruits? They belonged to a Polynesian garden of the Hesperides. There was something strangely alive in them, as though
they were created in a stage of the earth's dark history
when things were not irrevocably fixed to their forms. They were extravagantly luxurious. They were heavy with
tropical odours. They seemed to possess a sombre passion of
their own. It was enchanted fruit, to taste which might open
the gateway to God knows what secrets of the soul and to
mysterious palaces of the imagination. They were sullen with
unawaited dangers, and to eat them might turn a man to beast
or god. All that was healthy and natural, all that clung to
happy relationships and the simple joys of simple men, shrunk
from them in dismay; and yet a fearful attraction was in them,
and, like the fruit on the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and
Evil they were terrible with the possibilities of the Unknown. At last I turned away. I felt that Strickland had kept his
secret to the grave. "<i Voyons, Rene, mon ami>," came the loud, cheerful voice of
Madame Coutras, "what are you doing all this time? Here are
the  <i aperitifs>. Ask <i Monsieur> if he will not drink a
little glass of Quinquina Dubonnet." "<i Volontiers>, Madame," I said, going out on to the verandah. The spell was broken. Chapter LVIII


The time came for my departure from Tahiti. According to the
gracious custom of the island, presents were given me by the
persons with whom I had been thrown in contact -- baskets made
of the leaves of the cocoa-nut tree, mats of pandanus, fans;
and Tiare gave me three little pearls and three jars of
guava-jelly made with her own plump hands. When the mail-boat,
stopping for twenty-four hours on its way from Wellington to
San Francisco, blew the whistle that warned the passengers to
get on board, Tiare clasped me to her vast bosom, so that I
seemed to sink into a billowy sea, and pressed her red lips
to mine. Tears glistened in her eyes. And when we steamed
slowly out of the lagoon, making our way gingerly through the
opening in the reef, and then steered for the open sea,
a certain melancholy fell upon me. The breeze was laden still
with the pleasant odours of the land. Tahiti is very far
away, and I knew that I should never see it again. A chapter
of my life was closed, and I felt a little nearer to
inevitable death. Not much more than a month later I was in London; and after I
had arranged certain matters which claimed my immediate
attention, thinking Mrs. Strickland might like to hear what I
knew of her husband's last years, I wrote to her. I had not
seen her since long before the war, and I had to look out her
address in the telephone-book. She made an appointment, and I went
to the trim little house on Campden Hill which she now inhabited. She was by this time a woman of hard on sixty, but she
bore her years well, and no one would have taken her for
more than fifty. Her face, thin and not much lined, was of
the sort that ages gracefully, so that you thought in youth
she must have been a much handsomer woman than in fact she was. Her hair, not yet very gray, was becomingly arranged,
and her black gown was modish. I remembered having heard that
her sister, Mrs. MacAndrew, outliving her husband but a couple
of years, had left money to Mrs. Strickland; and by the look
of the house and the trim maid who opened the door I judged
that it was a sum adequate to keep the widow in modest comfort. When I was ushered into the drawing-room I found that Mrs.
Strickland had a visitor, and when I discovered who he was,
I guessed that I had been asked to come at just that time not
without intention. The caller was Mr. Van Busche Taylor,
an American, and Mrs. Strickland gave me particulars with a
charming smile of apology to him. "You know, we English are so dreadfully ignorant. You must
forgive me if it's necessary to explain." Then she turned to
me. "Mr. Van Busche Taylor is the distinguished American
critic. If you haven't read his book your education has been
shamefully neglected, and you must repair the omission at
once. He's writing something about dear Charlie, and he's
come to ask me if I can help him." Mr. Van Busche Taylor was a very thin man with a large, bald
head, bony and shining; and under the great dome of his skull
his face, yellow, with deep lines in it, looked very small. He was quiet and exceedingly polite. He spoke with the accent
of New England, and there was about his demeanour a bloodless
frigidity which made me ask myself why on earth he was busying
himself with Charles Strickland. I had been slightly tickled
at the gentleness which Mrs. Strickland put into her mention
of her husband's name, and while the pair conversed I took
stock of the room in which we sat. Mrs. Strickland had moved
with the times. Gone were the Morris papers and gone the
severe cretonnes, gone were the Arundel prints that had
adorned the walls of her drawing-room in Ashley Gardens; the
room blazed with fantastic colour, and I wondered if she knew
that those varied hues, which fashion had imposed upon her,
were due to the dreams of a poor painter in a South Sea
island. She gave me the answer herself. "What wonderful cushions you have," said Mr. Van Busche Taylor. "Do you like them?" she said, smiling. "Bakst, you know." And yet on the walls were coloured reproductions of several of
Strickland's best pictures, due to the enterprise of a
publisher in Berlin. "You're looking at my pictures," she said, following my eyes. "Of course, the originals are out of my reach, but it's a
comfort to have these. The publisher sent them to me himself. They're a great consolation to me." "They must be very pleasant to live with," said Mr. Van Busche Taylor. "Yes; they're so essentially decorative." "That is one of my profoundest convictions," said Mr. Van
Busche Taylor. "Great art is always decorative." Their eyes rested on a nude woman suckling a baby, while a
girl was kneeling by their side holding out a flower to the
indifferent child. Looking over them was a wrinkled, scraggy hag. It was Strickland's version of the Holy Family. I suspected
that for the figures had sat his household above Taravao,
and the woman and the baby were Ata and his first son. I asked myself if Mrs. Strickland had any inkling of the facts. The conversation proceeded, and I marvelled at the tact with which
Mr. Van Busche Taylor avoided all subjects that might have been
in the least embarrassing, and at the ingenuity with which
Mrs. Strickland, without saying a word that was untrue, insinuated
that her relations with her husband had always been perfect. At last Mr. Van Busche Taylor rose to go. Holding his
hostess' hand, he made her a graceful, though perhaps too elaborate,
speech of thanks, and left us. "I hope he didn't bore you," she said, when the door closed
behind him. "Of course it's a nuisance sometimes, but I feel
it's only right to give people any information I can about Charlie. There's a certain responsibility about having been the
wife of a genius." She looked at me with those pleasant eyes of hers, which had
remained as candid and as sympathetic as they had been more
than twenty years before. I wondered if she was making a fool of me. "Of course you've given up your business," I said. "Oh, yes," she answered airily. "I ran it more by way of a
hobby than for any other reason, and my children persuaded me
to sell it. They thought I was overtaxing my strength." I saw that Mrs. Strickland had forgotten that she had ever
done anything so disgraceful as to work for her living. She had the true instinct of the nice woman that it is only
really decent for her to live on other people's money. "They're here now," she said. "I thought they'd, like to hear
what you had to say about their father. You remember Robert,
don't you? I'm glad to say he's been recommended for the
Military Cross." She went to the door and called them. There entered a tall
man in khaki, with the parson's collar, handsome in a somewhat
heavy fashion, but with the frank eyes that I remembered in
him as a boy. He was followed by his sister. She must have
been the same age as was her mother when first I knew her, and
she was very like her. She too gave one the impression that
as a girl she must have been prettier than indeed she was. "I suppose you don't remember them in the least," said
Mrs. Strickland, proud and smiling. "My daughter is now
Mrs. Ronaldson. Her husband's a Major in the Gunners." "He's by way of being a pukka soldier, you know," said
Mrs. Ronaldson gaily. "That's why he's only a Major." I remembered my anticipation long ago that she would marry a soldier. It was inevitable. She had all the graces of the soldier's wife. She was civil and affable, but she could hardly conceal her intimate
conviction that she was not quite as others were. Robert was breezy. "It's a bit of luck that I should be in London when you turned
up," he said. "I've only got three days' leave." "He's dying to get back," said his mother. "Well, I don't mind confessing it, I have a rattling good time
at the front. I've made a lot of good pals. It's a first-rate life. Of course war's terrible, and all that sort of thing;
but it does bring out the best qualities in a man,
there's no denying that." Then I told them what I had learned about Charles Strickland
in Tahiti. I thought it unnecessary to say anything of Ata
and her boy, but for the rest I was as accurate as I could be. When I had narrated his lamentable death I ceased. For a
minute or two we were all silent. Then Robert Strickland
struck a match and lit a cigarette. "The mills of God grind slowly, but they grind exceeding small,"
he said, somewhat impressively. Mrs. Strickland and Mrs. Ronaldson looked down with a slightly
pious expression which indicated, I felt sure, that they
thought the quotation was from Holy Writ. Indeed, I was
unconvinced that Robert Strickland did not share their illusion. I do not know why I suddenly thought of Strickland's
son by Ata.