'She's willing if
you are. Shall I call her?' He chuckled in a funny, dry way
he had, and I called her. She knew what I was talking about,
the hussy, and I saw her out of the corner of my eyes
listening with all her ears, while she pretended to iron a
blouse that she had been washing for me. She came. She was
laughing, but I could see that she was a little shy,
and Strickland looked at her without speaking." "Was she pretty?" I asked. "Not bad. But you must have seen pictures of her. He painted
her over and over again, sometimes with a <i pareo> on and
sometimes with nothing at all. Yes, she was pretty enough. And she knew how to cook. I taught her myself. I saw
Strickland was thinking of it, so I said to him:  'I've given
her good wages and she's saved them, and the captains and the
first mates she's known have given her a little something now
and then. She's saved several hundred francs.' "He pulled his great red beard and smiled. "'Well, Ata,' he said, 'do you fancy me for a husband.' "She did not say anything, but just giggled. "'But I tell you, my poor Strickland, the girl has a
<i beguin> for you,' I said. "I shall beat you,' he said, looking at her. "'How else should I know you loved me,' she answered." Tiare broke off her narrative and addressed herself to me
reflectively. "My first husband, Captain Johnson, used to thrash me
regularly. He was a man. He was handsome, six foot three,
and when he was drunk there was no holding him. I would be
black and blue all over for days at a time. Oh, I cried when
he died. I thought I should never get over it. But it wasn't
till I married George Rainey that I knew what I'd lost. You can never tell what a man is like till you live with him. I've never been so deceived in a man as I was in George
Rainey. He was a fine, upstanding fellow too. He was nearly
as tall as Captain Johnson, and he looked strong enough. But
it was all on the surface. He never drank. He never raised
his hand to me. He might have been a missionary. I made love
with the officers of every ship that touched the island, and
George Rainey never saw anything. At last I was disgusted
with him, and I got a divorce. What was the good of a husband
like that? It's a terrible thing the way some men treat women." I condoled with Tiare, and remarked feelingly that men were
deceivers ever, then asked her to go on with her story of Strickland. "'Well,' I said to him, 'there's no hurry about it. Take your
time and think it over. Ata has a very nice room in the
annexe. Live with her for a month, and see how you like her. You can have your meals here. And at the end of a month, if
you decide you want to marry her, you can just go and settle
down on her property.' "Well, he agreed to that. Ata continued to do the housework, and
I gave him his meals as I said I would. I taught Ata to make one
or two dishes I knew he was fond of. He did not paint much. He
wandered about the hills and bathed in the stream. And he sat
about the front looking at the lagoon, and at sunset he would go
down and look at Murea. He used to go fishing on the reef. He
loved to moon about the harbour talking to the natives. He was a
nice, quiet fellow. And every evening after dinner he would go
down to the annexe with Ata. I saw he was longing to get away to
the bush, and at the end of the month I asked him what he
intended to do. He said if Ata was willing to go, he was willing
to go with her. So I gave them a wedding dinner. I cooked it with
my own hands. I gave them a pea soup and lobster <i a la portugaise,>
and a curry, and a cocoa-nut salad -- you've never had one of my
cocoa-nut salads, have you? I must make you one before you go --
and then I made them an ice. We had all the champagne we could
drink and liqueurs to follow. Oh, I'd made up my mind to do
things well. And afterwards we danced in the drawing-room. I was
not so fat, then, and I always loved dancing." The drawing-room at the Hotel de la Fleur was a small room,
with a cottage piano, and a suite of mahogany furniture,
covered in stamped velvet, neatly arranged around the walls. On round tables were photograph albums, and on the walls
enlarged photographs of Tiare and her first husband, Captain
Johnson. Still, though Tiare was old and fat, on occasion we
rolled back the Brussels carpet, brought in the maids and one
or two friends of Tiare's, and danced, though now to the
wheezy music of a gramaphone. On the verandah the air was
scented with the heavy perfume of the tiare, and overhead the
Southern Cross shone in a cloudless sky. Tiare smiled indulgently as she remembered the gaiety of a
time long passed. "We kept it up till three, and when we went to bed I don't
think anyone was very sober. I had told them they could have
my trap to take them as far as the road went, because after
that they had a long walk. Ata's property was right away in a
fold of the mountain. They started at dawn, and the boy I
sent with them didn't come back till next day. "Yes, that's how Strickland was married." Chapter LII


I suppose the next three years were the happiest of
Strickland's life. Ata's house stood about eight kilometres
from the road that runs round the island, and you went to it
along a winding pathway shaded by the luxuriant trees of the
tropics. It was a bungalow of unpainted wood, consisting of
two small rooms, and outside was a small shed that served as a
kitchen. There was no furniture except the mats they used as
beds, and a rocking-chair, which stood on the verandah. Bananas with their great ragged leaves, like the tattered
habiliments of an empress in adversity, grew close up to the house. There was a tree just behind which bore alligator pears,
and all about were the cocoa-nuts which gave the land
its revenue. Ata's father had planted crotons round his property,
and they grew in coloured profusion, gay and brilliant;
they fenced the land with flame. A mango grew in front
of the house, and at the edge of the clearing were two
flamboyants, twin trees, that challenged the gold of the
cocoa-nuts with their scarlet flowers. Here Strickland lived, coming seldom to Papeete, on the
produce of the land. There was a little stream that ran not
far away, in which he bathed, and down this on occasion would
come a shoal of fish. Then the natives would assemble with spears,
and with much shouting would transfix the great startled
things as they hurried down to the sea. Sometimes Strickland
would go down to the reef, and come back with a basket
of small, coloured fish that Ata would fry in cocoa-nut oil,
or with a lobster; and sometimes she would make a savoury
dish of the great land-crabs that scuttled away under your feet. Up the mountain were wild-orange trees, and now and
then Ata would go with two or three women from the village and
return laden with the green, sweet, luscious fruit. Then the
cocoa-nuts would be ripe for picking, and her cousins (like
all the natives, Ata had a host of relatives) would swarm up
the trees and throw down the big ripe nuts. They split them
open and put them in the sun to dry. Then they cut out the
copra and put it into sacks, and the women would carry it down
to the trader at the village by the lagoon, and he would give
in exchange for it rice and soap and tinned meat and a little money. Sometimes there would be a feast in the neighbourhood,
and a pig would be killed. Then they would go and eat
themselves sick, and dance, and sing hymns. But the house was a long way from the village, and the
Tahitians are lazy. They love to travel and they love to
gossip, but they do not care to walk, and for weeks at a time
Strickland and Ata lived alone. He painted and he read, and
in the evening, when it was dark, they sat together on the
verandah, smoking and looking at the night. Then Ata had a
baby, and the old woman who came up to help her through her
trouble stayed on. Presently the granddaughter of the old
woman came to stay with her, and then a youth appeared -- no
one quite knew where from or to whom he belonged -- but he
settled down with them in a happy-go-lucky way, and they all
lived together. Chapter LIII


"<i Tenez, voila le Capitaine Brunot>," said Tiare, one day
when I was fitting together what she could tell me of Strickland. "He knew Strickland well; he visited him at his house." I saw a middle-aged Frenchman with a big black beard, streaked
with gray, a sunburned face, and large, shining eyes. He was
dressed in a neat suit of ducks. I had noticed him at
luncheon, and Ah Lin, the Chinese boy, told me he had come
from the Paumotus on the boat that had that day arrived. Tiare introduced me to him, and he handed me his card, a large
card on which was printed <i Rene Brunot>, and underneath,
<i Capitaine au Long Cours.>  We were sitting on a little
verandah outside the kitchen, and Tiare was cutting out a
dress that she was making for one of the girls about the
house. He sat down with us. "Yes; I knew Strickland well," he said. "I am very fond of
chess, and he was always glad of a game. I come to Tahiti
three or four times a year for my business, and when he was at
Papeete he would come here and we would play. When he
married" -- Captain Brunot smiled and shrugged his shoulders --
"<i enfin>, when he went to live with the girl that Tiare
gave him, he asked me to go and see him. I was one of the
guests at the wedding feast." He looked at Tiare, and they
both laughed. "He did not come much to Papeete after that,
and about a year later it chanced that I had to go to that
part of the island for I forgot what business, and when I had
finished it I said to myself:  '<i Voyons>, why should I not
go and see that poor Strickland?' I asked one or two natives
if they knew anything about him, and I discovered that he
lived not more than five kilometres from where I was. So I went. I shall never forget the impression my visit made on me. I live on an atoll, a low island, it is a strip of land
surrounding a lagoon, and its beauty is the beauty of the sea
and sky and the varied colour of the lagoon and the grace of
the cocoa-nut trees; but the place where Strickland lived had
the beauty of the Garden of Eden. Ah, I wish I could make you
see the enchantment of that spot, a corner hidden away from
all the world, with the blue sky overhead and the rich,
luxuriant trees. It was a feast of colour. And it was
fragrant and cool. Words cannot describe that paradise. And here he lived, unmindful of the world and by the
world forgotten. I suppose to European eyes it would have
seemed astonishingly sordid. The house was dilapidated and none
too clean. Three or four natives were lying on the verandah. You know how natives love to herd together. There was a young
man lying full length, smoking a cigarette, and he wore nothing
but a <i pareo>." The <i pareo> is a long strip of trade cotton, red or blue,
stamped with a white pattern. It is worn round the waist and
hangs to the knees. "A girl of fifteen, perhaps, was plaiting pandanus-leaf to
make a hat, and an old woman was sitting on her haunches
smoking a pipe. Then I saw Ata. She was suckling a new-born
child, and another child, stark naked, was playing at her feet. When she saw me she called out to Strickland, and he
came to the door. He, too, wore nothing but a <i pareo>. He was an extraordinary figure, with his red beard and matted
hair, and his great hairy chest. His feet were horny and
scarred, so that I knew he went always bare foot. He had gone
native with a vengeance. He seemed pleased to see me, and
told Ata to kill a chicken for our dinner. He took me into
the house to show me the picture he was at work on when I came in. In one corner of the room was the bed, and in the middle
was an easel with the canvas upon it. Because I was sorry for
him, I had bought a couple of his pictures for small sums, and
I had sent others to friends of mine in France. And though I
had bought them out of compassion, after living with them I
began to like them. Indeed, I found a strange beauty in them. Everyone thought I was mad, but it turns out that I was right. I was his first admirer in the islands." He smiled maliciously at Tiare, and with lamentations she told
us again the story of how at the sale of Strickland's effects
she had neglected the pictures, but bought an American stove
for twenty-seven francs. "Have you the pictures still?" I asked. "Yes; I am keeping them till my daughter is of marriageable
age, and then I shall sell them. They will be her <i dot>." Then he went on with the account of his visit to Strickland. "I shall never forget the evening I spent with him. I had not
intended to stay more than an hour, but he insisted that I
should spend the night. I hesitated, for I confess I did not
much like the look of the mats on which he proposed that I
should sleep; but I shrugged my shoulders. When I was
building my house in the Paumotus I had slept out for weeks on
a harder bed than that, with nothing to shelter me but wild
shrubs; and as for vermin, my tough skin should be proof
against their malice. "We went down to the stream to bathe while Ata was preparing
the dinner, and after we had eaten it we sat on the verandah. We smoked and chatted. The young man had a concertina, and he
played the tunes popular on the music-halls a dozen years
before. They sounded strangely in the tropical night
thousands of miles from civilisation. I asked Strickland if
it did not irk him to live in that promiscuity. No, he said;
he liked to have his models under his hand. Presently, after
loud yawning, the natives went away to sleep, and Strickland
and I were left alone. I cannot describe to you the intense
silence of the night. On my island in the Paumotus there is
never at night the complete stillness that there was here. There is the rustle of the myriad animals on the beach, all
the little shelled things that crawl about ceaselessly, and
there is the noisy scurrying of the land-crabs. Now and then
in the lagoon you hear the leaping of a fish, and sometimes a
hurried noisy splashing as a brown shark sends all the other
fish scampering for their lives. And above all, ceaseless
like time, is the dull roar of the breakers on the reef. But here there was not a sound, and the air was scented with the
white flowers of the night. It was a night so beautiful that
your soul seemed hardly able to bear the prison of the body. You felt that it was ready to be wafted away on the immaterial air,
and death bore all the aspect of a beloved friend." Tiare sighed. "Ah, I wish I were fifteen again." Then she caught sight of a cat trying to get at a dish of
prawns on the kitchen table, and with a dexterous gesture and
a lively volley of abuse flung a book at its scampering tail. "I asked him if he was happy with Ata. "'She leaves me alone,' he said. 'She cooks my food and looks
after her babies. She does what I tell her. She gives me
what I want from a woman.' "'And do you never regret Europe? Do you not yearn sometimes
for the light of the streets in Paris or London, the
companionship of your friends, and equals, <i que sais-je?>
for theatres and newspapers, and the rumble of omnibuses on
the cobbled pavements?' "For a long time he was silent. Then he said:

"'I shall stay here till I die.' "'But are you never bored or lonely?' I asked. "He chuckled. "'<i Mon pauvre ami>,' he said. 'It is evident that you do
not know what it is to be an artist.'" Capitaine Brunot turned to me with a gentle smile, and there
was a wonderful look in his dark, kind eyes. "He did me an injustice, for I too know what it is to have
dreams. I have my visions too. In my way I also am an artist." We were all silent for a while, and Tiare fished out of her
capacious pocket a handful of cigarettes. She handed one to
each of us, and we all three smoked. At last she said:

"Since <i ce monsieur> is interested in Strickland, why do you
not take him to see Dr. Coutras? He can tell him something
about his illness and death." "<i Volontiers>," said the Captain, looking at me. I thanked him, and he looked at his watch. "It is past six o'clock. We should find him at home if you
care to come now." I got up without further ado, and we walked along the road
that led to the doctor's house. He lived out of the town,
but the Hotel de la Fleur was on the edge of it, and we were
quickly in the country. The broad road was shaded by pepper-trees,
and on each side were the plantations, cocoa-nut and vanilla. The pirate birds were screeching among the leaves of the palms. We came to a stone bridge over a shallow river,
and we stopped for a few minutes to see the native boys bathing. They chased one another with shrill cries and laughter,
and their bodies, brown and wet, gleamed in the sunlight. Chapter LIV


As we walked along I reflected on a circumstance which all
that I had lately heard about Strickland forced on my attention. Here, on this remote island, he seemed to have aroused
none of the detestation with which he was regarded at home,
but compassion rather; and his vagaries were accepted
with tolerance. To these people, native and European, he was
a queer fish, but they were used to queer fish, and they took
him for granted; the world was full of odd persons, who did
odd things; and perhaps they knew that a man is not what he
wants to be, but what he must be. In England and France he
was the square peg in the round hole, but here the holes were
any sort of shape, and no sort of peg was quite amiss. I do not think he was any gentler here, less selfish or less
brutal, but the circumstances were more favourable. If he had
spent his life amid these surroundings he might have passed
for no worse a man than another. He received here what he
neither expected nor wanted among his own people -- sympathy. I tried to tell Captain Brunot something of the astonishment
with which this filled me, and for a little while he did not
answer. "It is not strange that I, at all events, should have had
sympathy for him," he said at last, "for, though perhaps
neither of us knew it, we were both aiming at the same thing." "What on earth can it be that two people so dissimilar as you
and Strickland could aim at?" I asked, smiling. "Beauty." "A large order," I murmured. "Do you know how men can be so obsessed by love that they are
deaf and blind to everything else in the world? They are as
little their own masters as the slaves chained to the benches
of a galley. The passion that held Strickland in bondage was
no less tyrannical than love." "How strange that you should say that!" I answered. "For long
ago I had the idea that he was possessed of a devil." "And the passion that held Strickland was a passion to
create beauty. It gave him no peace. It urged him hither
and thither. He was eternally a pilgrim, haunted by a divine
nostalgia, and the demon within him was ruthless. There are
men whose desire for truth is so great that to attain it they
will shatter the very foundation of their world. Of such was
Strickland, only beauty with him took the place of truth. I could only feel for him a profound compassion." "That is strange also. A man whom he had deeply wronged told
me that he felt a great pity for him." I was silent for a moment. "I wonder if there you have found the explanation of
a character which has always seemed to me inexplicable. How did you hit on it?" He turned to me with a smile. "Did I not tell you that I, too, in my way was an artist? I realised in myself the same desire as animated him. But whereas his medium was paint, mine has been life." Then Captain Brunot told me a story which I must repeat,
since, if only by way of contrast, it adds something to my
impression of Strickland. It has also to my mind a beauty of
its own. Captain Brunot was a Breton, and had been in the French Navy. He left it on his marriage, and settled down on a small
property he had near Quimper to live for the rest of his days
in peace; but the failure of an attorney left him suddenly
penniless, and neither he nor his wife was willing to live in
penury where they had enjoyed consideration. During his sea
faring days he had cruised the South Seas, and he determined
now to seek his fortune there. He spent some months in Papeete
to make his plans and gain experience; then, on money borrowed
from a friend in France, he bought an island in the Paumotus. It was a ring of land round a deep lagoon, uninhabited,
and covered only with scrub and wild guava. With the
intrepid woman who was his wife, and a few natives,
he landed there, and set about building a house, and clearing
the scrub so that he could plant cocoa-nuts. That was twenty
years before, and now what had been a barren island was a garden. "It was hard and anxious work at first, and we worked
strenuously, both of us. Every day I was up at dawn,
clearing, planting, working on my house, and at night when I
threw myself on my bed it was to sleep like a log till
morning. My wife worked as hard as I did. Then children were
born to us, first a son and then a daughter. My wife and I
have taught them all they know. We had a piano sent out from
France, and she has taught them to play and to speak English,
and I have taught them Latin and mathematics, and we read
history together. They can sail a boat. They can swim as
well as the natives.