said Mr. Davis, with a hard laugh. "Indeed! And 'ow do you know
I'm not?" "For the best of reasons," was the reply. "Besides, how can you prove
that you are? Thirty-five years is a long time." "'Specially on a desert island," said Mr. Wotton, rapidly. "You'd be
surprised 'ow slow the time passes. I was there with 'im, and I can lay
my hand on my 'art and assure you that that is your husband." "Nonsense!" said the old lady, vigorously. "Rubbish!" "I can prove it," said Mr. Davis, fixing her with a glittering eye. "Do
you remember the serpent I 'ad tattooed on my leg for a garter?" "If you don't go at once," said the old lady, hastily, "I'll send for the
police." "You used to admire it," said Mr. Davis, reproachfully. "I remember
once----"

"If you say another word," said the other, in a fierce voice, "I'll send
straight off for the police. You and your serpents! I'll tell my
husband of you, that's what I'll do." "Your WHAT?" roared Mr. Davis, springing to his feet. "My husband. He won't stand any of your nonsense, I can tell you. You'd
better go before he comes in." "O-oh," said Mr. Davis, taking a long breath. "Oh, so you been and got
married again, 'ave you? That's your love for your husband as was cast
away while trying to earn a living for you. That's why you don't want
me, is it? We'll see. I'll wait for him." "You don't know what you're talking about," said the other, with great
dignity. "I've only been married once." Mr. Davis passed the back of his hand across his eyes in a dazed fashion
and stared at her. "Is--is somebody passing himself off as me?" he demanded. "'Cos if he
is I'll 'ave you both up for bigamy." "Certainly not." "But--but--"

Mr. Davis turned and looked blankly at his friend. Mr. Wotton met his
gaze with dilated eyes. "You say you recognize me as your wife?" said the old lady. "Certainly," said Mr. Davis, hotly. "It's very curious," said the other--"very. But are you sure? Look
again." Mr. Davis thrust his face close to hers and stared hard. She bore his
scrutiny without flinching. "I'm positive certain," said Mr. Davis, taking a breath. "That's very curious," said the old lady; "but, then, I suppose we are a
bit alike. You see, Mrs. Davis being away, I'm looking after her house
for a bit. My name happens to be Smith." Mr. Davis uttered a sharp exclamation, and, falling back a step, stared
at her open-mouthed. "We all make mistakes," urged Mr. Wotton, after a long silence, "and
Ben's sight ain't wot it used to be. He strained it looking out for a
sail when we was on that desert----"

"When--when'll she be back?" inquired Mr. Davis, finding his voice at
last. The old lady affected to look puzzled. "But I thought you were certain
that I was your wife?" she said, smoothly. "My mistake," said Mr. Davis, ruefully. "Thirty-five years is a long
time and people change a bit; I have myself. For one thing, I must say
I didn't expect to find 'er so stout." "Stout!" repeated the other, quickly. "Not that I mean you're too stout," said Mr. Davis, hurriedly--"for
people that like stoutness, that is. My wife used to 'ave a very good
figger." Mr. Wotton nodded. "He used to rave about it on that des----"

"When will she be back?" inquired Mr. Davis, interrupting him. Mrs. Smith shook her head. "I can't say," she replied, moving towards
the door. "When she's off holidaying, I never know when she'll return. Shall I tell her you called?" "Tell her I----certainly," said Mr. Davis, with great vehemence. "I'll
come in a week's time and see if she's back." "She might be away for months," said the old lady, moving slowly to the
passage and opening the street door. "Good-afternoon." She closed the door behind them and stood watching them through the glass
as they passed disconsolately into the street. Then she went back into
the parlour, and standing before the mantelpiece, looked long and
earnestly into the mirror. Mr. Davis returned a week later--alone, and, pausing at the gate, glanced
in dismay at a bill in the window announcing that the house was to be
sold. He walked up the path still looking at it, and being admitted by
the trim servant was shown into the parlour, and stood in a dispirited
fashion before Mrs. Smith. "Not back yet?" he inquired, gruffly. The old lady shook her head. "What--what--is that bill for?" demanded Mr. Davis, jerking his thumb
towards it. "She is thinking of selling the house," said Mrs. Smith. "I let her know
you had been, and that is, the result. She won't comeback. You won't
see her again." "Where is she?" inquired Mr. Davis, frowning. Mrs. Smith shook her head again. "And it would be no use my telling
you," she said. "What she has got is her own, and the law won't let you
touch a penny of it without her consent. You must have treated her
badly; why did you leave her?" "Why?" repeated Mr. Davis. "Why? Why, because she hit me over the 'ead
with a broom-handle." Mrs. Smith tossed her head. "Fancy you remembering that for thirty-five years!" she said. "Fancy forgetting it!" retorted Mr. Davis. "I suppose she had a hot temper," said the old lady. "'Ot temper?" said the other. "Yes." He leaned forward, and holding
his chilled hands over the fire stood for some time deep in thought. "I don't know what it is," he said at last, "but there's a something
about you that reminds me of her. It ain't your voice, 'cos she had a
very nice voice--when she wasn't in a temper--and it ain't your face,
because--"

"Yes?" said Mrs. Smith, sharply. "Because it don't remind me of her." "And yet the other day you said you recognized me at once," said the old
lady. "I thought I did," said Mr. Davis. "One thing is, I was expecting to see
her, I s'pose." There was a long silence. "Well, I won't keep you," said Mrs. Smith at last, "and it's no good for
you to keep coming here to see her. She will never come here again. I don't want to hurt your feelings, but you don't look over and above
respectable. Your coat is torn, your trousers are patched in a dozen
places, and your boots are half off your feet--I don't know what the
servant must think." "I--I only came to look for my wife," said Mr. Davis, in a startled
voice. "I won't come again." "That's right," said the old lady. "That'll please her, I know. And if
she should happen to ask what sort of a living you are making, what shall
I tell her?" "Tell her what you said about my clothes, ma'am," said Mr. Davis, with
his hand on the door-knob. "She'll understand then. She's known wot it
is to be poor herself. She'd got a bad temper, but she'd have cut her
tongue out afore she'd 'ave thrown a poor devil's rags in his face. Good-afternoon." "Good-afternoon, Ben," said the old woman, in a changed voice. Mr. Davis, half-way through the door, started as though he had been shot,
and, facing about, stood eyeing her in dumb bewilderment. "If I take you back again," repeated his wife, "are you going to behave
yourself?" "It isn't the same voice and it isn't the same face," said the old woman;
"but if I'd only got a broomhandle handy----"

Mr. Davis made an odd noise in his throat. "If you hadn't been so down on your luck," said his wife, blinking her
eyes rapidly, "I'd have let you go. If you hadn't looked 'so miserable I
could have stood it. If I take you back, are you going to behave
yourself?" Mr. Davis stood gaping at her. "If I take you back again," repeated his wife, speaking very slowly, "are
you going to behave yourself?" "Yes," said Mr. Davis, finding his voice at last. "Yes, if you are." THE OLD MAN OF THE SEA

"What I want you to do," said Mr. George Wright, as he leaned towards the
old sailor, "is to be an uncle to me." "Aye, aye," said the mystified Mr. Kemp, pausing with a mug of beer
midway to his lips. "A rich uncle," continued the young man, lowering his voice to prevent
any keen ears in the next bar from acquiring useless knowledge. "An
uncle from New Zealand, who is going to leave me all 'is money." "Where's it coming from?" demanded Mr. Kemp, with a little excitement. "It ain't coming," was the reply. "You've only got to say you've got it. Fact of the matter is, I've got my eye on a young lady; there's another
chap after 'er too, and if she thought I'd got a rich uncle it might make
all the difference. She knows I 'ad an uncle that went to New Zealand
and was never heard of since. That's what made me think of it." Mr. Kemp drank his beer in thoughtful silence. "How can I be a rich
uncle without any brass?" he inquired at length. "I should 'ave to lend you some--a little," said Mr. Wright. [Illustration: "What I want you to do," said Mr. George Wright, "is to
be an uncle to me."] The old man pondered. "I've had money lent me before," he said,
candidly, "but I can't call to mind ever paying it back. I always meant
to, but that's as far as it got." "It don't matter," said the other. "It'll only be for a little while,
and then you'll 'ave a letter calling you back to New Zealand. See? And
you'll go back, promising to come home in a year's time, after you've
wound up your business, and leave us all your money. See?" Mr. Kemp scratched the back of his neck. "But she's sure to find it out
in time," he objected. "P'r'aps," said Mr. Wright. "And p'r'aps not. There'll be plenty of
time for me to get married before she does, and you could write back and
say you had got married yourself, or given your money to a hospital." He ordered some more beer for Mr. Kemp, and in a low voice gave him as
much of the family history as he considered necessary. "I've only known you for about ten days," he concluded, "but I'd sooner
trust you than people I've known for years." "I took a fancy to you the moment I set eyes on you," rejoined Mr. Kemp. "You're the living image of a young fellow that lent me five pounds once,
and was drowned afore my eyes the week after. He 'ad a bit of a squint,
and I s'pose that's how he came to fall overboard." He emptied his mug, and then, accompanied by Mr. Wright, fetched his
sea-chest from the boarding-house where he was staying, and took it to
the young man's lodgings. Fortunately for the latter's pocket the chest
contained a good best suit and boots, and the only expenses incurred
were for a large, soft felt hat and a gilded watch and chain.