"If you're in anything," responded his father. "A gentleman would rather
go without his tea than drink it out of a saucer. That's the sort o'
thing Bill Foley would do." Mr. Bert Jobson drained his saucer thoughtfully. "Picking your teeth with your finger is wrong, too," said Mr. Jobson,
taking a breath. "Food should be removed in a--a--un-undemonstrative
fashion with the tip of the tongue." "I wasn't," said Gladys. "A knife," pursued her father--"a knife should never in any circumstances
be allowed near the mouth." "You've made mother cut herself," said Gladys, sharply; "that's what
you've done." "I thought it was my fork," said Mrs. Jobson. "I was so busy listening I
wasn't thinking what I was doing. Silly of me." "We shall all do better in time," said Mr. Jobson. "But what I want to
know is, what about the gravy? You can't eat it with a fork, and it
don't say nothing about a spoon. Oh, and what about our cold tubs,
mother?" "Cold tubs?" repeated his wife, staring at him. "What cold tubs?" "The cold tubs me and Bert ought to 'ave," said Mr. Jobson. "It says in
the book that an Englishman would just as soon think of going without his
breakfus' as his cold tub; and you know how fond I am of my breakfus'." "And what about me and the gals?" said the amazed Mrs. Jobson. "Don't you worry about me, ma," said Gladys, hastily. "The book don't say nothing about gals; it says Englishmen," said Mr.
Jobson. "But we ain't got a bathroom," said his son. "It don't signify," said Mr. Jobson. "A washtub'll do. Me and Bert'll
'ave a washtub each brought up overnight; and it'll be exercise for the
gals bringing the water up of a morning to us." "Well, I don't know, I'm sure," said the bewildered Mrs. Jobson. "Anyway, you and Bert'll 'ave to carry the tubs up and down. Messy, I
call it. "It's got to be done, mother," said Mr. Jobson cheerfully. "It's only
the lower orders what don't 'ave their cold tub reg'lar. The book says
so." He trundled the tub upstairs the same night and, after his wife had gone
downstairs next morning, opened the door and took in the can and pail
that stood outside. He poured the contents into the tub, and, after
eyeing it thoughtfully for some time, agitated the surface with his right
foot. He dipped and dried that much enduring member some ten times, and
after regarding the damp condition of the towels with great satisfaction,
dressed himself and went downstairs. "I'm all of a glow," he said, seating himself at the table. "I believe I
could eat a elephant. I feel as fresh as a daisy; don't you, Bert?" Mr. Jobson, junior, who had just come in from the shop, remarked,
shortly, that he felt more like a blooming snowdrop. "And somebody slopped a lot of water over the stairs carrying it up,"
said Mrs. Jobson. "I don't believe as everybody has cold baths of a
morning. It don't seem wholesome to me." Mr. Jobson took a book from his pocket, and opening it at a certain page,
handed it over to her. "If I'm going to do the thing at all I must do it properly," he said,
gravely. "I don't suppose Bill Foley ever 'ad a cold tub in his life; he
don't know no better. Gladys!" "Halloa!" said that young lady, with a start. "Are you--are you eating that kipper with your fingers?" Gladys turned and eyed her mother appealingly. "Page-page one hundred and something, I think it is," said her father,
with his mouth full. "'Manners at the Dinner Table.' It's near the end
of the book, I know." "If I never do no worse than that I shan't come to no harm," said his
daughter. Mr. Jobson shook his head at her, and after eating his breakfast with
great care, wiped his mouth on his handkerchief and went into the shop. "I suppose it's all right," said Mrs. Jobson, looking after him, "but
he's taking it very serious--very." "He washed his hands five times yesterday morning," said Dorothy, who had
just come in from the shop to her breakfast; "and kept customers waiting
while he did it, too." "It's the cold-tub business I can't get over," said her mother. "I'm
sure it's more trouble to empty them than what it is to fill them. There's quite enough work in the 'ouse as it is." "Too much," said Bert, with unwonted consideration. "I wish he'd leave me alone," said Gladys. "My food don't do me no good
when he's watching every mouthful I eat." Of murmurings such as these Mr. Jobson heard nothing, and in view of the
great improvement in his dress and manners, a strong resolution was
passed to avoid the faintest appearance of discontent. Even when,
satisfied with his own appearance, he set to work to improve that of Mrs.
Jobson, that admirable woman made no complaint. Hitherto the brightness
of her attire and the size of her hats had been held to atone for her
lack of figure and the roomy comfort of her boots, but Mr. Jobson,
infected with new ideas, refused to listen to such sophistry. He went
shopping with Dorothy; and the Sunday after, when Mrs. Jobson went for an
airing with him, she walked in boots with heels two inches high and toes
that ended in a point. A waist that had disappeared some years before
was recaptured and placed in durance vile; and a hat which called for a
new style of hair-dressing completed the effect. "You look splendid, ma!" said Gladys, as she watched their departure. "Splendid!" "I don't feel splendid," sighed Mrs. Jobson to her husband. "These 'ere
boots feel red-'ot." "Your usual size," said Mr. Jobson, looking across the road. "And the clothes seem just a teeny-weeny bit tight, p'r'aps," continued
his wife. Mr. Jobson regarded her critically. "P'r'aps they might have been let
out a quarter of an inch," he: said, thoughtfully. "They're the best fit
you've 'ad for a long time, mother. I only 'ope the gals'll 'ave such
good figgers." His wife smiled faintly, but, with little breath for conversation, walked
on for some time in silence. A growing redness of face testified to her
distress. "I--I feel awful," she said at last, pressing her hand to her side. "Awful." "You'll soon get used to it," said Mr. Jobson, gently. "Look at me! I
felt like you do at first, and now I wouldn't go back to old clothes--and
comfort--for anything. You'll get to love them boots. "If I could only take 'em off I should love 'em better," said his wife,
panting; "and I can't breathe properly--I can't breathe." "You look ripping, mother," said her husband, simply. His wife essayed another smile, but failed. She set her lips together
and plodded on, Mr. Jobson chatting cheerily and taking no notice of the
fact that she kept lurching against him. Two miles from home she stopped
and eyed him fixedly. "If I don't get these boots off, Alf, I shall be a 'elpless cripple for
the rest of my days," she murmured. "My ankle's gone over three times." "But you can't take 'em off here," said Mr. Jobson, hastily. "Think 'ow
it would look." "I must 'ave a cab or something," said his wife, hysterically. "If I
don't get 'em off soon I shall scream." She leaned against the iron palings of a house for support, while Mr.
Jobson, standing on the kerb, looked up and down the road for a cab. A
four-wheeler appeared just in time to prevent the scandal--of Mrs. Jobson
removing her boots in the street. "Thank goodness," she gasped, as she climbed in. "Never mind about
untying 'em, Alf; cut the laces and get 'em off quick." They drove home with the boots standing side by side on the seat in front
of them. Mr. Jobson got out first and knocked at the door, and as soon
as it opened Mrs. Jobson pattered across the intervening space with the
boots dangling from her hand. She had nearly reached the door when Mr.
Foley, who had a diabolical habit of always being on hand when he was
least wanted, appeared suddenly from the offside of the cab. "Been paddlin'?" he inquired. Mrs. Jobson, safe in her doorway, drew herself up and, holding the boots
behind her, surveyed him with a stare of high-bred disdain. "Been paddlin'?" he inquired

"I see you going down the road in 'em," said the unabashed Mr. Foley,
"and I says to myself, I says, 'Pride'll bear a pinch, but she's going
too far. If she thinks that she can squeedge those little tootsywootsies
of 'ers into them boo--'"

The door slammed violently and left him exchanging grins with Mr. Jobson. "How's the 'at?" he inquired. Mr. Jobson winked. "Bet you a level 'arf-dollar I ain't wearing it next
Sunday," he said, in a hoarse whisper. Mr. Foley edged away. "Not good enough," he said, shaking his head. "I've had a good many bets
with you first and last, Alf, but I can't remember as I ever won one yet. So long." FRIENDS IN NEED



R. Joseph Gibbs finished his half-pint in the private bar of the Red Lion
with the slowness of a man unable to see where the next was coming from,
and, placing the mug on the counter, filled his pipe from a small paper
of tobacco and shook his head slowly at his companions. "First I've 'ad since ten o'clock this morning," he said, in a hard
voice. "Cheer up," said Mr. George Brown. "It can't go on for ever," said Bob Kidd, encouragingly. "All I ask for--is work," said Mr. Gibbs, impressively. "Not slavery,
mind yer, but work." "It's rather difficult to distinguish," said Mr. Brown. "'Specially for some people," added Mr. Kidd. "Go on," said Mr. Gibbs, gloomily. "Go on. Stand a man 'arf a pint, and
then go and hurt 'is feelings. Twice yesterday I wondered to myself what
it would feel like to make a hole in the water." "Lots o' chaps do do it," said Mr. Brown, musingly. "And leave their wives and families to starve," said Mr. Gibbs, icily. "Very often the wife is better off," said his friend. "It's one mouth
less for her to feed. Besides, she gen'rally gets something. When pore
old Bill went they 'ad a Friendly Lead at the 'King's Head' and got his
missis pretty nearly seventeen pounds." "And I believe we'd get more than that for your old woman," said Mr.
Kidd. "There's no kids, and she could keep 'erself easy. Not that I
want to encourage you to make away with yourself." Mr. Gibbs scowled and, tilting his mug, peered gloomily into the
interior. "Joe won't make no 'ole in the water," said Mr. Brown, wagging his head. "If it was beer, now--"

Mr. Gibbs turned and, drawing himself up to five feet three, surveyed the
speaker with an offensive stare. "I don't see why he need make a 'ole in anything," said Mr. Kidd, slowly. "It 'ud do just as well if we said he 'ad. Then we could pass the hat
round and share it." "Divide it into three halves and each 'ave one," said Mr. Brown, nodding;
"but 'ow is it to be done?" "'Ave some more beer and think it over," said Mr. Kidd, pale with
excitement. "Three pints, please." He and Mr. Brown took up their pints, and nodded at each other. Mr.
Gibbs, toying idly with the handle of his, eyed them carefully. "Mind,
I'm not promising anything," he said, slowly. "Understand, I ain't
a-committing of myself by drinking this 'ere pint." "You leave it to me, Joe," said Mr. Kidd. Mr. Gibbs left it to him after a discussion in which pints played a
persuasive part; with the result that Mr. Brown, sitting in the same bar
the next evening with two or three friends, was rudely disturbed by the
cyclonic entrance of Mr. Kidd, who, dripping with water, sank on a bench
and breathed heavily. "What's up? What's the matter?" demanded several voices. "It's Joe--poor Joe Gibbs," said Mr. Kidd. "I was on Smith's wharf
shifting that lighter to the next berth, and, o' course Joe must come
aboard to help. He was shoving her off with 'is foot when--"

He broke off and shuddered and, accepting a mug of beer, pending the
arrival of some brandy that a sympathizer had ordered, drank it slowly. "It all 'appened in a flash," he said, looking round. "By the time I 'ad
run round to his end he was just going down for the third time. I hung
over the side and grabbed at 'im, and his collar and tie came off in my
hand. Nearly went in, I did." He held out the collar and tie; and approving notice was taken of the
fact that he was soaking wet from the top of his head to the middle
button of his waistcoat. "Pore chap!" said the landlord, leaning over the bar. "He was in 'ere
only 'arf an hour ago, standing in this very bar." "Well, he's 'ad his last drop o' beer," said a carman in a chastened
voice. "That's more than anybody can say," said the landlord, sharply. "I never
heard anything against the man; he's led a good life so far as I know,
and 'ow can we tell that he won't 'ave beer?" He made Mr. Kidd a present of another small glass of brandy. "He didn't leave any family, did he?" he inquired, as he passed it over.