He heard
a door open above, and then a wild, ear-splitting shriek rang through the
house. Instinctively he dashed upstairs and, following his wife into
their bedroom, stood by her side gaping stupidly at a pair of legs
standing on the hearthstone. As he watched they came backwards into the
room, the upper part of a body materialized from the chimney, and turning
round revealed the soot-stained face of Mr. Alfred Chase. Another wild
shriek from Mrs. Teak greeted its appearance. "Hul-lo!" exclaimed Mr. Teak, groping for the right thing to say. "Hul-lo! What--what are you doing, Alf?" Mr. Chase blew the soot from his lips. "I--I--I come 'ome unexpected,"
he stammered. "But--what are--you doing?" panted Mrs. Teak, in a rising voice. "I--I was passing your door," said Mr. Chase, "passing your door--to go
to my room to--to 'ave a bit of a rinse, when--"

"Yes," said Mrs. Teak. Mr. Chase gave Mr. Teak a glance the pathos of which even the soot could
not conceal. "When I--I heard a pore little bird struggling in your
chimbley," he continued, with a sigh of relief. "Being fond of animals,
I took the liberty of comin' into your room and saving its life." Mr. Teak drew a breath, which he endeavoured in vain to render noiseless. "It got its pore little foot caught in the brickwork," continued the
veracious Mr. Chase, tenderly. "I released it, and it flowed--I mean
flew--up the chimbley." With the shamefaced air of a man detected in the performance of a noble
action, he passed out of the room. Husband and wife eyed each other. "That's Alf--that's Alf all over," said Mr. Teak, with enthusiasm. "He's
been like it from a child. He's the sort of man that 'ud dive off
Waterloo Bridge to save the life of a drownding sparrow." "He's made an awful mess," said his wife, frowning; "it'll take me the
rest of the day to clean up. There's soot everywhere. The rug is quite
spoilt." She took off her hat and jacket and prepared for the fray. Down below
Messrs.  Teak and Chase, comparing notes, sought, with much warmth, to
put the blame on the right shoulders. "Well, it ain't there," said Mr. Chase, finally. "I've made sure of
that. That's something towards it. I shan't 'ave to look there again,
thank goodness." Mr. Teak sniffed. "Got any more ideas?" he queried. "I have," said the other sternly. "There's plenty of places to search
yet. I've only just begun. Get her out as much as you can and I'll 'ave
my hands on it afore you can say--"

"Soot?" suggested Mr. Teak, sourly. "Any more of your nasty snacks and I chuck it up altogether," said Mr.
Chase, heatedly. "If I wasn't hard up I'd drop it now." He went up to his room in dudgeon, and for the next few days Mr. Teak saw
but little of him. To, lure Mrs. Teak out was almost as difficult as to
persuade a snail to leave its shell, but he succeeded on two or three
occasions, and each time she added something to her wardrobe. The assistant fortune-hunter had been in residence just a month when Mr.
Teak, returning home one afternoon, stood in the small passage listening
to a suppressed wailing noise proceeding from upstairs. It was so creepy
that half-way up he hesitated, and, in a stern but trembling voice,
demanded to know what his wife meant by it. A louder wail than before
was the only reply, and, summoning up his courage, he pushed open the
door of the bedroom and peeped in. His gaze fell on Mrs. Teak, who was
sitting on the hearth-rug, rocking to and fro in front of a dismantled
fire-place. "What--what's the matter?" he said, hastily. Mrs. Teak raised her voice to a pitch that set his teeth on edge. "My
money!" she wailed. "It's all gone! All gone!" "Money?" repeated Mr. Teak, hardly able to contain himself. "What
money?" "All--all my savings!" moaned his wife. "Savings!" said the delighted
Mr. Teak. "What savings?" "Money I have been putting by for our old age," said his wife. "Three
hundred and twenty-two pounds. All gone!" In a fit of sudden generosity Mr. Teak decided then and there that Mr.
Chase should have the odd twenty-two pounds. "You're dreaming!" he said, sternly. "I wish I was," said his wife, wiping her eyes. "Three hundred and
twenty-two pounds in empty mustard-tins. Every ha'penny's gone!" Mr. Teak's eye fell on the stove. He stepped for ward and examined it. The back was out, and Mrs. Teak, calling his attention to a tunnel at the
side, implored him to put his arm in and satisfy himself that it was
empty. "But where could you get all that money from?" he demanded, after a
prolonged groping. "Sa--sa--saved it," sobbed his wife, "for our old age." "Our old age?" repeated Mr. Teak, in lofty tones. "And suppose I had
died first? Or suppose you had died sudden? This is what comes of
deceitfulness and keeping things from your husband. Now somebody has
stole it." Mrs. Teak bent her head and sobbed again. "I--I had just been out for
--for an hour," she gasped. "When I came back I fou--fou--found the
washhouse window smashed, and--"

Sobs choked her utterance. Mr. Teak, lost in admiration of Mr. Chase's
cleverness, stood regarding her in silence. "What--what about the police?" said his wife at last. "Police!" repeated Mr. Teak, with extraordinary vehemence. "Police! Certainly not. D'ye think I'm going to let it be known all round that
I'm the husband of a miser? I'd sooner lose ten times the money." He stalked solemnly out of the room and downstairs, and, safe in the
parlour, gave vent to his feelings in a wild but silent hornpipe. He
cannoned against the table at last, and, subsiding into an easy-chair,
crammed his handkerchief to his mouth and gave way to suppressed mirth. In his excitement he forgot all about tea, and the bereaved Mrs. Teak
made no attempt to come downstairs to prepare it. With his eye on the
clock he waited with what patience he might for the arrival of Mr. Chase. The usual hour for his return came and went. Another hour passed; and
another. A horrible idea that Mr. Chase had been robbed gave way to one
more horrible still. He paced the room in dismay, until at nine o'clock
his wife came down, and in a languid fashion began to set the
supper-table. "Alf's very late," said Mr. Teak, thickly. "Is he?" said his wife, dully. "Very late," said Mr. Teak. "I can't think--Ah, there he is!" He took a deep breath and clenched 'his hands together. By the time Mr.
Chase came into the room he was able to greet him with a stealthy wink. Mr. Chase, with a humorous twist of his mouth, winked back. "We've 'ad a upset," said Mr. Teak, in warning tones. "Eh?" said the other, as Mrs. Teak threw her apron over her head and sank
into a chair. "What about?" In bated accents, interrupted at times by broken murmurs from his wife,
Mr. Teak informed him of the robbery. Mr. Chase, leaning against the
doorpost, listened with open mouth and distended eyeballs. Occasional
interjections of pity and surprise attested his interest. The tale
finished, the gentlemen exchanged a significant wink and sighed in
unison. "And now," said Mr. Teak an hour later, after his wife had retired,
"where is it?" "Ah, that's the question," said Mr. Chase, roguishly. "I wonder where it
can be?" "I--I hope it's in a safe place," said Mr. Teak, anxiously. "Where 'ave
you put it?" "Me?" said Mr. Chase. "Who are you getting at? I ain't put it
anywhere. You know that." "Don't play the giddy goat," said the other, testily. "Where've you hid
it? Is it safe?" Mr. Chase leaned back in his chair and, shaking his head at him, smiled
approvingly. "You're a little wonder, that's what you are, Gussie," he
remarked. "No wonder your pore wife is took in so easy." Mr. Teak sprang up in a fury. "Don't play the fool," he said hoarsely. "Where's the money? I want it. Now, where've you put it?" "Go on," said Mr. Chase, with a chuckle. "Go on. Don't mind me. You
ought to be on the stage, Gussie, that's where you ought to be." "I'm not joking," said Mr. Teak, in a trembling voice, "and I don't want
you to joke with me. If you think you are going off with my money,
you're mistook. If you don't tell me in two minutes where it is, I shall
give you in charge for theft." "Oh" said Mr. Chase. He took a deep breath. "Oh, really!" he said. "I
wouldn't 'ave thought it of you, Gussie. I wouldn't 'ave thought you'd
have played it so low down. I'm surprised at you." "You thought wrong, then," said the other. "Trying to do me out o' my twenty pounds, that's what you are," said Mr.
Chase, knitting his brows. "But it won't do, my boy. I wasn't born
yesterday. Hand it over, afore I lose my temper. Twenty pounds I want
of you, and I don't leave this room till I get it." Speechless with fury, Mr. Teak struck at him. The next moment the
supper-table was overturned with a crash, and Mr. Chase, with his friend
in his powerful grasp, was doing his best, as he expressed it, to shake
the life out of him. A faint scream sounded from above, steps pattered
on the stairs, and Mrs. Teak, with a red shawl round her shoulders, burst
'hurriedly into the room. Mr. Chase released Mr. Teak, opened his mouth
to speak, and then, thinking better of it, dashed into the passage, took
his hat from the peg, and, slamming the front door with extraordinary
violence, departed. He sent round for his clothes next day, but he did not see Mr. Teak until
a month afterwards. His fists clenched and his mouth hardened, but Mr.
Teak, with a pathetic smile, held out his hand, and Mr. Chase, after a
moment's hesitation, took it. Mr. Teak, still holding his friend's hand,
piloted him to a neighbouring hostelry. "It was my mistake, Alf," he said, shaking his head, "but it wasn't my
fault. It's a mistake anybody might ha' made." "Have you found out who took it?" inquired Mr. Chase, regarding him
suspiciously. Mr. Teak gulped and nodded. "I met Bert Adams yesterday," he said,
slowly. "It took three pints afore he told me, but I got it out of 'im
at last. My missis took it herself." Mr. Chase put his mug down with a bang.