"The barmaid, a very nice gal with black 'air and her fingers covered all
over with rings, said that it did 'im credit, and they stood there
talking about tramps and beggars and such-like till Peter and Ginger
nearly choked. He stood there watching 'em and smoking a threepenny
cigar, and when they 'ad finished he told the barmaid to give 'em a
sausage-roll each, and went off. "Peter and Ginger snatched up their sausage-rolls and follered 'im, and
at last Ginger swallowed his pride and walked up to 'im and asked 'im to
lend them some money. "'You'll get it back agin,' he ses. 'You know that well enough.' "'Cert'nly not,' ses Sam; 'and I'm surprised at you asking. Why, a child
could rob you. It's 'ard enough as it is for a pore man like me to 'ave
to keep a couple o' hulking sailormen, but I'm not going to give you
money to chuck away on lodgers. No more sleeping on the floor for me! Now I don't want none o' your langwidge, and I don't want you follering
me like a couple o' cats arter a meat-barrer. I shall be 'aving a cup o'
tea at Brown's coffee-shop by and by, and if you're there at five sharp
I'll see wot I can do for you. Wot did you call me?' "Ginger told 'im three times, and then Peter Russet dragged 'im away. They turned up outside Brown's at a quarter to five, and at ten past six
Sam Small strolled up smoking a cigar, and, arter telling them that he
'ad forgot all about 'em, took 'em inside and paid for their teas. He
told Mr. Brown 'e was paying for 'em, and 'e told the gal wot served 'em
'e was paying for 'em, and it was all pore Ginger could do to stop
'imself from throwing his plate in 'is face. "Sam went off by 'imself, and arter walking about all the evening without
a ha'penny in their pockets, Ginger Dick and Peter went off 'ome to bed
and went to sleep till twelve o'clock, when Sam came in and woke 'em up
to tell 'em about a music-'all he 'ad been to, and 'ow many pints he had
'ad. He sat up in bed till past one o'clock talking about 'imself, and
twice Peter Russet woke Ginger up to listen and got punched for 'is
trouble. "They both said they'd get a ship next morning, and then old Sam turned
round and wouldn't 'ear of it. The airs he gave 'imself was awful. He
said he'd tell 'em when they was to get a ship, and if they went and did
things without asking 'im he'd let 'em starve. "He kept 'em with 'im all that day for fear of losing 'em and having to
give 'em their money when 'e met 'em agin instead of spending it on 'em
and getting praised for it. They 'ad their dinner with 'im at Brown's,
and nothing they could do pleased him. He spoke to Peter Russet out loud
about making a noise while he was eating, and directly arterwards he told
Ginger to use his pocket 'ankercher. Pore Ginger sat there looking at
'im and swelling and swelling until he nearly bust, and Sam told 'im if
he couldn't keep 'is temper when people was trying to do 'im a kindness
he'd better go and get somebody else to keep him. "He took 'em to a music-'all that night, but he spoilt it all for 'em by
taking 'em into the little public-'ouse in Whitechapel Road fust and
standing 'em a drink. He told the barmaid 'e was keeping 'em till they
could find a job, and arter she 'ad told him he was too soft-'arted and
would only be took advantage of, she brought another barmaid up to look
at 'em and ask 'em wot they could do, and why they didn't do it. "Sam served 'em like that for over a week, and he 'ad so much praise from
Mr. Brown and other people that it nearly turned his 'ead. For once in
his life he 'ad it pretty near all 'is own way. Twice Ginger Dick
slipped off and tried to get a ship and came back sulky and hungry, and
once Peter Russet sprained his thumb trying to get a job at the docks. "They gave it up then and kept to Sam like a couple o' shadders, only
giving 'im back-answers when they felt as if something 'ud give way
inside if they didn't. For the fust time in their lives they began to
count the days till their boat was ready for sea. Then something
happened. "They was all coming 'ome late one night along the Minories, when Ginger
Dick gave a shout and, suddenly bolting up a little street arter a man
that 'ad turned up there, fust of all sent 'im flying with a heavy punch
of 'is fist, and then knelt on 'im. "'Now then Ginger,' ses Sam bustling up with Peter Russet, 'wot's all
this? Wot yer doing?' "'It's the thief,' ses Ginger. 'It's our lodger. You keep still!' he
ses shaking the man. 'D'ye hear?' "Peter gave a shout of joy, and stood by to help. "'Nonsense!' ses old Sam, turning pale. 'You've been drinking, Ginger. This comes of standing you 'arf-pints.' "'It's him right enough,' ses Ginger. 'I'd know 'is ugly face anywhere.' "'You come off 'ome at once,' ses Sam, very sharp, but his voice
trembling. 'At once. D'ye hear me?' "'Fetch a policeman, Peter,' ses Ginger. "'Let the pore feller go, I tell you,' ses Sam, stamping his foot. ''Ow
would you like to be locked up? 'Ow would you like to be torn away from
your wife and little ones? 'Ow would you--'

"'Fetch a policeman, Peter,' ses Ginger agin. 'D'ye hear?' "'Don't do that, guv'nor,' ses the lodger. 'You got your money back. Wot's the good o' putting me away?' "'Got our wot back?' ses Ginger, shaking 'im agin. 'Don't you try and be
funny with me, else I'll tear you into little pieces.' "'But he took it back,' ses the man, trying to sit up and pointing at
Sam. 'He follered me downstairs and took it all away from me. Your
ticker as well.' "'Wot?' ses Ginger and Peter both together. "Strue as I'm 'ere,' ses the lodger. 'You turn 'is pockets out and see. Look out! He's going off!' "Ginger turned his 'ead just in time to see old Sam nipping round the
corner. He pulled the lodger up like a flash, and, telling Peter to take
hold of the other side of him, they set off arter Sam. "'Little-joke-o' mine-Ginger,' ses Sam, when they caught 'im. 'I was
going to tell you about it to-night. It ain't often I get the chance of
a joke agin you Ginger; you're too sharp for a old man like me.' "Ginger Dick didn't say anything. He kept 'old o' Sam's arm with one
hand and the lodger's neck with the other, and marched 'em off to his
lodgings. "He shut the door when 'e got in, and arter Peter 'ad lit the candle they
took hold o' Sam and went through 'im, and arter trying to find pockets
where he 'adn't got any, they took off 'is belt and found Ginger's watch,
seventeen pounds five shillings, and a few coppers. "'We 'ad over nine quid each, me and Peter,' ses Ginger. 'Where's the
rest?' "'It's all I've got left,' ses Sam; 'every ha'penny.' "He 'ad to undress and even take 'is boots off afore they'd believe 'im,
and then Ginger took 'is watch and he ses to Peter, 'Lemme see; 'arf of
seventeen pounds is eight pounds ten; 'arf of five shillings is
'arf-a-crown; and 'arf of fourpence is twopence.' "'What about me Ginger old pal?' ses Sam, in a kind voice. 'We must
divide it into threes.' "'Threes?' ses Ginger, staring at'im. 'Whaffor?' "''Cos part of it's mine,' ses Sam, struggling 'ard to be perlite. 'I've
paid for everything for the last ten days, ain't I?' "'Yes,' ses Ginger. 'You 'ave, and I thank you for it.' "'So do I,' ses Peter Russet. 'Hearty I do.' "'It was your kind-'artedness,' ses Ginger, grinning like mad. 'You gave
it to us, and we wouldn't dream of giving it to you back.' "'Nothin' o' the kind,' ses Sam, choking. "'Oh, yes you did,' ses Ginger, 'and you didn't forget to tell people
neither. You told everybody. Now it's our turn.' "He opened the door and kicked the lodger out. Leastways, he would 'ave
kicked 'im, but the chap was too quick for 'im. And then 'e came back,
and, putting his arm round Peter's waist, danced a waltz round the room
with 'im, while pore old Sam got on to his bed to be out of the way. They danced for nearly 'arf-an-hour, and then they undressed and sat on
Peter's bed and talked. They talked in whispers at fust, but at last Sam
'eard Peter say:--

"'Threepence for 'is brekfuss; sevenpence for 'is dinner; threepence for
'is tea; penny for beer and a penny for bacca. 'Ow much is that,
Ginger?' "'One bob,' ses Ginger. "Peter counted up to 'imself. 'I make it more than that, old pal,' he
ses, when he 'ad finished. "'Do you?' ses Ginger, getting up. 'Well, he won't; not if he counts it
twenty times over he won't. Good-night, Peter. 'Appy dreams.'" DUAL CONTROL

"Never say 'die,' Bert," said Mr. Culpepper, kindly; "I like you, and so
do most other people who know what's good for 'em; and if Florrie don't
like you she can keep single till she does." Mr. Albert Sharp thanked him. "Come in more oftener," said Mr. Culpepper. "If she don't know a steady
young man when she sees him, it's her mistake." "Nobody could be steadier than what I am," sighed Mr. Sharp. Mr. Culpepper nodded. "The worst of it is, girls don't like steady young
men," he said, rumpling his thin grey hair; "that's the silly part of
it." "But you was always steady, and Mrs. Culpepper married you," said the
young man. Mr. Culpepper nodded again. "She thought I was, and that came to the
same thing," he said, composedly. "And it ain't for me to say, but she
had an idea that I was very good-looking in them days. I had chestnutty
hair. She burnt a piece of it only the other day she'd kept for thirty
years." [Illustration: A very faint squeeze in return decided him]

"Burnt it? What for?" inquired Mr. Sharp. "Words," said the other, lowering his voice. "When I want one thing
nowadays she generally wants another; and the things she wants ain't the
things I want." Mr. Sharp shook his head and sighed again. "You ain't talkative enough for Florrie, you know," said Mr. Culpepper,
regarding him. "I can talk all right as a rule," retorted Mr. Sharp. "You ought to hear
me at the debating society; but you can't talk to a girl who doesn't talk
back." "You're far too humble," continued the other. "You should cheek her a
bit now and then. Let 'er see you've got some spirit. Chaff 'er." "That's no good," said the young man, restlessly. "I've tried it. Only
the other day I called her 'a saucy little kipper,' and the way she went
on, anybody would have thought I'd insulted her. Can't see a joke, I
s'pose. Where is she now?" "Upstairs," was the reply. "That's because I'm here," said Mr. Sharp. "If it had been Jack Butler
she'd have been down fast enough." "It couldn't be him," said Mr. Culpepper, "because I won't have 'im in
the house. I've told him so; I've told her so, and I've told 'er aunt
so. And if she marries without my leave afore she's thirty she loses the
seven hundred pounds 'er father left her. You've got plenty of time--ten
years." Mr. Sharp, sitting with his hands between his knees, gazed despondently
at the floor. "There's a lot o' girls would jump at me," he remarked. "I've only got to hold up my little finger and they'd jump." "That's because they've got sense," said Mr. Culpepper. "They've got the
sense to prefer steadiness and humdrumness to good looks and dash. A
young fellow like you earning thirty-two-and-six a week can do without
good looks, and if I've told Florrie so once I have told her fifty
times." "Looks are a matter of taste," said Mr. Sharp, morosely. "Some of them
girls I was speaking about just now--"

"Yes, yes," said Mr. Culpepper, hastily. "Now, look here; you go on a
different tack. Take a glass of ale like a man or a couple o' glasses;
smoke a cigarette or a pipe. Be like other young men. Cut a dash, and
don't be a namby-pamby. After you're married you can be as miserable as
you like." Mr. Sharp, after a somewhat lengthy interval, thanked him. "It's my birthday next Wednesday," continued Mr. Culpepper, regarding him
benevolently; "come round about seven, and I'll ask you to stay to
supper. That'll give you a chance. Anybody's allowed to step a bit over
the mark on birthdays, and you might take a glass or two and make a
speech, and be so happy and bright that they'd 'ardly know you. If you
want an excuse for calling, you could bring me a box of cigars for my
birthday." "Or come in to wish you 'Many Happy Returns of the Day,'" said the
thrifty Mr. Sharp. "And don't forget to get above yourself," said Mr. Culpepper, regarding
him sternly; "in a gentlemanly way, of course. Have as many glasses as
you like--there's no stint about me." "If it ever comes off," said Mr. Sharp, rising--"if I get her through
you, you shan't have reason to repent it. I'll look after that." Mr. Culpepper, whose feelings were a trifle ruffled, said that he would
"look after it too." He had a faint idea that, even from his own point
of view, he might have made a better selection for his niece's hand.