"'I'd trust you with untold gold,' I ses, 'but not with a real quid;
you're too fond of a joke, 'Arry.' "We 'ad another long argyment about it, and I had to tell 'im plain at
last that when I wanted to smell 'is fist, I'd say so. "'You turn up at the wharf at five minutes to seven,' I ses, 'and I'll
give you ten bob of it; arter you've done your business I'll give you the
other. Come along quiet, and you'll see me waiting at the gate for you.' "He gave way arter a time, and, fust going 'ome for a cup o' tea, I went
on to the wharf to tell the skipper 'ow things stood. "'It couldn't 'ave 'appened better,' he ses. 'Uncle Dick is sure to be
aboard at that time, 'cos 'e's going acrost the water at eight o'clock to
pay 'er a visit. And all the hands'll be away. I've made sure of that.' "He gave me the money for Artful 'Arry in two 'arf-suverins, and then we
went over to the 'Albion' for a quiet glass and a pipe, and to wait for
seven o'clock. "I left 'im there at ten minutes to, and at five minutes to, punctual to
the minute, I see 'Arry coming along swinging a thick stick with a knob
on the end of it. "'Where's the 'arf thick-un?' he ses, looking round to see that the coast
was clear. "I gave it to 'im, and arter biting it in three places and saying it was
a bit short in weight he dropped it in 'is weskit-pocket and said 'e was
ready. "I left 'im there for a minute while I went and 'ad a look round. The
deck of the Snipe was empty, but I could 'ear Uncle Dick down in the
cabin singing; and, arter listening for a few seconds to make sure that
it was singing, I went back and beckoned to 'Arry. "'He's down in the cabin,' I ses, pointing. 'Don't overdo it, 'Arry, and
at the same time don't underdo it, as you might say.' "'I know just wot you want,' ses 'Arry, 'and if you'd got the 'art of a
man in you, you'd make it two quids.' "He climbed on board and stood listening for a moment at the companion,
and then 'e went down, while I went off outside the gate, so as to be out
of earshot in case Uncle Dick called for me. I knew that I should 'ear
all about wot went on arterwards--and I did. "Artful 'Arry went down the companion-ladder very quiet, and then stood
at the foot of it looking at Uncle Dick. He looked 'im up and down and
all over, and then 'e gave a fierce, loud cough. "'Good-evening,' he ses. "'Good-evening,' ses Uncle Dick, staring at 'im. 'Did you want to see
anybody?' "'I did,' ses 'Arry. 'I do. And when I see 'im I'm going to put my arms
round 'im and twist 'is neck; then I'm going to break every bone in 'is
body, and arter that I'm going to shy 'im overboard to pison the fishes
with.' "'Dear me!' ses Uncle Dick, shifting away as far as 'e could. "'I ain't 'ad a wink o' sleep for two nights,' ses 'Arry--'not ever since
I 'eard of it. When I think of all I've done for that woman-working for
'er, and such-like-my blood boils. When I think of her passing 'erself
off as a widder--my widder--and going out with another man, I don't know
wot to do with myself.' "Uncle Dick started and turned pale. Fust 'e seemed as if 'e was going
to speak, and then 'e thought better of it. He sat staring at 'Arry as
if 'e couldn't believe his eyes. "'Wot would you do with a man like that?' ses 'Arry. 'I ask you, as man
to man, wot would you do to 'im?' "'P'r'aps-p'r'aps 'e didn't know,' ses Uncle Dick, stammering. "'Didn't know!' ses 'Arry. 'Don't care, you mean. We've got a nice
little 'ome, and, just because I've 'ad to leave it and lay low for a bit
for knifing a man, she takes advantage of it. And it ain't the fust
time, neither. Wot's the matter?' "'Touch-touch of ague; I get it sometimes,' ses Uncle Dick. "'I want to see this man Finch,' ses 'Arry, shaking 'is knobby stick. 'Muffit, my name is, and I want to tell 'im so.' "Uncle Dick nearly shook 'imself on to the floor. "'I--I'll go and see if 'e's in the fo'c'sle,' he ses at last. "'He ain't there, 'cos I've looked,' ses 'Arry, 'arf shutting 'is eyes and
looking at 'im hard. 'Wot might your name be?' "'My name's Finch,' ses Uncle Dick, putting out his 'ands to keep him
off; 'but I thought she was a widder. She told me her 'usband died ten
years ago; she's deceived me as well as you. I wouldn't ha' dreamt of
taking any notice of 'er if I'd known. Truth, I wouldn't. I should'nt
ha' dreamt of such a thing.' "Artful 'Arry played with 'is stick a little, and stood looking at 'im
with a horrible look on 'is face. "''Ow am I to know you're speaking the truth?' he ses, very slow. 'Eh? 'Ow can you prove it?' "'If it was the last word I was to speak I'd say the same,' ses Uncle
Dick. 'I tell you, I am as innercent as a new-born babe.' "'If that's true,' ses 'Arry, 'she's deceived both of us. Now, if I let
you go will you go straight off and bring her 'ere to me?' "'I will,' ses Uncle Dick, jumping up. "''Arf a mo,' ses 'Arry, holding up 'is stick very quick. 'One thing is,
if you don't come back, I'll 'ave you another day. I can't make up my
mind wot to do. I can't think--I ain't tasted food for two days. If I
'ad any money in my pocket I'd 'ave a bite while you're gone.' "'Why not get something?' ses Uncle Dick, putting his 'and in his pocket,
in a great 'urry to please him, and pulling out some silver. "'Arry said 'e would, and then he stood on one side to let 'im pass, and
even put the knobby stick under 'im to help 'im up the companion-ladder. "Uncle Dick passed me two minutes arterwards without a word, and set off
down the road as fast as 'is little legs 'ud carry 'im. I watched 'im
out o' sight, and then I went on board the schooner to see how 'Arry 'ad
got on. "Arry,' I ses, when he 'ad finished, 'you're a masterpiece!' "'I know I am,' he ses. 'Wot about that other 'arf-quid?' "'Here it is,' I ses, giving it to 'im. 'Fair masterpiece, that's wot
you are. They may well call you Artful. Shake 'ands.' "I patted 'im on the shoulder arter we 'ad shook 'ands, and we stood
there smiling at each other and paying each other compliments. "'Fancy 'em sitting 'ere and waiting for you to come back from that
bite,' I ses. "'I ought to 'ave 'ad more off of him,' ses 'Arry. ''Owever, it can't be
helped. I think I'll 'ave a lay down for a bit; I'm tired.' "'Better be off,' I ses, shaking my 'ead. 'Time passes, and they might
come back afore you think.' "'Well, wot of it?' ses 'Arry. "'Wot of it?' I ses. 'Why, it'ud spoil everything. It 'ud be blue
ruin.' "'Are you sure?' ses 'Arry'. "'Sartin,' I ses. "'Well, make it five quid, and I'll go, then,' he ses, sitting down agin. "I couldn't believe my ears at fust, but when I could I drew myself up
and told 'im wot I thought of 'im; and he sat there and laughed at me. "'Why, you called me a masterpiece just now,' he ses. 'I shouldn't be
much of a masterpiece if I let a chance like this slip. Why, I shouldn't
be able to look myself in the face. Where's the skipper?' "'Sitting in the "Albion",' I ses, 'arf choking. "'Go and tell 'im it's five quid,' ses 'Arry. 'I don't mean five more,
on'y four. Some people would ha' made it five, but I like to deal square
and honest.' "I run over for the skipper in a state of mind that don't bear thinking
of, and he came back with me, 'arf crazy. When we got to the cabin we
found the door was locked, and, arter the skipper 'ad told Artful wot
he'd do to 'im if he didn't open it, he 'ad to go on deck and talk to 'im
through the skylight. "'If you ain't off of my ship in two twos,' he ses, 'I'll fetch a
policeman.' "'You go and fetch four pounds,' ses 'Arry; 'that's wot I'm waiting for,
not a policeman. Didn't the watchman tell you?' "'The bargain was for one pound,' ses the skipper, 'ardly able to speak. "'Well, you tell that to the policeman,' ses Artful 'Arry. "It was no use, he'd got us every way; and at last the skipper turns out
'is pockets, and he ses, 'Look 'ere,' he ses, 'I've got seventeen and
tenpence ha' penny. Will you go if I give you that?' "''Ow much has the watchman got?' ses 'Arry. 'His lodger lost 'is purse
the other day.' "I'd got two and ninepence, as it 'appened, and then there was more
trouble because the skipper wouldn't give 'im the money till he 'ad gone,
and 'e wouldn't go till he 'ad got it. The skipper gave way at last, and
as soon as he 'ad got it 'Arry ses, 'Now 'op off and borrer the rest, and
look slippy about it.' "I put one hand over the skipper's mouth fust, and then, finding that was
no good, I put the other. It was no good wasting bad langwidge on 'Arry. "I pacified the skipper at last, and arter 'Arry 'ad swore true 'e'd go
when 'e'd got the money, the skipper rushed round to try and raise it. It's a difficult job at the best o' times, and I sat there on the
skylight shivering and wondering whether the skipper or Mrs. Muffit would
turn up fust. "Hours seemed to pass away, and then I see the wicket in the gate open,
and the skipper come through. He jumped on deck without a word, and
then, going over to the skylight, 'anded down the money to 'Arry. "'Right-o,' ses 'Arry. 'It on'y shows you wot you can do by trying.' "He unlocked the door and came up on deck, looking at us very careful,
and playing with 'is stick. "'You've got your money,' ses the skipper; 'now go as quick as you can.' "'Arry smiled and nodded at him. Then he stepped on to the wharf and was
just moving to the gate, with us follering, when the wicket opened and in
came Mrs. Muffit and Uncle Dick. "'There he is,' ses Uncle Dick. 'That's the man!' "Mrs. Muffit walked up to 'im, and my 'art a'most stopped beating. Her
face was the colour of beetroot with temper, and you could 'ave heard her
breath fifty yards away. "'Ho!' she says, planting 'erself in front of Artful 'Arry, 'so you're
the man that ses you're my 'usband, are you?' "'That's all right,' ses 'Arry, 'it's all a mistake.' "'MISTAKE?' ses Mrs. Muffit. "'Mistake o' Bill's,' ses 'Arry, pointing to me. 'I told 'im I thought
'e was wrong, but 'e would 'ave it. I've got a bad memory, so I left it
to 'im.' "'Ho!' ses Mrs. Muffit, taking a deep breath. 'Ho! I thought as much. Wot 'ave you got to say for yourself--eh?' "She turned on me like a wild cat, with her 'ands in front of her. I've
been scratched once in my life, and I wasn't going to be agin, so, fixing
my eyes on 'er, I just stepped back a bit, ready for 'er. So long as I
kept my eye fixed on 'ers she couldn't do anything. I knew that. Unfortunately I stepped back just a inch too far, and next moment I went
over back'ards in twelve foot of water. "Arter all, p'r'aps it was the best thing that could have 'appened to me;
it stopped her talking. It ain't the fust time I've 'ad a wet jacket;
but as for the skipper, and pore Uncle Dick--wot married her--they've
been in hot water ever since." FOR BETTER OR WORSE


Mr. George Wotton, gently pushing the swing doors of the public bar of
the "King's Head" an inch apart, applied an eye to the aperture, in the
hope of discovering a moneyed friend. His gaze fell on the only man in
the bar a greybeard of sixty whose weather-beaten face and rough clothing
spoke of the sea. With a faint sigh he widened the opening and passed
through. "Mornin', Ben," he said, with an attempt at cheerfulness. "Have a drop with me," said the other, heartily. "Got any money about
you?" Mr. Wotton shook his head and his face fell, clearing somewhat as the
other handed him his mug. "Drink it all up, George," he said. His friend complied. A more tactful man might have taken longer over the
job, but Mr. Benjamin Davis, who appeared to be labouring under some
strong excitement, took no notice. "I've had a shock, George," he said, regarding the other steadily. "I've
heard news of my old woman." "Didn't know you 'ad one," said Mr. Wotton calmly. "Wot's she done?" "She left me," said Mr. Davis, solemnly--"she left me thirty-five years
ago. I went off to sea one fine morning, and that was the last I ever
see of er.