"For Heaven's sake, Mr. Germ," cried Miss Moreton, "let us not dissect as we are
breakfasting!" "Be dumb for ever! Silent as the grave!" said Walwyn, giving Germ a cup
of tea. "Take this beverage, Sir, it will wash off the mass of crudities which are collected
in your brain!" "Tea is nothing more than the leaf of a tree, which grows in China," said
Germ, not vastly well pleased to have been stopped in his dissertation on eggs. "The
leaves, when steeped in warm water, and corrected in their bitterness by a small quantity
of sugar-"
"Twenty lumps," said Walwyn, "is your usual number, I think, Sir," putting sugar
into Germ's cup. Germ nodded his head and proceeded: "The leaves diffuse the scent of a
violet, and a volatility which, in some measure, refreshes the brain; and, besides these
qualities, it has the reputation of being an aperient." "I will trouble you for another cup of coffee," said Montgomery, who thought
Germ had proceeded quite far enough with the medicinal properties of tea. "Coffee-I
have that in page two hundred and ninety-three," said Germ; "it is a little berry, gathered
from a tree in Arabia-Felix, towards Aden and Mocha, and they now begin to cultivate it
with success in the parts adjacent to Batavia." "What precise time do you mean by now?" asked Walwyn, who knew that Germ
was speaking in the words of an obsolete author; "Coffee has been cultivated in Batavia
long ago." "Let me reflect, Sir," said Germ. "Why, yes, 'twas then; it might then, be as far
back as Anno Domini one thousand seven hundred and thirty." "That is a great way back, indeed," said Walwyn, "to prove that in those days
coffee was a little berry!" Germ saw that the laugh was against him, and began to butter his roll with great
eagerness and attention. "I am enchanted with your book, my dear friend," said Miss Moreton, laying it
down and sipping her tea; "and I declare to you, if there be a woman in the world whom I
envy, it is the divine Madam Stael-what pathos-what feeling does she not display!" "As a writer, and a composer, she is certainly very great," said Montgomery;
"Delphine is an interesting production; but there are sentiments of a most pernicious and
blameable tendency interspersed throughout the work, particularly pernicious, as, with
many readers, imagination would usurp the place of judgment, and, captivated by flowing
language, and impassioned descriptions, their interest would be too much excited to stay
to examine its intrinsic merit." "Do tell me where you can discover errors in this sublime composition," said Miss
Moreton; who, spite of her admiration of the book in question, felt a secret pleasure in
having at length called forth the interest of Montgomery. The Chevalier probably wished to evade the discussion. "You read it in English,
Sir, of course," said he. "Ah! many of the finest sentiments, many of the most melting
touches, are lost, are annihilated in your language; they are harsh and incomprehensible in
an English translation, and to an English ear. Miss Moreton reads it with the taste of a
Parisian, and in the original diction and purity!" "In a grammatical sense, that word may perhaps be properly applied," said
Montgomery, "but in no other: our language would indeed, Sir, convey harsh meanings
to many of the specious sentiments contained in that production!" "I wish you would point out your objections," said Miss Moreton, reclining
towards Montgomery, and stretching out her white arm to give him the book. "I read it just as it appeared, and before its translation," said Montgomery, "and
my treacherous memory will scarcely serve me as to the names of the characters, or the
incidents of the story; but I well recollect many, very many, exceptionable parts, though I
do not know where to look for them, neither should I like to be at the trouble of again
turning over six volumes in such an unprofitable search, as the time spent in it must be
lost, to say no worse of it." "Mr. Montgomery does not seem able to point out the faults," said the Chevalier,
"although they are so very glaring;" and he turned an expressive look towards Miss
Moreton, which Montgomery understood. "I can yet remember general principles which are pernicious and immoral,"
returned Montgomery; "for instance, the very little deference paid to the marriage vow,
and conjugal fidelity. All the particular friends of the heroine; all the married ladies, for
whom we are to be the most interested, have tender attachments, independent of their
husbands! On the subject of divorce, too, Madam Stael delivers her sentiments very freely
for a female writer; and Delphine, the heroine of the work, suffers a passion for Leonee
de Mandeville to take possession of her heart, knowing him to be the plighted husband of
her cousin; and, after his marriage with her cousin and her friend, maintains a
correspondence with him, that cousin, too, an exemplary character!" "Is it possible," cried Miss Moreton, "that you, Mr. Montgomery, can really call
Matilda de Vernon an exemplary character? a cold-hearted prude, and a rigid devotee as
ever professed catholicism; and as chilling, and as forbidding in her manners as-as Mrs.
Deborah Moreton!" "I think the character a regular and a good one," said Montgomery, "bred up in the
strict regard of a religion which maintains a good deal of formality in devotion, and
following its strict letter, from principle and a pious disposition; as a catholic, I think her
character is an amiable one, and I pity her constant mortification and humiliating trials,
seeing her rival shining before her eyes in those attractions, which she does not possess,
and stealing from her the affections of her husband. "Delphine, too, so impetuous in her feeling, so hasty in her resolves, so regardless
of the customs of the world!" "Oh! Mr. Montgomery, you are quite a cynic," said Miss Moreton; "I cannot, will
not, have my fascinating favourite Delphine abused; what sensibility! what feeling! does
she not display? In what interesting situations is she not placed? and how enchantingly
does she conduct herself through them!" "Enthusiasm and romance form the ground-work of her character," said
Montgomery; "and these naturally draw her into those situations which you mention,
from which a common character would have been exempt." "Delphine's is no common character, certainly," said the Chevalier. "It is a
character not to be found with us, I believe," said Montgomery. "And can you think so?" asked the Chevalier, turning his languishing little orbs, with melting meaning, towards
Miss Moreton. "I think so, I had almost said (pardon the affront to your heroine, Sir"),
said Montgomery, as if not understanding his allusion, "I hope so.-Our atmosphere is
too foggy for such volatile spirits; it is not composed of such inflammable materials; the
imagination of our ladies (bating a few exceptions) is not so vivid; and the genius of the
nation yet makes the prudent conduct of our women its peculiar care!" Miss Moreton knew not how to keep her seat; the matter of Mr. Montgomery's
speech was not at all pleasant to her; but the manner, the sparkling of his brilliant eye, the
graceful action, the mantling colour on his manly cheek! she was rivetted to the spot by
the warring sentiments with which her fancy was teeming; and, prone to translate every
thing as her own vanity wished, she immediately concluded, that the warmth of his
manner proceeded from a secret jealousy which he felt towards the Chevalier D'Aubert. This had roused his indignant spirit; this had urged him to speak in so decisive a tone; and
impelled by this feeling, surely nothing could be more natural than his disapprobation of
any book which his rival had recommended. It was the Chevalier, then, and not Delphine, which Montgomery had condemned;
and at that moment, he was in her eye the personified image of Leonee de Mandeville. Turning towards him with a most insinuating smile, Miss Moreton asked Montgomery if
he would accompany her in the landeau round the environs of the Villa. Montgomery,
though surprised at the invitation, could not refuse, and bowed assent. Walwyn looked
rather disconcerted at not being included. The Chevalier re-opened Delphine, and sighed
over its soul-harrowing pages!-Mary did not expect to be admitted of the party; but the
perfect amiable was the humour of the moment; she also was invited, and went to prepare
herself. "The lovers of a tune urge no severe inquiries
concerning the heart of a fidler. If he be a
mercenary, while he teaches female pupils, he is
watched; and if he performs in concerts, he is
paid. If above pecuniary gratifications, he is
rewarded with hyperbolical compliments. Articulate
or inarticulate sounds is ample retribution." Biographical Anecdotes of WILLIAM HOGARTH. MARY had soon put on her bonnet and cloak; a trouble which Miss Moreton had deemed
unnecessary, for her hair and veil floating on the breeze together, she sprung into the
vehicle, in her morning dishabille, reclining negligently on one seat of the carriage, whilst
the one opposite was occupied by Mary and Montgomery. Four swift horses carried them
through the park. Miss Moreton had all the conversation; Montgomery seemed very well
contented to be a patient hearer; and Mary's monosyllable, of an affirmative or negative,
was all which was required of her by her protectress. Miss Moreton appeared to take no little pride in pointing out the extent of her
demesne to Montgomery; and she talked of her improvements and plans with very great
satisfaction.-"There is," said she, "so much pleasure in feeling one's self above the
world; I mean, its customs and its foolish notions, and in having had spirit to break from
its iron thraldom, that I only wonder there is any one left, who will comply with its
arbitrary dictates! Don't you think, Mr. Montgomery, that every one is at liberty to do as
they please?" "Not knowing to what latitude you extend your question," said Montgomery, "I
am at a loss to answer you; but if you mean, that people are always at liberty to follow
their own inclinations, surely not. And think, if they were to do so, what a countless
number of ills would ensue!" "You take things in too serious a light," said Miss Moreton; "I am merely talking
of those little gratifications of whim, taste, (caprice, if you will) which the tyrant world,
and custom, would forbid our sex to enjoy; and which are perfectly harmless in their
nature. To overstep these, is surely praise-worthy. In a mind, which has the capacity of
thinking, to soar above trifles is laudable." "It depends on circumstances, whether even these may not be better observed than
infringed on," said Montgomery; "in as much as things which are, in their nature,
inoffensive, by encroaching too near the boundaries of decorum, break down those fences
which she has raised for the safety and security of morals and manners." "Decorum is so like my aunt Deborah," replied Miss Moreton, "that I declare to
you, Montgomery, I think if you were but to use it in her presence, you would stand a
good chance of becoming her heir-Apropos! I will take you to call on her; she will be
delighted to see you." They were arrived at the entrance of the village or the little town of Marlow,
where Mrs. Deborah Moreton resided. As a plain but elegant chariot appeared at a little

distance to be coming towards them, Miss Moreton ordered her drivers to stop at a little
public-house, where the sign of the Red Lion was meant to attract the attention of the
passing traveller. Neither Montgomery or Mary Cuthbert could divine her business at this humble
house of entertainment, till they heard her order the man at the door to bring her a half
pint of cider. "I am very dry," said she, turning to Montgomery, as she put the cup to her lips. The chariot at that moment passed the landeau; a young lady of a very interesting
appearance was seated in it. Cup in hand, Miss Moreton saluted her en passant. The lady
returned the recognition with a stiff yet civil bow-"Thank Heaven!" cried Clarissa, "I
have quenched my thirst, and given that notorious prude, Miss Davenport, a topic for a
month. Miss Moreton drinking at an alehouse door in a morning! Oh! what a delightful
incident to circulate through Marlow! Now drive on to Mrs. Deborah Moreton's. "You look surprised, child," said Miss Moreton, turning to Mary; "but you will
know me in time. This is a little gratification, which the unfeeling world would have
denied me. Now tell me, Montgomery, was there any harm in it?" "Most assuredly, no
serious harm," said Montgomery; "but as Miss Moreton's example may be brought as a
precedent for others to do the same; as an alehouse is certainly not a proper place for
females of delicacy to frequent; as evil reports are frequently raised from slighter
foundations than this; and as Mrs. Deborah Moreton's residence is so very near, where
you might have taken any refreshment you wished-I must confess that I think you might
as well have driven by the Red Lion!" "I can't be angry with you; for I asked for it," said Miss Moreton; "and yet in the
whole circle of my friends, not one of them save yourself would have given me such a
lecture!" Mary Cuthbert felt grateful to Montgomery for giving his opinion so freely, as
she hoped it might have some influence on her cousin's conduct; for she saw, with the
deepest concern, that she prided herself on setting all the common decencies of life at
defiance. Montgomery felt that he had no right to talk in this manner to Miss Moreton, as
neither his age, his sex, or the length of his acquaintance with her authorised it; but he
found that his style, though novel, was not offensive to her; and, while his whole soul
recoiled at her eccentricities, he felt that it was for the lovely Mary alone that he was
interested in the conduct of Miss Moreton. Mrs. Deborah Moreton received her visitors with some ceremony; but,
notwithstanding her old fashioned formality, it plainly appeared, that she approved of the
present companions of her niece. Miss Moreton threw herself on an old settee, covered with tent stitch, and flinging
off her slippers and gloves, declared that she was expiring from heat and fatigue. "Then do take something, Clary," said Mrs. Deborah. "Oh, no, I thank you, I took
a draught of cider at the Red Lion, at the entrance of the village." "Clary-Miss Moreton-do I hear right? have I lost my senses; the Red Lion, a
pot ale-house-my niece-no, you are only joking; or I must be mistaken. Pray, Sir, did
you have any cider at the Red Lion? or is my niece tormenting me on purpose?" "I had none certainly, Ma'am," answered Montgomery. "There, there, I am really revived again!" said Mrs. Deborah, "how can you be
such a tormenting girl!" "But Mr. Montgomery only answered for himself, Ma'am; and I only spoke of
myself; for, upon my honour, I stopped there to quench my thirst; and, if you will persist
in discrediting me, ask your friend Miss Davenport, who passed in her carriage at the very
moment that I was drinking it, and holding the cup in my hand.