Hence their mutual attachment. About the
    same time, Count Stiletto had conceived a design against that poor
    orphan; and dreading Lord Theodore as a rival, waylaid and
    imprisoned him. But to return. Next morning, the lovers woke in full possession of their
    faculties, when the happiest _denouement_ took place. Hysterica
    told Theodore that she had extricated herself from the snow, at
    the risk of her life. In fact, she was obliged to pelt it away in
    balls, and Theodore now recollected having been hit with one,
    during his search for her. Fearful of returning to the castle, she
    walked _à Londres_; and officiated there in the respective
    capacities of cook, milliner, own woman, and washerwoman. Her
    honour too, was untarnished, though a hulking porter had paid her
    the most delicate attentions, and assured her that Theodore was
    married to cruel Barbara Allen. Theodore called down several stars to witness his unalterable love;
    and, as a farther proof of the fact, offered to marry her the next
    day. Her former scruples (the mysterious circumstances of her birth)
    being now removed, she beamed an inflammatory glance, and
    consented. He deposited a kiss on her cheek, and a blush was the
    rosy result. He therefore repeated the application. CHAPTER VII

    Sure such a day as this was never seen!--THOMAS THUMB. The day, th' important day!--ADDISON. O giorno felice!--ITALIAN. RURAL SCENERY.--THE BRIDAL COSTUME.--OLD FRIENDS.--LITTLE BILLY
    GREATLY GROWN.--THE MARRIAGE.--A SCENE OF  MORTALITY.--CONCLUSION. The morning of the happy day destined to unite our lovers was
    ushered into the world with a blue sky, and the ringing of bells. Maidens, united in bonds of amity and artificial roses, come
    dancing to the pipe and tabor; while groups of children and
    chickens add hilarity to the unison of congenial minds. On the left
    of the village are seen plantations of tufted turnips; on the right
    a dilapidated dog-kennel,

        With venerable grandeur marks the scene;

    while every where the delighted eye catches monstrous mountains and
    minute daisies. In a word,

        All nature wears one universal grin. The procession now set forward to the church. The bride was habited
    in white drapery. Ten signs of the Zodiac, worked in spangles,
    sparkled round its edge, but Virgo was omitted at her own desire;
    and the bridegroom proposed to dispense with Capricorn. Sweet
    delicacy! She held a pot of myrtle in her hand, and wore on her
    head a small lighted torch, emblematical of Hymen. The boys and
    girls bounded about her, and old Margueritone begged the favour of
    lighting her pipe at her la'ship's head. 'Aha, I remember you!' said little Billy, pointing his plump and
    dimpled finger at her. She remarked how tall he was grown, and took
    him in her arms; while he playfully beat her with an infinitude of
    small thumps. The marriage ceremony passed off with great spirit; and the fond
    bridegroom, as he pressed her to his heart, felt how pure, how
    delicious are the joys of virtue. That evening, he gave a _fête champetre_ to the peasantry; and,
    afterwards, a magnificent supper to his friends. The company consisted of Lord Lilliput, Sir James Brobdignag,
    little Billy, Anacharsis Clootz, and Joe Miller. Nothing, they thought, could add to their happiness; but they were
    miserably mistaken. A messenger, pale as Priam's, rushed into the
    room, and proclaimed Lord Theodore a peer of Great Britain, as his
    father had died the night before. All present congratulated Lord De Willoughby on this prosperous
    turn of affairs; while himself and his charming bride exchanged a
    look that spoke volumes. Little Billy then pledged him in a goblet of Falernian; but he very
    properly refused, alleging, that as the dear child was in love with
    Hysterica, he had probably poisoned the wine, in a fit of jealousy. The whole party were in raptures at this mark of his lordship's
    discretion. After supper, little Billy rose, and bowing gracefully to the
    bride, stabbed himself to the heart. Our readers may now wish to learn what became of the remaining
    personages in this narrative. Count Stiletto is dead; Lord Lilliput is no more; Sir James
    Brobdignag has departed this life; Anacharsis Clootz is in his
    grave; and Mr. J. Miller is in another, and we trust, a better
    world. Old Margueritone expired with the bible in her hand, and the
    coroner's inquest brought in a verdict of lunacy. Having thus conducted our lovers to the summit of human happiness,
    we shall take leave of our readers with this moral reflection:--

        THE FALLING OUT OF LOVERS IS THE RENEWAL OF LOVE. THE END. I must now leave you to prepare my dress for the ball. The ball-room,
which occupies an entire wing of the house, is full of artists and
workmen; but her ladyship will not permit me to see it till the night
of the dance; as, she says, she means to surprise me with its
splendour. Cynics may say what they will against expensive decorations;
but in my opinion, whatever tends to promote taste in the fine arts
(and a mental is in some degree productive of a moral taste); whatever
furnishes artizans with employment, and excites their emulation, must
improve the condition of society. Adieu. The morning of the ball, I awoke without any remains of my late
indisposition, except that captivating paleness, that sprinkling of
lilies, which adds to interest without detracting from beauty. I rose with the sun, and taking a small china vase in my hand, tripped
into the parterre, to collect the fresh and fragrant dew that glistened
on the blossoms. I filled the piece of painted earth with the nectar of
the sky, and returned. During the day, I took nothing but honey, milk, and dried conserves; a
repast the most likely to promote that ethereal character which I
purposed adopting at night. Towards evening, I laved my limbs in a tepid bath; and as soon as the
sun had waved his last crimson banner in the west, I began my toilette. So variable is fashion, that I determined not to dress according to its
existing laws; since they might be completely exploded in a month; and,
at all events, by the time my life is written, they will have become
quite antiquated. For instance, do we not already abhor Evelina's and
Harriet Byron's powdered, pomatumed, and frizzled hair? It was,
therefore, my plan to dress in imitation of classical models, and to
copy the immortal toilette of Greece. Having first divested myself from head to foot of every habiliment, I
took a long piece of the finest cambric, and twice wound it gracefully
round my shoulders and bosom, and twice enveloped my form in its folds;
which, while they delineated the outline of my shape, veiled the
tincture of my skin. I then flung over it a drapery of embroidered
gauze, and its unimplicated simplicity gave to my perfect figure the
spirit of an antique statue. An apparent tissue of woven air, it fell
like a vapour round me. A zone of gold and a clasp prettily imprisoned
my waist; and my graceful arms, undegraded by gloves, were bare to the
shoulder. Part of my hair was confined by a bodkin, and part floated
over my neck in native ringlets. As I could not well wear my leg naked,
I drew on it a texture of woven silk; and laced a pair of sandals over
my little foot; which resembled that of a youthful Thetis, or of a
fugitive Atalanta. I then bathed my face with the dew which I had gathered in the morning,
poured on my hair and bosom the balmy waters of the distilled rose, and
sprinkled my drapery with fragrant floods of lavender; so that I might
be said to move in an ambient atmosphere of odours. Behold me now, dressed to a charm, to a criticism. Here was no sloping,
or goring, or seaming, or frilling, or flouncing. Detestable mechanism
of millinery! No tedious papillotes, or unpoetical pins were here. All
was done, in a few minutes, with a clasp, a zone, and a bodkin. As I surveyed my form in the mirror, I was enraptured at its Sylphic
delicacy; but I trembled to reflect, that the fairest flowers are the
most fragile. You would imagine that a maiden's sigh could dissipate
the drapery; and its aerial effect was as if a fairy were to lift the
filmy gossamer on her spear, and lightly fling it over a rose-bud. Resolving not to make myself visible till all the guests had arrived, I
sat down and read Ossian, to store my mind with ideas for conversation. I love Ossian, it is so sublime, so bewildered, so full of a blue and
white melancholy; of ghosts, and the four elements. I likewise turned
over other books; for, as I had never mixed in fashionable society, I
could not talk that nothingness, which is every thing in high life. Nor, indeed, if I could, would I; because, as a heroine, it was my part
to converse with point, flowers, and sublimation. About to appear in a world where all was new to me; ignorant of its
forms, inexperienced in its rules; fair, young, and original, I
resolved on adopting such manners as should not be subject to place,
time, accident, or fashion. In short, to copy universal, generalized,
unsophisticated nature, and Grecian statues. As I had studied elegance of attitude before I knew the world, my
graces were original, and all my own creation; so that if I had not the
temporary mannerisms of a marchioness, I had, at least, the immortal
movements of a seraph. Words may become obsolete, but the language of
gesture is universal and eternal. As for smiles, I felt myself perfect mistress of all that were ever
ascribed to heroines;--the fatal smile, the smile such as precedes the
dissolution of sainted goodness, the fragment of a broken smile, and
the sly smile that creates the little dimple on the left side of the
little mouth. At length the most interesting moment of my life arrived; the moment
when I was to burst, like a new planet, on the fashionable hemisphere. I descended the stairs, and pausing at the door, tried to tranquillize
my fluttered spirits. I then assumed an air-lifted figure, scarcely
touching the ground, and glided into the room. The company were walking in groups, or sitting. 'That is she;--there she is;--look, look!' was whispered on all sides. Every eye fixed itself upon me, while I felt at once elevated and
opprest. Lady Gwyn advanced, took my hand, and paying me the highest compliments
on my appearance, led me to a sofa, at the upper end of the room. A
semicircle of astonished admirers, head over head, ranged itself in my
front, and a smile of glowing approbation illuminated the faces of all. There I sat, in all the bashful diffidence of a simple and
inexperienced recluse, trembling for myself, fearing for others,
systematically suppressing my feelings, impulsively betraying them;
while, with an expression of sweet wildness, and retiring
consciousness, was observable a degree of susceptibility too exquisite
to admit of lasting peace. At last a spruce and puny fop stepped from amidst the group, and seated
himself beside me. 'This was a fine day, Ma'am,' said he, as he admired the accurate turn
of his ankle. 'Yes,' answered I, 'halcyon was the morn, when I strayed into the
garden, to gather flowery dew; and it seemed as if the twins of Latona
had met to propitiate their rites. Blushes, like their own roses,
coloured the vapours; and rays, pure as their thoughts, silvered the
foliage.' The company murmured applause. 'What a pity,' said he, 'that this evening was wet; as in consequence
of it, we have probably lost another beautiful description from you.' 'Ah, my good friend,' cried I, wreathing my favourite smile; and laying
the rosy tip of my finger on his arm; 'such is the state of man. His
morning rises in sunshine, and his evening sets in rain.' While the company were again expressing their approbation, I overheard
one of them whisper to the fop:

'Come, play the girl off, and let her have your best nonsense.' The fop winked at him, and then turned to me; while I sat shocked and
astonished, but collecting all my powers. 'See,' said he, 'how you have fascinated every eye. Actually you are
the queen-bee; with all your swarm about you.' 'And with my drone too,' said I, bowing slightly. 'Happy in being a drone,' said he, 'so he but sips of your honey.' 'Rather say,' cried I, 'that he deserves my sting.' 'Ah,' said he, laying his hand on his heart; 'your eyes have fixed a
sting here.' 'Then your tongue,' returned I, 'is rather more innocent; for though it
may have the venom of a sting, it wants the point.' The company laughed, and he coloured. 'Do I tease you?' said he, trying to rally. 'How cruel! Actually I am
so abashed, as you may see, that my modesty flies into my face.' 'Then,' said I, 'your modesty must be very hard run for a refuge.' Here the room echoed with acclamations. 'I am not at a loss for an answer,' said he, looking round him, and
forcing a smile. 'I am not indeed.' 'Then pray let me have it,' said I, 'for folly never becomes truly
ludicrous till it tries to be pert.' 'Bravo! Bravo!' cried an hundred voices at once, and away the little
drone flew from my hive. I tossed back my ringlets with an infantine
shake of the head, and sat as if unconscious of my triumph. The best of it is, that every word he said will one day appear in
print. Men who converse with a heroine ought to talk for the press, or
they will make but a silly figure in her memoirs. 'I thank you for your spirit, my dear,' said Lady Gwyn, sitting down
beside me. 'That little puppy deserves every severity. Think of his
always sitting in his dressing-gown, a full hour after he has shaved,
that the blood may subside from his face. He protests his surprise how
men can find pleasure in running after a nasty fox; cuts out half his
own coat at his tailor's; has a smile, and a "pretty!" for every one
and every thing; sits silent till one of his four only topics is
introduced, and then lisping a descant on the last opera, the last
boxing-match, the last race, or the last play, he drains his last idea,
and has nothing at your service, for the remainder of the night,
but an assenting bow. Such insects should never come out but at
butterfly-season; and even then, only in a four-wheeled bandbox, while
monkeys strew the way with mignionette. No, I can never forgive him for
having gone to Lady Bontein's last rout in preference to mine; though
he knew that she gave her's on the same evening purposely to thin my
party.' 'And pray,' said I, 'who is Lady Bontein?' 'That tall personage yonder, with sorrel hair,' answered her ladyship;
'and with one shoulder of the gothic order, and the other of the
corinthian. She has now been forty years endeavouring to look handsome,
and she still thinks, that by diligent perseverance she will succeed at
last. See how she freshens her smiles, and labours to look at ease;
though she has all the awkwardness of a milkmaid, without any of the
simplicity. You must know she has pored over Latin, till her mind has
become as dead as the language itself. Then she writes well-bred
sonnets about a tear, or a primrose, or a daisy; but nothing larger
than a lark; and talks botany with the men, as she thinks that science
is a sufficient excuse for indecency. Nay, the meek creature affects
the bible too; but it is whispered, that she has often thrown it at her
footman's head, without any affectation at all. But the magnificence
of to-night will put all competition out of her power; and I have also
planned a little _Scena_, classical, appropriate, and almost unique;
not alone in order to complete my triumph over her, but to grace your
entrance into life, by conferring a peculiar mark of distinction on
you.' 'On me!' cried I. 'What mark? I deserve no mark, I am sure.' 'Indeed you do,' said she. 'All the world knows that you are the first
heroine in it; and the fact is, I mean to celebrate your merits
to-night, by crowning you, just as Corinne was crowned in the capitol.' 'Dear Lady Gwyn,' cried I, panting with joy; 'sure you are not---- Ah,
are you serious?' 'Most serious, my love,' answered she, 'and in a short time the
ceremony will commence. You may perceive that the young men and girls
have left the room. It is to prepare for the procession; and now excuse
me, as I must assist them.' She then hurried out, and I remained half an hour, in an agony of
anxious expectation. At last, I heard a confused murmur at the door, and a gentleman ran
forward from it, to clear a passage. A lane was soon formed of the
guests; and fancy my feelings, when I beheld the promised procession
entering! First appeared several little children, who came tripping towards me;
some with baskets of flowers, and others with vases of odorous waters,
or censers of fragrant fire. After them advanced a tall youth of noble
port, conspicuous in a scarlet robe, that trailed behind him with
graceful dignity. On his head was a plat of palm, in his left hand he
held a long wand, and in his right the destined wreath of laurel and
myrtle. Behind him came maidens, two by two, and hand in hand. They had
each a drapery of white muslin flung negligently round them, and
knotted just under the shoulder; while their luxuriant hair floated
over their bosoms. The youths came next, habited in flowing vestments
of white linen. The leader approached, and making profound obeisance, took my hand. I
rose, bowed, and we proceeded with a slow step out of the room; while
the children ran before us, tossing their little censers, scattering
pansies, and sprinkling liquid sweets. The nymphs and youths followed
in couples, and the company closed the procession. We crossed the hall,
ascended the winding staircase, and passed along the corridor, till we
reached the ball-room. The folding doors then flew open, as if with
wings; and a scene presented itself, which almost baffles description. It was a spacious apartment, oval in its form, and walled all round
with a luxuriant texture of interwoven foliage, kept compact by green
lattice-work. Branches of the broad chesnut and arbutus were relieved
with lauristinas, acacias, and mountain-ash; while here and there,
within the branches, appeared clusters of lamps, that mingled their
coloured rays, and poured a flood of lustre on the leaves. The floor
was chalked into circular compartments, and each depicted some gentle
scene of romance. There I saw Mortimer and his Amanda, Delville and his
Cecilia, Valencourt and his Emily. The ceiling was of moss, illuminated
with large circles of lamps; and from the centre of each circle, a
basket was seen peeping, and half inverted, as if about to shower its
ripe fruits and chaplets upon our heads. At the upper end of the room I beheld a large arbour, elevated on a
gradual slope of turf. Its outside was intertwined with jessamines,
honeysuckles, and eglantines, tufted with clumps of sunflowers, lilies,
hollyhocks, and a thousand other blossoms, and hung with clusters of
grapes, and trails of intricate ivy; while all its interior was so
studded with innumerable lamps, that it formed a resplendent arch of
variegated fire. The seat was a grassy bank, strewn with a profusion of
aromatic herbs; and the footstool was a heap of roses. Just from under
this footstool, and through the turf, came gushing a little rill, that
first tumbled its warbling waters down some rugged stones, and then
separating itself to the right and left, ran along a pebbled channel,
bordered with flowery banks, till it was lost, at either side, amidst
overshadowing branches. The moment I set foot in the room, a stream of invisible music, as if
from above, and softened by distance, came swelling on my enraptured
ear. Thrice we circled this enchanted chamber, and trod to the solemn
measure. I was amazed, entranced; I felt elevated to the empyrean. I
moved with the grandeur of a goddess, and the grace of a vision. At length my conductor led me across the little rill, into the bower. I
sat down, and he stood beside me. The children lay in groups on the
grass, while the youths and virgins ranged themselves along the
opposite side of the streamlet, and the rest of the company stood
behind them. The master of this august ceremony now waved his wand: the music
ceased, all was silent, and he thus began. 'My countrymen and countrywomen. 'Behold your Cherubina; behold the most celebrated woman in our island. Need I recount to you all her accomplishments? Her impassioned
sensibility, her exquisite art in depicting the delicate and affecting
relations between the beauties of nature, and the deep emotions of the
soul? Need I dwell on those elegant adventures, those sorrows, and
those horrors, which she has experienced; I might almost say, sought? Oh! no. The whole globe already resounds with them, and their fame will
descend to the most remote posterity. 'Need I portray her eloquence, the purity of her style, and the
smoothness of her periods? Are not her ancestors illustrious? Are not
her manners fascinating? Alas! to this question, some of our hearts
beat audible response. Her's is the head of a Sappho, deficient alone
in the voluptuous languor, which should characterize the countenance of
that enamoured Lesbian. 'To CROWN her, therefore, as the patroness of arts, the paragon of
charms, and the first of heroines, is to gratify our feelings, more
than her own; by enabling us to pay a just homage to beauty and to
virtue.' He ceased amidst thunders of applause. I rose;--and in an instant, it
was the stillness of death. Then with a timorous, yet ardent air, I
thus addressed the assembly. 'My countrymen, my countrywomen! 'I will not thank you, for I cannot. In giving me cause to be grateful,
you have taken from me the means of expressing my gratitude, for you
have overpowered me. 'How I happen to deserve the beautiful eulogium just pronounced, I am
sure I cannot conceive. Till this flattering moment, I never knew that
the grove resounds with my praises, that my style is pure, and my head
a Sappho's. But unconsciousness of merit is the characteristic of a
heroine. 'The gratitude, however, which my words cannot express, my deeds shall
evince; and I now pledge myself, that neither rank nor riches (which,
from my pursuits, I am peculiarly liable to) shall ever make me
unmindful of what I owe to adversity. For, from her, I have acquired
all my knowledge of the world, my sympathy, my pensiveness, and my
sensibility. Yes, since adversity thus adds to virtue, it must be a
virtue to seek adversity. 'England, my friends, is now the depository of all that remains of
virtue;--the ark that floats upon the waters of the deluge. But what
preserves her virtuous? Her women. And whence arises their purity? From
education. 'To you, then, my fair auditory, I would enjoin a diligent cultivation
of learning. But oh! beware what books you peruse; for, trust me, some
are as injurious as others are salutary. I cannot point out to you the
mischievous class, because I have never read them; but indubitably, the
most useful are novels and romances. Such as I am, these, these alone
have made me. These, by depicting heroines sublimated almost to
immateriality, teach the common class of womankind to reach what is
uncommon, by striving at what is unattainable; to despise the
grovelling follies and idlenesses of the mere worker of samplers, and
to contract a taste for that sensibility, whose tear is the dissolution
of pearls, whose blush is the sunbeam of the cheek, and whose sigh is
more costly than the breeze, that comes laden with oriental
frankincense.' I spoke, and peals of acclamation shook the bower. The priest of the ceremony now raises the crown on high, then lowers it
by slow degrees, and holds it suspended over my head. Letting down my
tresses, and folding my hands on my bosom, I throw myself upon my
knees, and incline forward to receive it. I AM CROWNED. At the same moment, drums, and trumpets, and shouts, burst upon my ear,
in a hurricane of triumph. The youths and maidens make obeisance; I
rise, press my hand to my heart, and bow deeply. Tears start into my
eyes. I feel far above mortality. Hardly had the tumult subsided when a harp was brought to the bower;
and they requested that I would sing and play an improvisatore, like
Corinne. What was I to do? for I knew nothing of the harp, but a few
chords! In this difficulty, I luckily recollected a heroine, who was
educated only by an old steward, and his old wife, in an old castle,
with an old lute; and who, notwithstanding, as soon as she stepped into
society, played and sang, like angels, by intuition. I therefore felt quite reassured, and sat to the harp. I struck a few
low Lydian notes, and cast a timid glance around me. At first my voice
was scarcely louder than a sigh; and my accompaniment was a harmonic
chord, swept at intervals. The words came from the moment. 'Where is my blue-eyed chief? said the white-bosomed daughter of Erin,
as the wave kissed her foot; and wherefore went he from his weeping
maid, to the fight of heroes? She saw a dim form rise before her, like
a mist from the valley. Pale grew her cheek, as the blighted leaf in
autumn. Your lover, it shrilly shrieked, sleeps among the dead, like a
broken thistle amidst dandelions; but his spirit, like the thistly
down, has ascended into the skies. The maiden heard; she ran, she flew,
she sprang from a rock. The waves closed over her. Peace to the
daughter of Erin!' As I sang 'she ran, she flew,' the workings and tremblings of the
minstrel were in unison; while my winged fingers fluttered along the
chords, light as a swallow over a little lake, when he touches it with
the utmost feather of his pinion. But while I sang, 'peace to the
daughter of Erin!' my voice, as it died over the faint vibration of the
strings, had all the heart-breaking softness of an Eolian lyre; so
woeful was it, so wistful, so wildered. 'Viva! viva!' resounded through
the room. At the last cadence, I dropped one arm gently down, and
hanging the other on the harp, leaned my languishing head upon it,
while my moistened eyes were half closed. A sudden disturbance at the door roused me from my trance. I looked up,
and beheld--what?--Can you imagine what? No, my friend, you could not
to the day of judgment. I saw, in short, my great mother come striding
towards me, with outspread arms, and calling, 'my daughter, my
daughter!' in a voice that might waken the dead. My heart died within me: down I darted from the bower, and ran for
shelter behind Lady Gwyn. 'Give me back my daughter!' vociferated the dreadful woman, advancing
close to her ladyship. 'Oh! do no such thing!' whispered I, pulling her ladyship by the
sleeve. 'Take half--all my property; but do not be the death of me!' 'What are you muttering there, Miss?' cried my mother, espying me. 'What makes you stand peeping over that wretch's shoulder?' 'Indeed, Ma'am,' stammered I, 'I am--I am taking your part.' 'Who could have presumed to liberate this woman?' cried Lady Gwyn. 'The Condottieri,' said my mother, 'headed by the great Damno Sulphureo
Volcanoni.' 'Then you must return to your prison, this moment,' cried Lady Gwyn. My mother fell on her knees, and began blubbering; while the guests got
round, and interceded for her being restored to liberty. I too thought
it my duty to say something (my mother all the time sobbing horribly);
till, at length, Lady Gwyn consented--for my sake, she said,--to set
the poor wretch free; but on this special condition, that there should
be no prosecution for false imprisonment. All matters being amicably adjusted, my mother begged a morsel of meat,
as she had not eaten any these ten years. In a few minutes, a small
table, furnished with a cold turkey and a decanter of wine, was laid
for her in the bower. The moment she perceived it, she ran, and seating
herself in the scene of my recent triumph, began devouring with such
avidity, that I was thunderstruck. One wing soon went; the second
shared the fate of its companion, and now she set about a large slice
of the breast. 'What a charming appetite your dear mother has got!' said several of
the guests to me. I confessed it, but assured them that inordinate
hunger did not run in our family. Her appetite being at last satiated,
she next assailed the wine. Glass after glass disappeared with
inconceivable rapidity, and every glass went to my heart. 'She will be
quite intoxicated!' thought I; while my fears for the hereditary honour
of our house overcoming my personal terrors, I had the resolution to
steal across, and whisper:

'Mother, if you have any regard for your daughter, and respect for your
ancestors, drink no more.' 'No more than this decanter, upon my honour!' said she, applying it to
her lips. At this moment the violins struck up. 'And now,' cried my mother, running down from the bower, 'who is for a
dance?' 'I am,' said my friend, the little fop, advancing, and taking her hand. 'Then,' said she, 'we will waltz, if you please.' Santa Maria!--Waltz! A circle was cleared, and they began whirling each other round at a
frightful rate,--or rather she him; for he was like a plaything in her
hands; and had he let go his grasp, I am sure he would have been flung
up among the branches, and have stuck there, like King Charles in the
oak. At last, while I was standing, a statue of shame, and wondering how any
human being, endowed with a common portion of reason, could act so
ridiculous a part, this miserable woman, overcome with wine and
waltzing, fell flat upon the floor; and was carried out of the room by
four grinning footmen. I could hold no longer: the character of my family demanded a prompt
explanation, and with tears in my eyes, I desired to be heard. Silence
was obtained. 'I beseech of this assembly,' said I, 'to acquit me of having hand,
act, or part, in the conduct of that unfortunate person. I never even
saw her, till I came to this house; and that I may never see her again,
I pray heaven. I hate her, I dread her; and I now protest, in the most
unequivocal manner, that I do not believe her to be my mother at all. She has no resemblance to the portrait in the gallery; and as she was
stark mad, when found in the woods, she perhaps imagined herself my
mother; for I am told that mad persons are apt to fancy themselves
great people. No, my malignant star ordained us to meet, that she might
place me in awkward situations by her vulgarity; just as Mrs. Garnet,
the supposed mother of the Beggar Girl, used to place that heroine. I
am sure this is the case; nothing can convince me to the contrary; and
therefore, I thus publicly renounce, disown, and wash my hands of her,
now and for ever.' The company coincided in my sentiments, and applauded my determination. Country dancing was then proposed: the men sauntered about the room for
partners; the mothers walked their daughters up and down, to shew their
paces; and their daughters turned away their heads when they saw their
favourites approaching to ask them. Ugliness and diamonds occupied the
top of the set; the beauties stood in the centre, and the motley
couples came last;--old bachelors with misses of fifteen; and boys, who
were glad to be thought men, with antiques, who were sorry to be called
maids. Other unfortunates, drest to a pin, yet noticed by nobody, sat
protruding the supercilious lip at a distance. And now the merry maze commenced. But what mutilated steps, what
grotesque graces! One girl sprang and sprawled to the terror of every
ankle; and with a clear idea of space, shewed that she had no notion of
time. Another, not deigning to dance, only moved; while her poor
partner was seen helping her in, like a tired jade to the distance
post. This bartered elegance for a flicflac; that swam down the set; a
third cut her way through it; and a fourth, who, by her longevity,
could not be dancing for a husband, appeared, by her earnestness, to be
dancing for her life. All this delighted me highly, for it would shew my graces to the
greater advantage. My partner was the gentleman who had crowned me; and
now, when our turn to dance down came, a general whisper among the
spectators, and their sudden hurry towards me, proved that much was
expected from my performance. I would not disappoint them for worlds;
besides, it was incumbent on me to stamp a marked dissimilarity between
my supposed mother, and myself, in every thing; and to call forth
respect and admiration, as much as she had excited derision and
contempt. And now, with my right foot behind, and the point of it but just
touching the ground, I leaned forward on my left, and stood as if in
act to ascend from this vale of tears to regions of interminable
beatitude. The next moment the music gave the signal, and I began. Despising the
figure of the common country-dance, I meandered through all the
intricacies of the dance of Ariadne; imitating in my circular and
oblique motions the harmonious movement of the spheres; and
resembling, in my light and playful form, the Horoe of Bathycles, as
they appeared in the Temple of Amycla. Sometimes with a rapid flight,
and glowing smile, I darted, like a herald Iris, through the mazes of
the set; sometimes assuming the dignity of a young Diana, I floated in
a swimming languishment; and sometimes, like a pastoral nymph of
Languedoc, capriciously did I bend my head on one side, and dance up
insidious.