What a Hebe! I happened not to see my partner from the time I began till I had
ended; but when panting and playful, I flew like a lapwing, to my seat,
he followed, and requested that I would accept the assurances of his
high admiration. Soon afterwards, waltzing was introduced. 'You have already imitated Ida's dancing,' said he. 'Will you now
imitate Charlotte's, and allow me, like Werter, to hold in my arms the
most lovely of women; to fly with her, like the wind, and lose sight of
every other object?' I consented; he led me forth, and clasping my waist, began the
circuitous exercise of waltzing. Round and round we flew, and swifter
and swifter; till my head grew quite giddy. Lamps, trees, dresses,
faces, all seemed to be shattered and huddled together, and sent
whisking round the room in a vortex. But, oh, my friend, how shall I find language to describe the
calamitous termination of an evening so propitious in its commencement? I blush as I write it, till the reflected crimson dyes my paper. For in
the midst of my rotatory motion, while heaven seemed earth, and earth
seemed heaven; the zone, on which all my attire depended, and by which
it was all confined, on a sudden burst asunder, and in the next whirl,
more than half of my dress dropped at my feet! Another revolution and I
had acted Diana to fifty Acteons; but I shrieked, and extricating
myself from my partner, sank on the floor, amidst the wreck of my
drapery. The ladies ran, ranged themselves round me, and cast a mantle
over my half-revealed charms. I was too much shocked, and indeed too
giddy to move; so they lifted me between them, and bore me, in slow
procession, out of the room. It was the funeral of modesty; but the
pall was supported by tittering malice. I hurried into bed, and cried myself asleep. I cannot think, much less write of this disaster, with common
fortitude. I wonder whether Thompson's Musidora could be considered a
sufficient precedent, or at least a palliative parallel? If not, and
that my biographer records it, I am undone. Adieu. Yesterday Lady Gwyn took me, at my particular request, to visit Monkton
Castle, an old ruin, within three miles of us; and as it forms part of
that property which she holds at present, it is mine to all intents and
purposes. The door-way was stopped up with stones, so that I could not take a
survey of its interior; but outside it looked desolate enough. I mean,
at some future period, to furnish it like Udolpho, and other castles of
romance, and to reside there during the howling months. After dinner her ladyship went to superintend the unpacking of some
beautiful china, which had just arrived from London; and I was left
alone on the sofa. Evening had already begun to close: a delicious
indolence thrilled through my limbs, and I felt all that lassitude and
vacuity which the want of incident ever creates. 'Were there even some youth in the house,' thought I, 'who would
conceive an unhappy attachment for me;--had her ladyship but a
persecuting son, what scenes might happen! Suppose at this moment the
door were to be thrown open, and he to enter, with a quick step, and
booted and spurred. He starts on seeing me. Never had I looked so
lovely. 'Heavens!' murmurs he, ''tis a divinity!' then suddenly
recollecting himself, he advances with a respectful bow. 'Pardon this
intrusion,' says he; 'but I--really I--.' I rise, and colouring
violently, mutter, without looking at him: 'I wonder where her ladyship
can be?' But as I am about to pass him, he snatches my hand, and
leading me back to the sofa, says:--'Suffer me to detain you a moment. This occasion, so long desired, I cannot bring myself to relinquish. Prevented by the jealous care of a too fond mother, from appearing
before you, I have sought and found a thousand opportunities, on the
stairs--in the garden--in the shrubbery--to behold those charms. Fatal
opportunities! for they have robbed me of my peace for ever! Yes,
charming Cherubina, you have undone me. That airy, yet dignified form;
those mild, yet sparkling eyes; those lips, more delicious than the
banquet of the gods----' 'Really, Signor,' says I, in all the pleasing
simplicity of maiden embarrassment, 'this language is as improper for
me to hear as for you to express.' 'It is, it is improper,' cries he,
with animation, 'for it is inadequate.' 'Yes,' says I 'inadequate to
the respect I deserve as the guest of your mother.' 'Ah!' exclaims he,
'why should the guest imitate the harshness of the hostess?' 'That she
may not,' says I, 'countenance the follies of the son. Signor, I desire
you will unhand me.' 'Never!' cries he; 'never, till you say you pity
me. O, my Cherubina; O, my soul's idol!' and he drops upon his knee,
and grasps my hand; when behold, the door opens, and Lady Gwyn appears
at it! Never were astonishment and dismay equal to her's. 'Godfrey,
Godfrey,' says she, 'is this the conduct that I requested of you? This,
to seek clandestine interviews, where I had prohibited even an open
acquaintance? And for thee, fair unfortunate,' turning towards me, with
that mild look, which cuts more than a thousand sarcasms; 'for thee,
lovely frail one, thou must seek some other asylum.' Her sweet eyes
swim in tears. I fling myself at her feet. 'I am innocent,' I cry,
'innocent as the little fawn that frisks itself to repose by the
bubbling fountain.' She smiles incredulous. 'Come,' says she, taking my
hand, 'let me lead you to your apartment.' 'Stay, in mercy stay!' cries
Godfrey, rushing between us and the door. She waves him aside. I reach
my room. Nothing can console me. I am all despair. In a few minutes the
maid taps at my door, with a slip of paper from Godfrey. 'Oh,
Cherubina,' it says, 'how my heart is torn for you! As you value your
fame, perhaps your life, meet me to-night, at twelve, in the
shrubbery.' After a long struggle, I resolve to meet him. 'Tis twelve,
the winds are abroad, the shower descends. I fling on something, and
steal into the shrubbery. I find him there before me. He thanks me ten
thousand, thousand times for my kindness, my condescension; and by
degrees, leads me into the avenue, where I see a chaise in waiting. I
shrink back; he prays, implores; and at length, snatching me in his
arms, is about to force me into the vehicle, when on a sudden--'Hold,
villain!' cries a voice. It is the voice of Stuart! I shriek, and drop
to the ground. The clashing of swords resounds over my contested body,
and I faint. On recovering, I find myself in a small, but decent
chamber, with an old woman and a beautiful girl watching over me. 'St. Catherine be praised,' exclaims the young peasant, 'she comes to
herself.' 'Tell me,' I cry, 'is he murdered?' 'The gentleman is dead,
sure enough, miss,' says the woman. I laugh frantic, and point my
finger. 'Ha! look yonder,' I cry; 'see his mangled corpse, mildly
smiling, even in death. See, they fight; he falls.--Barbarous Godfrey! valiant, generous, unfortunate Stuart! And hark, hear you that! 'Tis
the bell tolling, tolling, tolling!' During six weeks I continue in
this dreadful brain-fever. Slowly I recover. A low melancholy preys
upon me, and I am in the last stage of a consumption. But though I lose
my bloom, illness touches my features with something more than human. One evening, I had got my chair on the green before the door, and was
watching the sun as he set in a blaze of gold. 'And oh!' exclaimed I,
'soon must I set like thee, fair luminary;--when I am interrupted by a
stifled sigh, just behind me. I turn. Heaven and earth! who should be
leaning over me, with looks of unutterable love, but--Stuart! In an
instant, I see him, I shriek, I run, I leap into his arms.----

Unfortunate leap; for it wakened me from a delicious reverie, and I
found myself in the arms,--not of Stuart,--but of the old butler! Down
we both came, and broke in pieces a superb china vase, which he was
just bringing into the room. 'What will my lady say to this?' cried he, rising and collecting the
fragments. 'She will smile with ineffable grace,' answered I, 'and make a moral
reflection on the instability of sublunary things.' He shook his head, and went on with his work of affliction; while I
hastened to the glass, where I found my face flushed from my reverie,
my hair dishevelled, and my long eyelashes wet with tears. I perceived
too that my dress had got a terrible rent by my fall. Hardly had I recomposed myself, when her ladyship returned, and called
for tea. 'How did you tear your robe, my love?' said she. 'By a fall that I got just now,' replied I. 'Sure never was such an
unfortunate fall!' 'Nay, child,' said she, rallying me, 'though a martyr to the tender
sensibilities, you must not be a victim to torn muslin.' 'I am extremely distressed, however,' said I. 'But why so?' cried she. 'It was an accident, and all of us are awkward
at times. Life has too many serious miseries to admit of vexation about
trifles.' 'There now!' cried I, with delight. 'I declare I told the butler, when
I broke the china vase, that you would make a moral reflection.' 'Broke the---- Oh! mercy, have you broken my beautiful china vase?' 'Smashed it to atoms,' answered I, in a tone of the most assuasive
sweetness. 'You did?' exclaimed she, in a voice that stunned me. 'And pray, how
dared you go near it? How dared you even look at it? You, who are not
fit company for crockery, much less china;--a crazed creature, that I
brought into my house to divert my guests. You a title? You a beauty?' 'Dear Lady Gwyn,' said I, 'do be calm under this calamity. Trust me
life has too many serious miseries to admit of vexation about trifles.' Her ladyship rose, with her cheeks inflamed, and her eyes glittering. I ran out of the room, in much terror; then up stairs, and into the
nearest bed-chamber. It happened to be her ladyship's; and this
circumstance struck me as most providential; for, in her present mood,
she would probably compel me to quit the house; so that I could never
have another opportunity of ransacking her caskets and cabinets, for
memorials of my birth. I therefore began the search; but in the midst of it was interrupted by
hearing a small voice cry, 'get out!' Much amazed, I looked up, and perceived her ladyship's favourite parrot
in its cage. 'Get out!' said the parrot. 'I will let thee out, cost what it will,' cried I. So with much sensibility, and indeed, very little spleen, I took the
bird, and put it out at the window. After having accurately examined several drawers, I found a casket in
one of them; opened it, and beheld within (O delightful sight!) a
miniature set round with inestimable diamonds, and bearing a perfect
resemblance to the portrait in the gallery,--face, attitude, attire,
every thing! 'Relic of my much injured house!' exclaimed I, depositing the picture
in my bosom.' Image of my sainted mother, never will I part with thee!' 'What are you doing in my room?' cried Lady Gwyn, as she burst into it. 'How is this? All my dresses about the floor! my drawers, my casket
open!--And, as I live, here is the miniature gone! Why you graceless
little thing, are you robbing me?' 'Madam,' answered I, 'that miniature belongs to my family; I have
recovered it at last; and let me see who will dare take it from me.' 'You are more knave than fool,' said her ladyship: 'give it back this
instant, or, on my honour, I will expose you to the servants.' 'What is the use of bullying?' said I. 'Sure you are ruined should this
swindling affair come to be known, not that I would, for the world,
hang your ladyship;--far from it,--but then your character will be
blasted. Ah! Lady Gwyn, where is your hereditary honour? where is your
prudence? where is your dignity?' 'Where is my parrot?' shrieked her ladyship. 'Ranging the radiant air!' exclaimed I--'inhaling life, and fragrance,
and freedom amidst the clouds! I let it out at the window.' Her ladyship ran towards me, but I passed her, and made the best of my
way down stairs; while she followed, calling, stop thief! Too well I
knew and rued the dire expression; nor stopped an instant, but hurried
out of the house--through the lawn--down the avenue--into a
hay-field;--the servants in hot pursuit. Not a moment was to be lost: a
drowning man, you know, will grasp at straws, and I crept for refuge
under a heap of hay. But whether they found me there, or how long I remained, or what has
become of me since, or what is likely to become of me hereafter, you
shall learn in my next. Adieu. I remained in my disagreeable situation till night had closed, and the
pursuit appeared over. I then rose, and walked through the fields,
without any settled intention. Terror was now succeeded by bitter
indignation at the conduct of Lady Gwyn, who had dared to drive me from
my own house, and vilify me as a common thief. Insupportable insult! Unparalleled degradation! Was there no revenge? no remedy? Like a rapid ray from heaven, a thought at once simple and magnificent
shot through my brain, and made my very heart bound with transport. When I name Monkton Castle, need I tell you the rest? Need I tell you
that I determined to seize on that antique abode of my ancestors, to
fortify it against assaults, to procure domestics and suitable
furniture for it, and to reside there, the present rival, and the
future victress of the vile Lady Gwyn? Let her dispossess me if she
dare, or if she can; for I have heard that possession is a great number
of points of the law in one's favour. As to fitting up the castle, that will be quite an easy matter; for the
tradespeople of London willingly give credit for any amount to a
personage of rank like me; and therefore I have nothing more to do than
make some friend there bespeak furniture in my name. It appeared to me that Jerry Sullivan was the most eligible person I
could select; so now, a light heart making a light foot, I tripped back
to the road, and took my way towards Monkton Castle, for the purpose of
procuring an asylum in some cottage near it, and writing a letter of
instructions to Jerry. It was starlight, and I had walked almost three miles, when a little
girl with a bundle of sticks on her back overtook me, and began asking
alms. In the midst of her supplications, we came to the hut where she
lived, and I followed her into it, with the hope of getting a night's
lodging there, or at least a direction to one. In a room, comfortless, with walls of smoked mud, I found a wrinkled
and decrepit beldame, and two smutty children, holding their hands over
a few faded embers. I begged permission to rest myself for a short
time; the woman, after looking at me keenly, consented, and I sat down. I then entered into conversation, represented myself as a wandering
stranger in distress, and inquired if I had any chance of finding a
lodging about the neighbourhood. The woman assured me that I had not,
and on perceiving me much disconcerted at the disappointment, coarsely,
but cordially, offered me her hut for the night. I saw I had nothing
for it but to remain there; so the fire was replenished, some brown
bread and sour milk (the last of their store) produced, and while we
sat round it, I requested of the poor woman to let me know what had
reduced her to such distress. She told me, with many tears and episodes, that her daughter and
son-in-law, who had supported her, died about a month ago, and left
these children behind, without any means of subsistence, except what
they could procure from the charitable. All their appearances corroborated this account, for famine had set its
meagre finger on their faces. I wished to pity them, but their whining,
their dirtiness, and their vulgarity, disgusted more than interested
me. I nauseated the brats, and abhorred the haggard hostess. How it
happens, I know not, but the misery that looks alluring on paper is
almost always repulsed in real life. I turn with distaste from a ragged
beggar, or a decayed tradesman, while the recorded sorrows of a
Belfield or a Rushbrook draw tears of pity from me as I read. At length we began to think of rest. The children gave me their pallet:
I threw myself upon it without undressing, and they slept on some straw
with a blanket over them. In the morning we presented a most dismal group. Not a morsel had we
for breakfast, nor the means of obtaining any. The poor cripple, who
had expected some assistance from me, sat grunting in a corner; the
children whimpered and shivered; and I, with more elegance, but not
less misery, chaunted a matin to the Virgin. I then began seriously to consider what mode of immediate subsistence I
ought to adopt; and at last I hit upon a most pleasing and judicious
plan. As some days must elapse between my writing to Jerry Sullivan and
his coming down (for I mean to have him here, if possible), and as the
cottage is within a short distance from the castle, I have resolved to
remain with my hostess till he shall arrive, and to go forth every day
in the character of a beggar-girl. Like another Rosa, I will earn my
bread by asking alms. My simple and imploring address, my
half-suppressed sigh, my cheek yet traced with the recent tear, all
will be irresistible. Even the shrivelled palm of age will expand at my
supplication, and the youths, offering compliments with eleemosynary
silver, will call me the lovely vagabond, or the mendicant angel. Thus
my few days of beggary will prove quite delightful; and oh, how sweet,
when those are over, to reward and patronize, as Lady of the Castle,
those hospitable cottagers who have pitied and sheltered me as the
beggar-girl. My first step was writing to Jerry Sullivan; and I fortunately found
the stump of a pen, some thick ink, and coarse paper, in the cottage. This was my letter. 'Honest Jerry,

    'Since I saw you last, I have established all my claims, and am now
    the Lady Cherubina de Willoughby, the true and illustrious mistress
    of Gwyn Castle, Monkton Castle, and other estates of uncommon
    extent and value. Now, Jerry, as I am convinced that you feel
    grateful for the services, however trivial, which I have done you,
    I know you will be happy at an opportunity of obliging me in
    return. 'Will you then execute some commissions for me? Meaning to make
    Monkton Castle (which is uninhabited at present) my residence, I
    wish to furnish it according to the style of the times it was built
    in. You must, therefore, bespeak, at the best shops, such articles
    as I shall now enumerate. 'First. Antique tapestry sufficient to furnish one entire wing. 'Second. Painted glass enriched with armorial bearings. 'Third. Pennons and flags, stained with the best old blood;--Feudal
    if possible. 'Fourth. Black feathers, and cloaks for my liveries. 'Fifth. An old lute, or lyre, or harp. 'Sixth. Black hangings, curtains, and a velvet pall. 'Seventh. A warder's trumpet. 'Eighth. A bell for the portal. 'Besides these, I shall want antique chairs, tables, beds, and, in
    a word, all the casts-off of castles that you can lay hands upon. 'You must also get a handsome barouche, and four horses; and by
    mentioning my name (the Lady Cherubina de Willoughby, of Monkton
    Castle), and by shewing this letter, no shopkeeper or mechanic will
    refuse you credit for anything. Tell them I will pass my receipts
    as soon as the several articles arrive. 'I have now to make a proposal, which, I hope and trust, will meet
    with your approbation. Your present business does not appear to be
    prosperous: all the offices in my castle are still unoccupied, and
    as I have the highest opinion of your discretion and honesty, the
    situation of warden (a most ostensible one) is at your service. The
    salary is two hundred a-year: consider of it. 'At all events, I do beseech of you to come down, as soon as you
    can, on receipt of this letter, and remain a few days, for the
    purpose of assisting me in my regulations. 'You might travel in the barouche, and bring some of the smaller
    articles with you. Pray be here in three days at farthest. 'CHERUBINA DE WILLOUGHBY. '_Monkton Castle._'

I now began to think that I might, and should summon other friends, on
this important occasion; and accordingly I wrote a few lines to
Higginson. 'Dear Sir,

    'Intending to take immediate possession of Monkton Castle, which
    has devolved to me by right of lineal descent; and wishing, in
    imitation of ancient times, for a wild and enthusiastic minstrel,
    as part of my household, I have to acquaint you, that if you should
    think such an office eligible, I shall be happy to place you in it,
    and to recompense your poetical services with an annual stipend of
    two hundred pounds. 'Should this proposal prove acceptable, be so good as to call on my
    trusty servant, Jerry Sullivan, in St. Giles's, and accompany him
    down in my barouche. 'CHERUBINA DE WILLOUGHBY. '_Monkton Castle._'

I then penned a billet to Montmorenci; ah, ask not why, but pity me. Silly Cherubina! and yet, mark how her burning pen can write ice. 'My Lord,

    'Pardon the trouble I am about giving you, but as I mean to reside,
    for the future, in one of my castles (my birth and pretensions
    having already been acknowledged by Lady Gwyn), I wish to secure
    the parchment and picture that I left at my former lodgings at
    Drury Lane. 'Will you, my lord, have the goodness to transmit them, by some
    trusty hand, to Jerry Sullivan, the woollen-draper in St. Giles's,
    who will convey them to me at Monkton Castle. 'With sentiments of respect and esteem,

    'I have the honour to be,

    'My Lord,

    'Your lordship's most obedient,

    'And most humble servant,

    'CHERUBINA DE WILLOUGHBY. '_Monkton Castle._'

Now this is precisely the formal sort of letter which a heroine
sometimes indites to her lover: he cannot, for the soul of him, tell
why; so down he comes, all distracted in a postchaise, and makes such a
dishevelled entrance, as melts her heart in an instant, and the scene
ends with his arm round her waist. Adieu. As I was now about to go begging, I thought it necessary to look like a
beggar; so I dressed myself in a tattered gown, cap, and cloak, that
had belonged to the deceased daughter of my hostess. Then placing my
mother's portrait in my bosom, I sallied forth, and took the road to
the neighbouring village. Being Sunday, the rustics looked trim and festive, the nymphs and
youths frolicked along, the grandsires sat at their doors, the sun was
shining; all things smiled but the miserable Cherubina. At length I reached the village, and deposited my letters for the post. The church, imbosomed in trees, stood at a little distance. The people
were at prayers, and as I judged that they would soon be dismissed, I
placed myself at the sacred gate, as an auspicious station for the
commencement of my supplicatory career. In a short time they began to leave the church. 'One penny for the poor starving girl,' said I. 'How are you? How are you? How are you?' was gabbled on all sides. 'One penny,--one penny,--Oh, one penny!' softly faltered I. It was the cooing of a dove amidst the chattering of magpies. 'And who was that stranger in the next pew?' said one lady. 'One penny for the love of----'

'She seemed to think herself too pretty to pray,' said another. 'One penny for the----'

'Perhaps motion does not become her lips,' said another. 'One penny for the love of charity.' But they had gotten into their carriages. 'If youth, innocence, and distress can touch your hearts,' said I,
following some gentlemen down the road, 'pity the destitute orphan, the
hungry vagrant, the most injured and innocent of her sex. Gentlemen,
good gentlemen, kind gentlemen----.' 'Go to hell,' said they. 'There is for you, sweetheart,' cried a coarse voice from behind, while
a halfpenny jingled at my foot. I turned to thank my benefactor, and
found that he was a drunken man in the stocks. Disgusted and indignant at the failure of my first attempt, I hurried
out of the village, and strayed along, addressing all I met, but all
appeared too gay to pity misery. Hour after hour I passed in fruitless
efforts, now walking, now sitting; till at length day began to close,
and fatigue and horrid hunger were enfeebling my limbs. In a piteous condition, I determined to turn my steps back towards the
cottage; for night was already blackening the blue hemisphere, the
mountainous clouds hung low, and the winds piped the portentous moan of
a coming hurricane. By the little light that still remained, I saw a
long avenue on my left, which, I thought, might lead to some hospitable
place of shelter; and I began, as well as the gloom of the trees would
permit, to grope my way through it. After much labour and many falls, I came to an opening, and as I saw no
house, I still walked straight forward. By this time the storm had
burst upon my head with tremendous violence, and it was with difficulty
that I could keep my feet. At last I fancied I could perceive a building in front, and I bent my
steps towards it. As I drew nearer, I found my way sometimes obstructed
by heaps of stones, or broken columns, and I concluded that I was
approaching some prodigious castle, where I should be sure to find
shelter, horror, owls, and one of my near relations. I therefore
hastened towards it, and soon my extended hands touched the structure. My heart struck a throb of joy, and I began to feel along the wall for
some ruined portal or archway. Hardly had I moved ten paces, when my groping hands plunged into
unresisting air: I stopped a moment, then entered through the vacuity,
and to my great comfort, found myself under immediate shelter. This then, I guessed, was the great hall of the castle, and I prepared
my mind for the most terrible things. I had not advanced three yards, when I paused in much terror; for I
thought I heard a stir just beside me. Again all was still, and I
ventured forward. I now fancied that I heard a gentle breathing; and at
the same instant I struck my foot against something, which, with a
sudden movement, tripped up my heels, and down I came, shrieking and
begging for mercy; while a frightful bustle arose all round me,--such
passing and repassing, rustling and rushing, that I gave myself over
for lost. 'Oh, gentlemen banditti!' cried I, 'spare my persecuted life, and I
will never, never betray you!' They did not answer a syllable, but retired to some distance, where
they held a horrid silence. In a few minutes, I heard steps outside, and two persons entered the
building. 'This shelters us well enough,' said one of them. 'Curse on the storm,' cried the other, 'it will hinder any more of them
from coming out to-night. However we have killed four already, and,
please goodness, not one will be alive on the estate this day month.' Oh, Biddy, how my soul sickened at the shocking reflection, that four
of a family were already murdered in cold blood, and that the rest were
to share the same fate in a month! Unable to contain myself, I muttered, 'Mercy upon me, mercy upon me!' 'Did you hear that?' whispered one of the men. 'I did,' said the other. 'Off with us this moment!' and off they both
ran. I too determined to quit this nest of horrors, for my very life
appeared in danger; so, rising, I began to grope my way towards the
door, when I fell over something that lay on the ground, and as I put
out my hand, I touched (Oh, horrible!) a dead, cold, damp human face.