His affection for her soon sunk into indifference; hers lasted a little longer; and in spite of her youth
and her manners, she retained all the claims to reputation which her marriage had given her. Though Darcy could never receive him at Pemberley, yet, for Elizabeth's sake, he assisted him further
in his profession. Lydia was occasionally a visitor there, when her husband was gone to enjoy himself
in London or Bath; and with the Bingleys they both of them frequently staid so long, that even
Bingley's good humour was overcome, and he proceeded so far as to talk of giving them a hint to be
gone. Miss Bingley was very deeply mortified by Darcy's marriage; but as she thought it advisable to retain
the right of visiting at Pemberley, she dropt all her resentment; was fonder than ever of Georgiana,
almost as attentive to Darcy as heretofore, and paid off every arrear of civility to Elizabeth. Pemberley was now Georgiana's home; and the attachment of the sisters was exactly what Darcy
had hoped to see. They were able to love each other even as well as they intended. Georgiana had
the highest opinion in the world of Elizabeth; though at first she often listened with an astonishment
bordering on alarm at her lively, sportive, manner of talking to her brother. He, who had always
inspired in herself a respect which almost overcame her affection, she now saw the object of open
pleasantry. Her mind received knowledge which had never before fallen in her way. By Elizabeth's
instructions, she began to comprehend that a woman may take liberties with her husband which a
brother will not always allow in a sister more than ten years younger than himself. Lady Catherine was extremely indignant on the marriage of her nephew; and as she gave way to all
the genuine frankness of her character in her reply to the letter which announced its arrangement,
she sent him language so very abusive, especially of Elizabeth, that for some time all intercourse was
at an end. But at length, by Elizabeth's persuasion, he was prevailed on to overlook the offence, and
seek a reconciliation; and, after a little further resistance on the part of his aunt, her resentment
gave way, either to her affection for him, or her curiosity to see how his wife conducted herself; and
she condescended to wait on them at Pemberley, in spite of that pollution which its woods had
received, not merely from the presence of such a mistress, but the visits of her uncle and aunt from
the city. With the Gardiners, they were always on the most intimate terms. Darcy, as well as Elizabeth, really
loved them; and they were both ever sensible of the warmest gratitude towards the persons who, by
bringing her into Derbyshire, had been the means of uniting them.