"She will of course, as I shall her, when we are married." "You begin late," said I, ironically, "marriage is usually considered the grave, and not the cradle of
love. So you are about to love her, but do not already?" "Do not catechise me, Lionel; I will do my duty by her, be assured. Love! I must steel my heart against
that; expel it from its tower of strength, barricade it out: the fountain of love must cease to play, its
waters be dried up, and all passionate thoughts attendant on it die-that is to say, the love which
would rule me, not that which I rule. Idris is a gentle, pretty, sweet little girl; it is impossible not to
have an affection for her, and I have a very sincere one; only do not speak of love -love, the tyrant
and the tyrant-queller; love, until now my conqueror, now my slave; the hungry fire, the untameable
beast, the fanged snake-no-no-I will have nothing to do with that love. Tell me, Lionel, do you
consent that I should marry this young lady?" He bent his keen eyes upon me, and my uncontrollable heart swelled in my bosom. I replied in a calm
voice-but how far from calm was the thought imaged by my still words-"Never! I can never
consent that Lady Idris should be united to one who does not love her." "Because you love her yourself." "Your Lordship might have spared that taunt; I do not, dare not love her." "At least," he continued haughtily, "she does not love you. I would not marry a reigning sovereign,
were I not sure that her heart was free. But, O, Lionel! a kingdom is a word of might, and gently
sounding are the terms that compose the style of royalty. Were not the mightiest men of the olden
times kings? Alexander was a king; Solomon, the wisest of men, was a king; Napoleon was a king;
Caesar died in his attempt to become one, and Cromwell, the puritan and king-killer, aspired to
regality. The father of Adrian yielded up the already broken sceptre of England; but I will rear the
fallen plant, join its dismembered frame, and exalt it above all the flowers of the field. "You need not wonder that I freely discover Adrian's abode. Do not suppose that I am wicked or
foolish enough to found my purposed sovereignty on a fraud, and one so easily discovered as the
truth or falsehood of the Earl's insanity. I am just come from him. Before I decided on my marriage
with Idris, I resolved to see him myself again, and to judge of the probability of his recovery.-He is
irrecoverably mad." I gasped for breath-
"I will not detail to you," continued Raymond, "the melancholy particulars. You shall see him, and
judge for yourself; although I fear this visit, useless to him, will be insufferably painful to you. It has
weighed on my spirits ever since. Excellent and gentle as he is even in the downfall of his reason, I do
not worship him as you do, but I would give all my hopes of a crown and my right hand to boot, to
see him restored to himself." His voice expressed the deepest compassion: "Thou most unaccountable being," I cried, "whither will
thy actions tend, in all this maze of purpose in which thou seemest lost?" "Whither indeed? To a crown, a golden be-gemmed crown, I hope; and yet I dare not trust and
though I dream of a crown and wake for one, ever and anon a busy devil whispers to me, that it is
but a fool's cap that I seek, and that were I wise, I should trample on it, and take in its stead, that
which is worth all the crowns of the east and presidentships of the west." "And what is that?" "If I do make it my choice, then you shall know; at present I dare not speak, even think of it." Again he was silent, and after a pause turned to me laughingly. When scorn did not inspire his mirth,
when it was genuine gaiety that painted his features with a joyous expression, his beauty became
super-eminent, divine. "Verney," said he, "my first act when I become King of England, will be to
unite with the Greeks, take Constantinople, and subdue all Asia. I intend to be a warrior, a
conqueror; Napoleon's name shall vail to mine; and enthusiasts, instead of visiting his rocky grave,
and exalting the merits of the fallen, shall adore my majesty, and magnify my illustrious
achievements." I listened to Raymond with intense interest. Could I be other than all ear, to one who seemed to
govern the whole earth in his grasping imagination, and who only quailed when he attempted to rule
himself. Then on his word and will depended my own happiness-the fate of all dear to me. I
endeavoured to divine the concealed meaning of his words. Perdita's name was not mentioned; yet I
could not doubt that love for her caused the vacillation of purpose that he exhibited. And who was so
worthy of love as my noble-minded sister? Who deserved the hand of this self-exalted king more
than she whose glance belonged to a queen of nations? who loved him, as he did her;
notwithstanding that disappointment quelled her passion, and ambition held strong combat with his. We went together to the House in the evening. Raymond, while he knew that his plans and prospects
were to be discussed and decided during the expected debate, was gay and careless. An hum, like
that of ten thousand hives of swarming bees, stunned us as we entered the coffee-room. Knots of
politicians were assembled with anxious brows and loud or deep voices. The aristocratical party, the
richest and most influential men in England, appeared less agitated than the others, for the question
was to be discussed without their interference. Near the fire was Ryland and his supporters. Ryland
was a man of obscure birth and of immense wealth, inherited from his father, who had been a
manufacturer. He had witnessed, when a young man, the abdication of the king, and the
amalgamation of the two houses of Lords and Commons; he had sympathized with these popular
encroachments, and it had been the business of his life to consolidate and encrease them. Since
then, the influence of the landed proprietors had augmented; and at first Ryland was not sorry to
observe the machinations of Lord Raymond, which drew off many of his opponent's partizans. But
the thing was now going too far. The poorer nobility hailed the return of sovereignty, as an event
which would restore them to their power and rights, now lost. The half extinct spirit of royalty
roused itself in the minds of men; and they, willing slaves, self-constituted subjects, were ready to
bend their necks to the yoke. Some erect and manly spirits still remained, pillars of state; but the
word republic had grown stale to the vulgar ear; and many-the event would prove whether it was a
majority- pined for the tinsel and show of royalty. Ryland was roused to resistance; he asserted that
his sufferance alone had permitted the encrease of this party; but the time for indulgence was
passed, and with one motion of his arm he would sweep away the cobwebs that blinded his
countrymen. When Raymond entered the coffee-room, his presence was hailed by his friends almost with a shout. They gathered round him, counted their numbers, and detailed the reasons why they were now to
receive an addition of such and such members, who had not yet declared themselves. Some trifling
business of the House having been gone through, the leaders took their seats in the chamber; the
clamour of voices continued, till Ryland arose to speak, and then the slightest whispered observation
was audible. All eyes were fixed upon him as he stood-ponderous of frame, sonorous of voice, and
with a manner which, though not graceful, was impressive. I turned from his marked, iron
countenance to Raymond, whose face, veiled by a smile, would not betray his care; yet his lips
quivered somewhat, and his hand clasped the bench on which he sat, with a convulsive strength that
made the muscles start again. Ryland began by praising the present state of the British empire. He recalled past years to their
memory; the miserable contentions which in the time of our fathers arose almost to civil war, the
abdication of the late king, and the foundation of the republic. He described this republic; shewed
how it gave privilege to each individual in the state, to rise to consequence, and even to temporary
sovereignty. He compared the royal and republican spirit; shewed how the one tended to enslave the
minds of men; while all the institutions of the other served to raise even the meanest among us to
something great and good. He shewed how England had become powerful, and its inhabitants valiant
and wise, by means of the freedom they enjoyed. As he spoke, every heart swelled with pride, and
every cheek glowed with delight to remember, that each one there was English, and that each
supported and contributed to the happy state of things now commemorated. Ryland's fervour
increased-his eyes lighted up-his voice assumed the tone of passion. There was one man, he
continued, who wished to alter all this, and bring us back to our days of impotence and contention:-
one man, who would dare arrogate the honour which was due to all who claimed England as their
birthplace, and set his name and style above the name and style of his country. I saw at this juncture
that Raymond changed colour; his eyes were withdrawn from the orator, and cast on the ground; the
listeners turned from one to the other; but in the meantime the speaker's voice filled their ears-the
thunder of his denunciations influenced their senses. The very boldness of his language gave him
weight; each knew that he spoke truth-a truth known, but not acknowledged. He tore from reality
the mask with which she had been clothed; and the purposes of Raymond, which before had crept
around, ensnaring by stealth, now stood a hunted stag-even at bay-as all perceived who watched
the irrepressible changes of his countenance. Ryland ended by moving, that any attempt to re-erect
the kingly power should be declared treason, and he a traitor who should endeavour to change the
present form of government. Cheers and loud acclamations followed the close of his speech. After his motion had been seconded, Lord Raymond rose,-his countenance bland, his voice softly
melodious, his manner soothing, his grace and sweetness came like the mild breathing of a flute,
after the loud, organ-like voice of his adversary. He rose, he said, to speak in favour of the
honourable member's motion, with one slight amendment subjoined. He was ready to go back to old
times, and commemorate the contests of our fathers, and the monarch's abdication. Nobly and
greatly, he said, had the illustrious and last sovereign of England sacrificed himself to the apparent
good of his country, and divested himself of a power which could only be maintained by the blood of
his subjects-these subjects named so no more, these, his friends and equals, had in gratitude
conferred certain favours and distinctions on him and his family for ever. An ample estate was
allotted to them, and they took the first rank among the peers of Great Britain. Yet it might be
conjectured that they had not forgotten their ancient heritage; and it was hard that his heir should
suffer alike with any other pretender, if he attempted to regain what by ancient right and inheritance
belonged to him. He did not say that he should favour such an attempt; but he did say that such an
attempt would be venial; and, if the aspirant did not go so far as to declare war, and erect a standard
in the kingdom, his fault ought to be regarded with an indulgent eye. In his amendment he proposed,
that an exception should be made in the bill in favour of any person who claimed the sovereign
power in right of the earls of Windsor. Nor did Raymond make an end without drawing in vivid and
glowing colours, the splendour of a kingdom, in opposition to the commercial spirit of republicanism. He asserted, that each individual under the English monarchy, was then as now, capable of attaining
high rank and power-with one only exception, that of the function of chief magistrate; higher and
nobler rank, than a bartering, timorous commonwealth could afford. And for this one exception, to
what did it amount? The nature of riches and influence forcibly confined the list of candidates to a
few of the wealthiest; and it was much to be feared, that the ill-humour and contention generated by
this triennial struggle, would counterbalance its advantages in impartial eyes. I can ill record the flow
of language and graceful turns of expression, the wit and easy raillery that gave vigour and influence
to his speech. His manner, timid at first, became firm-his changeful face was lit up to superhuman
brilliancy; his voice, various as music, was like that enchanting. It were useless to record the debate that followed this harangue. Party speeches were delivered,
which clothed the question in cant, and veiled its simple meaning in a woven wind of words. The
motion was lost; Ryland withdrew in rage and despair; and Raymond, gay and exulting, retired to
dream of his future kingdom. IS there such a feeling as love at first sight? And if there be, in what does its nature differ from love
founded in long observation and slow growth? Perhaps its effects are not so permanent; but they
are, while they last, as violent and intense. We walk the pathless mazes of society, vacant of joy, till
we hold this clue, leading us through that labyrinth to paradise. Our nature dim, like to an unlighted
torch, sleeps in formless blank till the fire attain it; this life of life, this light to moon, and glory to the
sun. What does it matter, whether the fire be struck from flint and steel, nourished with care into a
flame, slowly communicated to the dark wick, or whether swiftly the radiant power of light and
warmth passes from a kindred power, and shines at once the beacon and the hope. In the deepest
fountain of my heart the pulses were stirred; around, above, beneath, the clinging Memory as a cloak
enwrapt me. In no one moment of coming time did I feel as I had done in time gone by. The spirit of
Idris hovered in the air I breathed; her eyes were ever and for ever bent on mine; her remembered
smile blinded my faint gaze, and caused me to walk as one, not in eclipse, not in darkness and
vacancy-but in a new and brilliant light, too novel, too dazzling for my human senses. On every leaf,
on every small division of the universe, (as on the hyacinth ai is engraved) was imprinted the talisman
of my existence-SHE LIVES! SHE IS! -I had not time yet to analyze my feeling, to take myself to
task, and leash in the tameless passion; all was one idea, one feeling, one knowledge -it was my life! But the die was cast-Raymond would marry Idris. The merry marriage bells rung in my ears; I heard
the nation's gratulation which followed the union; the ambitious noble uprose with swift eagle-flight,
from the lowly ground to regal supremacy-and to the love of Idris. Yet, not so! She did not love him;
she had called me her friend; she had smiled on me; to me she had entrusted her heart's dearest
hope, the welfare of Adrian. This reflection thawed my congealing blood, and again the tide of life
and love flowed impetuously onward, again to ebb as my busy thoughts changed. The debate had ended at three in the morning. My soul was in tumults; I traversed the streets with
eager rapidity. Truly, I was mad that night- love-which I have named a giant from its birth,
wrestled with despair! My heart, the field of combat, was wounded by the iron heel of the one,
watered by the gushing tears of the other. Day, hateful to me, dawned; I retreated to my lodgings-I
threw myself on a couch-I slept-was it sleep?-for thought was still alive-love and despair
struggled still, and I writhed with unendurable pain. I awoke half stupefied; I felt a heavy oppression on me, but knew not wherefore; I entered, as it
were, the council-chamber of my brain, and questioned the various ministers of thought therein
assembled; too soon I remembered all; too soon my limbs quivered beneath the tormenting power;
soon, too soon, I knew myself a slave! Suddenly, unannounced, Lord Raymond entered my apartment. He came in gaily, singing the
Tyrolese song of liberty; noticed me with a gracious nod, and threw himself on a sopha opposite the
copy of a bust of the Apollo Belvidere. After one or two trivial remarks, to which I sullenly replied, he
suddenly cried, looking at the bust, "I am called like that victor! Not a bad idea; the head will serve
for my new coinage, and be an omen to all dutiful subjects of my future success." He said this in his most gay, yet benevolent manner, and smiled, not disdainfully, but in playful
mockery of himself. Then his countenance suddenly darkened, and in that shrill tone peculiar to
himself, he cried, "I fought a good battle last night; higher conquest the plains of Greece never saw
me achieve. Now I am the first man in the state, burthen of every ballad, and object of old women's
mumbled devotions. What are your meditations? You, who fancy that you can read the human soul,
as your native lake reads each crevice and folding of its surrounding hills-say what you think of me;
king-expectant, angel or devil, which?" This ironical tone was discord to my bursting, over-boiling-heart; I was nettled by his insolence, and
replied with bitterness; "There is a spirit, neither angel or devil, damned to limbo merely." I saw his
cheeks become pale, and his lips whiten and quiver; his anger served but to enkindle mine, and I
answered with a determined look his eyes which glared on me; suddenly they were withdrawn, cast
down, a tear, I thought, wetted the dark lashes; I was softened, and with involuntary emotion added,
"Not that you are such, my dear lord." I paused, even awed by the agitation he evinced; "Yes," he said at length, rising and biting his lip, as
he strove to curb his passion; "Such am I! You do not know me, Verney; neither you, nor our
audience of last night, nor does universal England know aught of me. I stand here, it would seem, an
elected king; this hand is about to grasp a sceptre; these brows feel in each nerve the coming
diadem. I appear to have strength, power, victory; standing as a dome-supporting column stands;
and I am-a reed! I have ambition, and that attains its aim; my nightly dreams are realized, my
waking hopes fulfilled; a kingdom awaits my acceptance, my enemies are overthrown. But here," and
he struck his heart with violence, "here is the rebel, here the stumbling-block; this over-ruling heart,
which I may drain of its living blood; but, while one fluttering pulsation remains, I am its slave." He spoke with a broken voice, then bowed his head, and, hiding his face in his hands, wept. I was still
smarting from my own disappointment; yet this scene oppressed me even to terror, nor could I
interrupt his access of passion. It subsided at length; and, throwing himself on the couch, he
remained silent and motionless, except that his changeful features shewed a strong internal conflict. At last he rose, and said in his usual tone of voice, "The time grows on us, Verney, I must away. Let
me not forget my chiefest errand here. Will you accompany me to Windsor to-morrow? You will not
be dishonoured by my society, and as this is probably the last service, or disservice you can do me,
will you grant my request?" He held out his hand with almost a bashful air. Swiftly I thought-Yes, I will witness the last scene of
the drama. Beside which, his mien conquered me, and an affectionate sentiment towards him, again
filled my heart-I bade him command me. "Aye, that I will," said he gaily, "that's my cue now; be
with me to-morrow morning by seven; be secret and faithful; and you shall be groom of the stole ere
long." So saying, he hastened away, vaulted on his horse, and with a gesture as if he gave me his hand to
kiss, bade me another laughing adieu. Left to myself, I strove with painful intensity to divine the
motive of his request and foresee the events of the coming day. The hours passed on unperceived;
my head ached with thought, the nerves seemed teeming with the over full fraught-I clasped my
burning brow, as if my fevered hand could medicine its pain. I was punctual to the appointed hour on
the following day, and found Lord Raymond waiting for me. We got into his carriage, and proceeded
towards Windsor. I had tutored myself, and was resolved by no outward sign to disclose my internal
agitation. "What a mistake Ryland made," said Raymond, "when he thought to overpower me the other night. He spoke well, very well; such an harangue would have succeeded better addressed to me singly,
than to the fools and knaves assembled yonder. Had I been alone, I should have listened to him with
a wish to hear reason, but when he endeavoured to vanquish me in my own territory, with my own
weapons, he put me on my mettle, and the event was such as all might have expected." I smiled incredulously, and replied: "I am of Ryland's way of thinking, and will, if you please, repeat all
his arguments; we shall see how far you will be induced by them, to change the royal for the patriotic
style." "The repetition would be useless," said Raymond, "since I well remember them, and have many
others, self-suggested, which speak with unanswerable persuasion." He did not explain himself, nor did I make any remark on his reply. Our silence endured for some
miles, till the country with open fields, or shady woods and parks, presented pleasant objects to our
view. After some observations on the scenery and seats, Raymond said: "Philosophers have called
man a microcosm of nature, and find a reflection in the internal mind for all this machinery visibly at
work around us. This theory has often been a source of amusement to me; and many an idle hour
have I spent, exercising my ingenuity in finding resemblances. Does not Lord Bacon say that, 'the
falling from a discord to a concord, which maketh great sweetness in music, hath an agreement with
the affections, which are re-integrated to the better after some dislikes?' What a sea is the tide of
passion, whose fountains are in our own nature! Our virtues are the quick-sands, which shew
themselves at calm and low water; but let the waves arise and the winds buffet them, and the poor
devil whose hope was in their durability, finds them sink from under him. The fashions of the world,
its exigencies, educations and pursuits, are winds to drive our wills, like clouds all one way; but let a
thunderstorm arise in the shape of love, hate, or ambition, and the rack goes backward, stemming
the opposing air in triumph." "Yet," replied I, "nature always presents to our eyes the appearance of a patient: while there is an
active principle in man which is capable of ruling fortune, and at least of tacking against the gale, till
it in some mode conquers it." "There is more of what is specious than true in your distinction," said my companion. "Did we form
ourselves, choosing our dispositions, and our powers? I find myself, for one, as a stringed instrument
with chords and stops-but I have no power to turn the pegs, or pitch my thoughts to a higher or
lower key." "Other men," I observed, "may be better musicians." "I talk not of others, but myself," replied Raymond, "and I am as fair an example to go by as another. I cannot set my heart to a particular tune, or run voluntary changes on my will. We are born; we
choose neither our parents, nor our station; we are educated by others, or by the world's
circumstance, and this cultivation, mingling with our innate disposition, is the soil in which our
desires, passions, and motives grow." "There is much truth in what you say," said I, "and yet no man ever acts upon this theory. Who, when
he makes a choice, says, Thus I choose, because I am necessitated? Does he not on the contrary feel
a freedom of will within him, which, though you may call it fallacious, still actuates him as he
decides?" "Exactly so," replied Raymond, "another link of the breakless chain. Were I now to commit an act
which would annihilate my hopes, and pluck the regal garment from my mortal limbs, to clothe them
in ordinary weeds, would this, think you, be an act of free-will on my part?" As we talked thus, I perceived that we were not going the ordinary road to Windsor, but through
Englefield Green, towards Bishopgate Heath. I began to divine that Idris was not the object of our
journey, but that I was brought to witness the scene that was to decide the fate of Raymond-and of
Perdita. Raymond had evidently vacillated during his journey, and irresolution was marked in every
gesture as we entered Perdita's cottage. I watched him curiously, determined that, if this hesitation
should continue, I would assist Perdita to overcome herself, and teach her to disdain the wavering
love of him, who balanced between the possession of a crown, and of her, whose excellence and
affection transcended the worth of a kingdom. We found her in her flower-adorned alcove; she was reading the newspaper report of the debate in
parliament, that apparently doomed her to hopelessness. That heart-sinking feeling was painted in
her sunk eyes and spiritless attitude; a cloud was on her beauty, and frequent sighs were tokens of
her distress. This sight had an instantaneous effect on Raymond; his eyes beamed with tenderness,
and remorse clothed his manners with earnestness and truth. He sat beside her; and, taking the
paper from her hand, said, "Not a word more shall my sweet Perdita read of this contention of
madmen and fools. I must not permit you to be acquainted with the extent of my delusion, lest you
despise me; although, believe me, a wish to appear before you, not vanquished, but as a conqueror,
inspired me during my wordy war." Perdita looked at him like one amazed; her expressive countenance shone for a moment with
tenderness; to see him only was happiness. But a bitter thought swiftly shadowed her joy; she bent
her eyes on the ground, endeavouring to master the passion of tears that threatened to overwhelm
her. Raymond continued, "I will not act a part with you, dear girl, or appear other than what I am,
weak and unworthy, more fit to excite your disdain than your love. Yet you do love me; I feel and
know that you do, and thence I draw my most cherished hopes. If pride guided you, or even reason,
you might well reject me. Do so; if your high heart, incapable of my infirmity of purpose, refuses to
bend to the lowness of mine. Turn from me, if you will,-if you can. If your whole soul does not urge
you to forgive me-if your entire heart does not open wide its door to admit me to its very centre,
forsake me, never speak to me again. I, though sinning against you almost beyond remission, I also
am proud; there must be no reserve in your pardon-no drawback to the gift of your affection." Perdita looked down, confused, yet pleased. My presence embarrassed her; so that she dared not
turn to meet her lover's eye, or trust her voice to assure him of her affection; while a blush mantled
her cheek, and her disconsolate air was exchanged for one expressive of deep-felt joy. Raymond
encircled her waist with his arm, and continued, "I do not deny that I have balanced between you
and the highest hope that mortal men can entertain; but I do so no longer. Take me-mould me to
your will, possess my heart and soul to all eternity. If you refuse to contribute to my happiness, I quit
England to-night, and will never set foot in it again. "Lionel, you hear: witness for me: persuade your sister to forgive the injury I have done her;
persuade her to be mine." "There needs no persuasion," said the blushing Perdita, "except your own dear promises, and my
ready heart, which whispers to me that they are true." That same evening we all three walked together in the forest, and, with the garrulity which happiness
inspires, they detailed to me the history of their loves. It was pleasant to see the haughty Raymond
and reserved Perdita changed through happy love into prattling, playful children, both losing their
characteristic dignity in the fulness of mutual contentment. A night or two ago Lord Raymond, with a
brow of care, and a heart oppressed with thought, bent all his energies to silence or persuade the
legislators of England that a sceptre was not too weighty for his hand, while visions of dominion, war,
and triumph floated before him; now, frolicsome as a lively boy sporting under his mother's
approving eye, the hopes of his ambition were complete, when he pressed the small fair hand of
Perdita to his lips; while she, radiant with delight, looked on the still pool, not truly admiring herself,
but drinking in with rapture the reflection there made of the form of herself and her lover, shewn for
the first time in dear conjunction. I rambled away from them. If the rapture of assured sympathy was theirs, I enjoyed that of restored
hope. I looked on the regal towers of Windsor. High is the wall and strong the barrier that separate
me from my Star of Beauty. But not impassible. She will not be his. A few more years dwell in thy
native garden, sweet flower, till I by toil and time acquire a right to gather thee. Despair not, nor bid
me despair! What must I do now? First I must seek Adrian, and restore him to her. Patience,
gentleness, and untired affection, shall recall him, if it be true, as Raymond says, that he is mad;
energy and courage shall rescue him, if he be unjustly imprisoned. After the lovers again joined me, we supped together in the alcove. Truly it was a fairy's supper; for
though the air was perfumed by the scent of fruits and wine, we none of us either ate or drank-
even the beauty of the night was unobserved; their extasy could not be increased by outward
objects, and I was wrapt in reverie. At about midnight Raymond and I took leave of my sister, to
return to town. He was all gaiety; scraps of songs fell from his lips; every thought of his mind-every
object about us, gleamed under the sunshine of his mirth. He accused me of melancholy, of ill-
humour and envy. "Not so," said I, "though I confess that my thoughts are not occupied as pleasantly as yours are. You
promised to facilitate my visit to Adrian; I conjure you to perform your promise. I cannot linger here;
I long to soothe -perhaps to cure the malady of my first and best friend. I shall immediately depart
for Dunkeld." "Thou bird of night," replied Raymond, "what an eclipse do you throw across my bright thoughts,
forcing me to call to mind that melancholy ruin, which stands in mental desolation, more irreparable
than a fragment of a carved column in a weed-grown field. You dream that you can restore him? Daedalus never wound so inextricable an error round Minotaur, as madness has woven about his
imprisoned reason. Nor you, nor any other Theseus, can thread the labyrinth, to which perhaps some
unkind Ariadne has the clue." "You allude to Evadne Zaimi: but she is not in England." "And were she," said Raymond, "I would not advise her seeing him. Better to decay in absolute
delirium, than to be the victim of the methodical unreason of ill-bestowed love. The long duration of
his malady has probably erased from his mind all vestige of her; and it were well that it should never
again be imprinted. You will find him at Dunkeld; gentle and tractable he wanders up the hills, and
through the wood, or sits listening beside the waterfall. You may see him-his hair stuck with wild
flowers -his eyes full of untraceable meaning-his voice broken-his person wasted to a shadow. He plucks flowers and weeds, and weaves chaplets of them, or sails yellow leaves and bits of bark on
the stream, rejoicing in their safety, or weeping at their wreck. The very memory half unmans me. By
Heaven! the first tears I have shed since boyhood rushed scalding into my eyes when I saw him." It needed not this last account to spur me on to visit him. I only doubted whether or not I should
endeavour to see Idris again, before I departed. This doubt was decided on the following day. Early in
the morning Raymond came to me; intelligence had arrived that Adrian was dangerously ill, and it
appeared impossible that his failing strength should surmount the disorder. "To-morrow," said
Raymond, "his mother and sister set out for Scotland to see him once again." "And I go to-day," I cried; "this very hour I will engage a sailing balloon; I shall be there in forty-eight
hours at furthest, perhaps in less, if the wind is fair. Farewell, Raymond; be happy in having chosen
the better part in life. This turn of fortune revives me. I feared madness, not sickness-I have a
presentiment that Adrian will not die; perhaps this illness is a crisis, and he may recover." Everything favoured my journey. The balloon rose about half a mile from the earth, and with a
favourable wind it hurried through the air, its feathered vans cleaving the unopposing atmosphere. Notwithstanding the melancholy object of my journey, my spirits were exhilarated by reviving hope,
by the swift motion of the airy pinnace, and the balmy visitation of the sunny air. The pilot hardly
moved the plumed steerage, and the slender mechanism of the wings, wide unfurled, gave forth a
murmuring noise, soothing to the sense. Plain and hill, stream and corn-field, were discernible below,
while we unimpeded sped on swift and secure, as a wild swan in his spring-tide flight. The machine
obeyed the slightest motion of the helm; and, the wind blowing steadily, there was no let or obstacle
to our course. Such was the power of man over the elements; a power long sought, and lately won;
yet foretold in by-gone time by the prince of poets, whose verses I quoted much to the astonishment
of my pilot, when I told him how many hundred years ago they had been written:-
  Oh! human wit, thou can'st invent much ill,
  Thou searchest strange arts: who would think by skill,
  An heavy man like a light bird should stray,
  And through the empty heavens find a way? I alighted at Perth; and, though much fatigued by a constant exposure to the air for many hours, I
would not rest, but merely altering my mode of conveyance, I went by land instead of air, to
Dunkeld. The sun was rising as I entered the opening of the hills. After the revolution of ages Birnam
hill was again covered with a young forest, while more aged pines, planted at the very
commencement of the nineteenth century by the then Duke of Athol, gave solemnity and beauty to
the scene. The rising sun first tinged the pine tops; and my mind, rendered through my mountain
education deeply susceptible of the graces of nature, and now on the eve of again beholding my
beloved and perhaps dying friend, was strangely influenced by the sight of those distant beams:
surely they were ominous, and as such I regarded them, good omens for Adrian, on whose life my
happiness depended. Poor fellow! he lay stretched on a bed of sickness, his cheeks glowing with the hues of fever, his eyes
half closed, his breath irregular and difficult. Yet it was less painful to see him thus, than to find him
fulfilling the animal functions uninterruptedly, his mind sick the while. I established myself at his
bedside; I never quitted it day or night. Bitter task was it, to behold his spirit waver between death
and life: to see his warm cheek, and know that the very fire which burned too fiercely there, was
consuming the vital fuel; to hear his moaning voice, which might never again articulate words of love
and wisdom; to witness the ineffectual motions of his limbs, soon to be wrapt in their mortal shroud. Such for three days and nights appeared the consummation which fate had decreed for my labours,
and I became haggard and spectre-like, through anxiety and watching. At length his eyes unclosed
faintly, yet with a look of returning life; he became pale and weak; but the rigidity of his features was
softened by approaching convalescence. He knew me. What a brimful cup of joyful agony it was,
when his face first gleamed with the glance of recognition-when he pressed my hand, now more
fevered than his own, and when he pronounced my name! No trace of his past insanity remained, to
dash my joy with sorrow. This same evening his mother and sister arrived. The Countess of Windsor was by nature full of
energetic feeling; but she had very seldom in her life permitted the concentrated emotions of her
heart to shew themselves on her features. The studied immovability of her countenance; her slow,
equable manner, and soft but unmelodious voice, were a mask, hiding her fiery passions, and the
impatience of her disposition. She did not in the least resemble either of her children; her black and
sparkling eye, lit up by pride, was totally unlike the blue lustre, and frank, benignant expression of
either Adrian or Idris. There was something grand and majestic in her motions, but nothing
persuasive, nothing amiable. Tall, thin, and strait, her face still handsome, her raven hair hardly
tinged with grey, her forehead arched and beautiful, had not the eye-brows been somewhat
scattered-it was impossible not to be struck by her, almost to fear her. Idris appeared to be the only
being who could resist her mother, notwithstanding the extreme mildness of her character. But there
was a fearlessness and frankness about her, which said that she would not encroach on another's
liberty, but held her own sacred and unassailable. The Countess cast no look of kindness on my worn-out frame, though afterwards she thanked me
coldly for my attentions. Not so Idris; her first glance was for her brother; she took his hand, she
kissed his eye-lids, and hung over him with looks of compassion and love. Her eyes glistened with
tears when she thanked me, and the grace of her expressions was enhanced, not diminished, by the
fervour, which caused her almost to falter as she spoke. Her mother, all eyes and ears, soon
interrupted us; and I saw, that she wished to dismiss me quietly, as one whose services, now that his
relatives had arrived, were of no use to her son. I was harassed and ill, resolved not to give up my
post, yet doubting in what way I should assert it; when Adrian called me, and clasping my hand, bade
me not leave him. His mother, apparently inattentive, at once understood what was meant, and
seeing the hold we had upon her, yielded the point to us. The days that followed were full of pain to me; so that I sometimes regretted that I had not yielded
at once to the haughty lady, who watched all my motions, and turned my beloved task of nursing my
friend to a work of pain and irritation. Never did any woman appear so entirely made of mind, as the
Countess of Windsor. Her passions had subdued her appetites, even her natural wants; she slept
little, and hardly ate at all; her body was evidently considered by her as a mere machine, whose
health was necessary for the accomplishment of her schemes, but whose senses formed no part of
her enjoyment. There is something fearful in one who can thus conquer the animal part of our
nature, if the victory be not the effect of consummate virtue; nor was it without a mixture of this
feeling, that I beheld the figure of the Countess awake when others slept, fasting when I, abstemious
naturally, and rendered so by the fever that preyed on me, was forced to recruit myself with food. She resolved to prevent or diminish my opportunities of acquiring influence over her children, and
circumvented my plans by a hard, quiet, stubborn resolution, that seemed not to belong to flesh and
blood. War was at last tacitly acknowledged between us. We had many pitched battles, during which
no word was spoken, hardly a look was interchanged, but in which each resolved not to submit to the
other. The Countess had the advantage of position; so I was vanquished, though I would not yield. I became sick at heart. My countenance was painted with the hues of ill health and vexation. Adrian
and Idris saw this; they attributed it to my long watching and anxiety; they urged me to rest, and take
care of myself, while I most truly assured them, that my best medicine was their good wishes; those,
and the assured convalescence of my friend, now daily more apparent. The faint rose again blushed
on his cheek; his brow and lips lost the ashy paleness of threatened dissolution; such was the dear
reward of my unremitting attention-and bounteous heaven added overflowing recompence, when
it gave me also the thanks and smiles of Idris. After the lapse of a few weeks, we left Dunkeld. Idris and her mother returned immediately to
Windsor, while Adrian and I followed by slow journies and frequent stoppages, occasioned by his
continued weakness. As we traversed the various counties of fertile England, all wore an exhilarating
appearance to my companion, who had been so long secluded by disease from the enjoyments of
weather and scenery. We passed through busy towns and cultivated plains. The husbandmen were
getting in their plenteous harvests, and the women and children, occupied by light rustic toils,
formed groupes of happy, healthful persons, the very sight of whom carried cheerfulness to the
heart. One evening, quitting our inn, we strolled down a shady lane, then up a grassy slope, till we
came to an eminence, that commanded an extensive view of hill and dale, meandering rivers, dark
woods, and shining villages. The sun was setting; and the clouds, straying, like new-shorn sheep,
through the vast fields of sky, received the golden colour of his parting beams; the distant uplands
shone out, and the busy hum of evening came, harmonized by distance, on our ear. Adrian, who felt
all the fresh spirit infused by returning health, clasped his hands in delight, and exclaimed with
transport:
"O happy earth, and happy inhabitants of earth! A stately palace has God built for you, O man! and
worthy are you of your dwelling! Behold the verdant carpet spread at our feet, and the azure canopy
above; the fields of earth which generate and nurture all things, and the track of heaven, which
contains and clasps all things. Now, at this evening hour, at the period of repose and refection,
methinks all hearts breathe one hymn of love and thanksgiving, and we, like priests of old on the
mountain-tops, give a voice to their sentiment. "Assuredly a most benignant power built up the majestic fabric we inhabit, and framed the laws by
which it endures. If mere existence, and not happiness, had been the final end of our being, what
need of the profuse luxuries which we enjoy? Why should our dwelling place be so lovely, and why
should the instincts of nature minister pleasurable sensations? The very sustaining of our animal
machine is made delightful; and our sustenance, the fruits of the field, is painted with transcendant
hues, endued with grateful odours, and palatable to our taste. Why should this be, if HE were not
good? We need houses to protect us from the seasons, and behold the materials with which we are
provided; the growth of trees with their adornment of leaves; while rocks of stone piled above the
plains variegate the prospect with their pleasant irregularity. "Nor are outward objects alone the receptacles of the Spirit of Good. Look into the mind of man,
where wisdom reigns enthroned; where imagination, the painter, sits, with his pencil dipt in hues
lovelier than those of sunset, adorning familiar life with glowing tints. What a noble boon, worthy the
giver, is the imagination! it takes from reality its leaden hue: it envelopes all thought and sensation in
a radiant veil, and with an hand of beauty beckons us from the sterile seas of life, to her gardens, and
bowers, and glades of bliss. And is not love a gift of the divinity? Love, and her child, Hope, which can
bestow wealth on poverty, strength on the weak, and happiness on the sorrowing. "My lot has not been fortunate. I have consorted long with grief, entered the gloomy labyrinth of
madness, and emerged, but half alive. Yet I thank God that I have lived! I thank God, that I have
beheld his throne, the heavens, and earth, his footstool. I am glad that I have seen the changes of his
day; to behold the sun, fountain of light, and the gentle pilgrim moon; to have seen the fire bearing
flowers of the sky, and the flowery stars of earth; to have witnessed the sowing and the harvest. I am
glad that I have loved, and have experienced sympathetic joy and sorrow with my fellow-creatures. I
am glad now to feel the current of thought flow through my mind, as the blood through the
articulations of my frame; mere existence is pleasure; and I thank God that I live! "And all ye happy nurslings of mother-earth, do ye not echo my words? Ye who are linked by the
affectionate ties of nature, companions, friends, lovers! fathers, who toil with joy for their offspring;
women, who while gazing on the living forms of their children, forget the pains of maternity;
children, who neither toil nor spin, but love and are loved! "Oh, that death and sickness were banished from our earthly home! that hatred, tyranny, and fear
could no longer make their lair in the human heart! that each man might find a brother in his fellow,
and a nest of repose amid the wide plains of his inheritance! that the source of tears were dry, and
that lips might no longer form expressions of sorrow. Sleeping thus under the beneficent eye of
heaven, can evil visit thee, O Earth, or grief cradle to their graves thy luckless children? Whisper it
not, let the demons hear and rejoice! The choice is with us; let us will it, and our habitation becomes
a paradise. For the will of man is omnipotent, blunting the arrows of death, soothing the bed of
disease, and wiping away the tears of agony. And what is each human being worth, if he do not put
forth his strength to aid his fellow-creatures? My soul is a fading spark, my nature frail as a spent
wave; but I dedicate all of intellect and strength that remains to me, to that one work, and take upon
me the task, as far as I am able, of bestowing blessings on my fellow-men!" His voice trembled, his eyes were cast up, his hands clasped, and his fragile person was bent, as it
were, with excess of emotion.