Encouraged by finding that she had not mentioned my impertinent behaviour to her father, my vanity construed her silence into partiality, and I resolved to improve it to my own advantage, though I was soon convinced that the fear of exciting her father’s uneasiness, had been her sole motive for the only reserve she had ever used towards him. Would that she had related it in the first impulse of anger, he would not then have smiled on an assassin, who basely wounded him when he could not defend himself. “After Macdonald’s death, it was necessary to fix on some plan for his daughter immediately; at first I determined upon sending her into Scotland, under the care of my servant, and in the company of Jane Williams, the gardener’s daughter, a well-behaved honest young woman, who had waited on her, and to whom she appeared attached. Unfortunately I thought again, and however second thoughts may be deemed the wisest, they are seldom the most favorable to the causes of humanity and virtue, for the dictates of the former, have too often been repressed on a nearer view, by cautious avarice, and the ardour of the latter, damped by the suggestions of self-gratification. “As the time approached for her departure, my courage sunk under the idea of losing her; I began to hesitate; I persuaded myself that there was something disrespectful

to her father’s memory, and that I only half fulfilled my promise, by sending her away under the care of servants; I therefore resolved to accompany her, to place her myself under the care of her aunt, with whom I hoped that my father’s name, and my own, would be of service in procuring her respect and comfort. Pleased with any thing like a reprieve, I was delighted with the victory which I imagined I had gained over my inclinations, and compared my triumph to that of Cyrus, or Scipio, thinking my own forbearance in no wise inferior to theirs. I imparted my intentions to Mary, who received them with that innocent sweetness which so enslaves me, that unsuspecting implicit reliance on my honor, which, I thank heaven, she has never yet had reason to repent; believe me Edmund, I have never yet sought to injure the purity which confides in me, and could I gain resolution to withdraw from temptation, I might yet be virtuous and happy, for surely the applauses of my own heart would diffuse balm over my wounded soul.” “Oh Courtney,” exclaimed Edmund, “there spoke my friend; cherish the noble thought, resign her, Henry, resign her, and fulfil your trust with honor; ah, do not add another victim to infamy, lead her not to lament that ignorance of guilt, which deprived her even of suspicion. Do not teach her its existence, by discovering it where she expected every virtue; my dear friend, the ardour or passion will subside, and your conduct must hereafter appear to you in its real colours, perhaps also at a time, when wearied of the world and disgusted with mankind, all your resources for happiness must be drawn from the retrospect of a well-spent life. What then will be your feelings, when you review your actions and dwell on this period? Perhaps long after the poor deceived object of your love, may have ceased to exist, and will be remembered only by the remorse awakened in your breast, from the consciousness of your base conduct towards her. Seduction, always a crime, is in this case one of the deepest dye, it joins perfidy, cruelty, falsehood and perjury, it offends immediately God and man, and when the hour of your death arrives, you may be agonized by recollecting the violation of your promises given in the same trying moment, to Macdonald.” Edmund’s fine countenance in speaking, was animated by the energy of virtue, and illuminated by the light of truth, his eyes beamed conviction, whilst the tears which fell from them, softened the rigour of his speech, and attested the sincerity of the tender friendship by which it was inspired. Lord Courtney listened in silence, he felt the force of Edmund’s arguments, for his own heart had taught him the same, but he received them with the peevishness, of “a man convinced against his will.” When the unimpassioned Madame de Maintenon, urged Madame de Montespan, to withdraw her guilty attachment from the King, and to fill her heart with the love of God, devoting the rest of her life to penitence and prayer. “Alas! madame,” replied the wavering mistress, “you seem to think it as easy to change an attachment, as to change one’s linen; and for a King too!” Courtney answered nearly in the same words, “I agree to all that you have said; I know what I ought to do, but how to prevail on myself to do it, is the difficulty which I have hitherto found insurmountable. You seem to think it as easy for me to disengage myself from an attachment, as from an appointment to dine; and an attachment for one too so eminently lovely!” “Her loveliness is no excuse,” returned Edmund, “for your irresolution, no addition to your difficulties; every man thinks the woman he loves, eminently and incomparably lovely; and he is only convinced by a new attachment, that she may be equalled and perhaps excelled.” Courtney was piqued, “Yes,” he replied, “if to do, were as easy, as to know what is fitting

to be done, ‘chapels would be churches, and poor men’s cottages princes’ palaces.’ You can condemn my partiality to a girl, who possesses every power to facinate by nature, for of art she knows not the name, and yet you for weeks, submitted the disposal of your time, to a capricious woman of quality, under the idea of her entertaining a serious passion for you; forgetting she was known as a hacknied coquette, that a woman of that description, will never love any one but herself, that Lady Laura has been so profuse of her smiles in the world of fashion, that it is a proof of greater dexterity to escape them, than of bonne fortune, to be favoured with them; and that the former is generally considered more enviable than the latter.” Edmund did not wish to quarrel with a friend whom he loved, for a woman whom he despised, though that may be the order of things, among the Quixotes of the day, who manfully meet to fight, are separated by the peace- officers, shake hands, have the satisfaction of seeing their intentions set forth in a barren paper, and gain the admiration of the ladies for their daring courage; he therefore calmly answered, that he confessed his ignorance of Lady Laura’s principles, at the time of his becoming acquainted with her, that he discontinued his intimacy, when he became convinced of her favours being general, and that he only now made a shew of it, from a consideration of the politeness, which he deemed due to every female, though by her conduct she might sometimes forfeit her claim to it. This mild reply recalled Henry to a sense of his petulance. “You must forgive me my dear friend,” said he, “I grow as savage as a bear, and I am vexed to find you ten thousand times more worthy than I shall ever be; I ask your advice, and if it be not exactly according to my wishes, and diametrically opposite to what you ought to give, I become angry, persuade myself that it is not worth taking, but that my own is infinitely better, and ought to be followed; I will however resume my history, though I know that I must make a poor figure as the hero of it. I told you that Mary was pleased with my determination to accompany her into Scotland; a journey of five hundred miles, appeared to her a terrific undertaking, and she naturally expressed pleasure in having a companion whom she regarded as her best friend. This determined me; I postponed the day of her departure, and never fixed it again. I prevailed on her to change her lodgings to a village, six miles from Drelincourt, called Appleton, on pretence that the rooms she then had were damp; an idea given me by the old people, who lamented the circumstance, and gladly accepted her offer of taking Jane to wait on her. In this retired spot, she remained, perfectly satisfied with my delaying her journey, on account of the severity of the winter, which even under its mildest aspect, is certainly an improper and uncomfortable season for travelling. “When the time was fixed, for our leaving the castle, I easily prevailed on her to quit Appleton; she had no friend but me; she considered me as her lawful guardian, and thought herself bound to comply with my proposals, which appeared entirely for her comfort. I had travelled very leisurely, never suspecting the probability of seeing my father on the road, as I knew that he did not intend to begin his journey, until the time when I expected mine would be ended; imagine then my surprize and dismay, when I recognized his livery; at the first I thought that he meant only to change horses, for I knew he never made Blandford his resting-place; but I soon found that he was stationary for the night, and I durst not risk a discovery; I endured all the tortures of concealment and anxiety, until you were seated at table, I then framed an excuse to Mary for my apparent

whimsicality; ordered horses, went one stage further that night, and took a different rout for the remainder of the way. “I had previously engaged the house which you saw yesterday at Brompton, and I immediately procured masters in every branch of the polite arts for Mary, whose education had hitherto been solely guided by her own excellent capacity, and natural taste, aided by her father’s occasional instructions, as his confined income rendered it impossible for him to give her the advantages, that his affection wished. Her ignorance of the world, guards her from uneasiness, she perceives not any thing peculiar in her situation, and in retaining Jane as a companion, she imagines that every appearance of impropriety is avoided. Her time glides on in undisturbed tranquillity, marked only by the acquisition of useful knowledge, or pleasing accomplishments. She delights to see me when she can display any improvement, and in my absence, her sole study is to deserve my approbation, by redoubled diligence. “Alas! shall I cultivate the rich soil of her mind, for another to reap its fruits? Shall I daily see the loveliest flowers of my own planting, spring up, and must another mark their bloom, and enjoy their fragrance? I am denied the privilege of the humble peasant, I have not a right to dispose of my hand; no, I know too well what I have received from my ancestors, and what I owe to them; yet I cannot but think, that the disposal of my heart belongs to me alone, and my Mary would accept it, unmindful of the censure of the world, for she would know that I had not more to offer. Marriage is at best a mere human ceremony, instituted for the convenience and security of society, its form differs in every country, and it is of consequence only so far, as it binds one man to one woman; so long therefore as the end is effected, the means are optional; and as from the peculiarity of my situation, I am under the necessity of accommodating my actions to circumstances, my intentions may nevertheless be pure, my conduct honorable, Heaven knowing my motives, will acquit me of guilt, and men will have no right to accuse me, for I should only deviate from established rules, because a compliance with them, would injure those, to whom I owe the most affectionate reverence, and those from whom, though yet unborn, I may hope to receive it. How few are there who will condemn me for obeying the dictates of my own inclinations! how many would be justified in censuring me, were I to disgrace my lineage by an unequal marriage! in the first instance, I only injure myself, in the last I injure my posterity, I wish not to appear scrupulously virtuous at their expence, and I would rather be accused of failing in the rigid forms of morality, than of forgetting the respect due to an illustrious name and exalted rank. My own actions are free; if they incur censure, I alone am the sufferer: but I have no right to entail shame on my children, for those on whom the name of Drelincourt will descend, shall never have cause to blush for the weakness of their father, and the inferior condition of their mother.” So spoke family pride, and early instilled prejudices; so shrunk Lord Courtney from the idea of giving birth to a titled heir, by a woman, virtuous as she was lovely, capable of adorning any rank to which she might be exalted, and whose only fault consisted in the want of nobility. Edmund combated these opinions with honest warmth. “I do not understand your distinctions,” said he, “you seem to think yourself entitled by your birth, to overcome every obstacle divine and human, that may interfere with your wishes. You say, a just pride, a debt due to your ancestors and to your posterity, forbids your marrying the object of your affection, because her condition in life is unequal to your

own. I grant this, and respect the distinctions which society requires; but I cannot think you excusable in forming a dishonorable connexion with her, and thereby rendering her inferior to every virtuous woman, in even the lowest ranks of life. The right that you claim of incurring censure on your own actions, I will not dispute, but I cannot grant that the noble privilege extends to hers; nor can I imagine what plea you can alledge to involve her in ruin, or why your children by her, should blush to know themselves born in wedlock, yet be enabled to bear the taunts of illiberal contempt, or the reproaches of malicious cruelty, without experiencing any painful sensations on knowing themselves to be the fruits of betrayed confidence, and illicit love. If all obstacles must be made to yield to our desires, however inordinate, then may the tyrant ‘wade unchecked through slaughter to a throne,’ and plead in excuse for his cruelties, that the intermediate claimants interfered with his desire to reign, and that being unable to succeed by peaceful means, he was justified in waving the murdering steel, and dispersing the obstacles to his gratification. But virtue must be fixed and unalterable, her laws can never be subjected to the arbitrary opinions of men, blinded by prejudice and passion; and the arguments which you have advanced in support of your wishes, only prove that however ingenious the understanding may be, in strengthening the suggestions of the will, and dignifying them with the appearance of reason, it can yet raise no cloud of words sufficiently powerful to obscure that steady light of truth, with which the Almighty has been graciously pleased to illuminate our minds, to guide us through the mazes of error, and to enable us to continue in the paths of virtue with cheerfulness and security.” Edmund ceased, Henry replied, arguments were maintained on both sides, without producing conviction to either, and the controversy ended as controversies generally do, by each party being more warmly convinced of the truth of his own opinion, and the fallacy and weakness of that of his adversary. At length they parted; Henry went to pay his devoirs to his fair enslaver, who suspected not the discussion of which she had been the subject, and Edmund delighted with the hope of saving her from ruin, and his friend from remorse, resolved to impart the whole affair to Lord Drelincourt, rightly thinking, that in a case so desperate, confidence would be “more honor’d in the breach than the observance.” Unfortunately the Earl was at that time engaged at the house, but Edmund resolved to take the first opportunity of his return, to gain a private audience of him, and in the intermediate time, he went to pay his respects to Lady Laura, and to frame an excuse for his negligence the preceeding evening. Then all for parking and parading,
Coquetting, dancing, masquerading,
For sales, plays, courts and crowds, what passion, Nay churches even if the fashion;
For woman’s sense of right and wrong,
Is ruled by the almighty throng;
Still turns to each meander tame,
And swims the straw of every stream. MOORE. THE groom of the chambers shewed Edmund into Lady Laura’s dressing-room, and informed him, that she had been much indisposed. “Mi ladi,” said Monsieur La Fleurette, “be tèrs bad tout le matin; she had des fit historic last night, she had such grand peur of de barbares who made all de grand bruit; and dis morning, one, two o’clock came, she had de historic fit again, and de physician came to help her to die, but she be better for all dat.” With this melancholy account he left the room; and soon after her ladyship entered, with an air of interesting languor, and most attractingly dressed in an elegantly deshabille, of fine muslin, trimmed with beautiful lace. Edmund, naturally compassionate, saw immediately that she was really indisposed, and accordingly paid his condolences in a very tender manner. “I shall soon be better,” she replied, “ I was hurried and alarmed last night in coming from the opera, which made me rest very ill; but I shall feel quite renovated with a little air.” Edmund was really shocked, and attempted to apologize, but she goodnaturedly commanded his silence, and he thought that she had never appeared more amiable. She saw the impression which she made, but unfortunately, in endeavouring to strengthen, she destroyed it. When she smiled tenderly, he recollected Henry’s words, and they introduced such a crowd of melancholy reflections, that his countenance became clouded by them. She quickly remarked the change, and asked him to take an airing with her; he endeavoured to excuse himself, by saying, that he was engaged to meet the ladies at a fashionable auction. “What!” exclaimed she, “at the sale of Sir William Lightly’s effects?” “The same.” “Oh delightful! then I will make one of your party, for it will do me good to be amused; I was very intimate with them all the last winter; I know there are a profusion of sweet tempting articles, and all the world will be there; besides, I was Lady Lightly’s particular friend, and she will be pleased to hear I was there; she will think it a compliment you know; excusez moi donc, un moment.” so saying, she tripped away to alter her dress, leaving Edmund to wonder at the different modes of complimenting in different countries. Lady Laura’s prophecy seemed actually fulfilled, the rooms were delightfully crowded with a motley group drawn together by avarice, extravagance, indolence, vanity, scandal and curiosity. Lady Laura was in her element, and soon forgot all des barbares, and de historic fit. “How d’ye do, how d’ye do,” said she, nodding to Lady Drelincourt and her party; “you see I come to you sans cérémonie.” She then seated herself, and after

taking time to recover breath, she ran on, “How very shocking to see all these pretty things so thrown about, what brutes these creditors are, how dreadful to fall into their clutches. It is immensely hard on people of fashion; their clumsy tradesmen never consider the enormous expences they are obliged to incur in order to appear tolerably genteel.” “Nor do the people of fashion, I am afraid,” said Lady Rosamond “ever consider the expences that their tradesman are obliged to incur, and how many families are ruined by the efforts of their customers to appear genteel.” “Oh, Lord! yes, it is very shocking for the industrious souls; but to be sure some of them are horrid cormorants, and bore one to death with their long bills.” “And yet, a long bill,” said Mr. Fletcher, “is not a characteristic of the bird which you have just mentioned; I am afraid, rather, that you may compare the poor tradesmen to snipes; and the masked ball, or suite of newly furnished rooms, to the voracious gormandizer, that swallows up the little people without finding his ravenous appetite appeased.” “Oh, you wretch!” cried her ladyship, “to compare an aukward creature of a tradesman to any thing so delicate and divine as a snipe; but, really now, I am so sorry for poor Lady Lightly; what is become of her, pray?” “I believe,” said Mr. Fletcher, “she is in the country, writing a treatise on the inestimable value of friendship, illustrated by various incidents, and innumerable characters, ancient and modern.” “Indeed! well I never knew that she could write, but it is a happy resource, poor woman, she may find it very useful; I will subscribe to her book, if she publishes it by subscription. I suppose they have nothing left; indeed they lived terribly fast; quite shocking to receive so many invitations from them, when all the world knew that they could not hold out another winter.” “Which I suppose,” said Mr. Fletcher, “was the reason why all the world good-naturedly accepted them, fearing, in its tender anxiety, lest every entertainment should be the last.” “Oh! you are so severe,” returned her ladyship, “if I did not know you, I should be quite afraid of you.” “And I have heard many declare their fears of your ladyship, merely because they do know you.” She was going to retort, but at that moment, Mr. Sellwell gracefully waving his hammer, entreated silence, with an earnestness, nearly resembling a command. He then opened the sale with a speech, in which he extolled the elegant taste that had collected so matchless an assortment of goods; hinted, with impertinent delicacy, his grief at being called on to dispose of them, and judiciously intimated his satisfaction, on seeing to so brilliant an assemblage of beauty and fashion; who, he doubted not, would willingly do justice to articles, so eminently worthy their attention. Valuable paintings were now knocked down at one fourth of their original cost, and gaudy copies purchased for three times more than their intrinsic value, whilst the comments of the company formed the principal entertainment. Lord Dunderton had come to bid for bookcases, though they were very useless articles of furniture in his eyes; a small shelf in his counting-house, having always, hitherto, been capacious enough for this library. Conscious of this, be was vexed to find much more bidden for them than he thought they could be worth; though they were most tastefully designed, and elegantly ornamented. He could not however prevail on himself to bid one-third of their value, but endeavoured to vent his disappointment in abusing their late owner. Lord Drelincourt had just stepped in, and stood near him, though he could not have addressed his complaints to a worse subject. “It is amazing, my Lord Drelincourt,” he exclaimed, his words almost inarticulate with passion, “it is astonishing to see how some people do throw away their

money. Who would have thought to have seen such handsome furniture, in a young fellow’s house not worth a groat? what business had he to be knighted? silly mushroom, he never did any good after; it is, indeed, a strange thing that people cannot be content with that state of life, unto which it may please God to call them. For my part, I don’t say nothing out of envy, I am doing well in the world, thank God, but one can’t but be vexed to see no distinctions made; why there’s a parcel of young fellows just now bid against me, out of contradiction, about them there book-cases; not that I had much use for ‘em, but I don’t believe the young sparks are so flush of cash; rather a shy article, that I believe with most of ‘em; not that I care about it, but there is a respect due, my lord, that there is sometimes a want of that said article in the present day.” Lord Drelincourt drew himself up with additional hauteur, until he effectually overlooked the little fat figure who had talked of similarity of opinion, and deficiency of respect; he answered briefly, that he did not carry his expectations of respect being paid to him, to so ridiculous an extent, as to look for it in a mere trifle of fancy or convenience; and that he had not the honor of knowing Lord Dunderton sufficiently to form a judgment of his claims to it. Lord Dunderton thought it mighty odd, that Lord Drelincourt should stand on such ceremony, for a sense of his own importance prevented him from ascribing the coldness, which he could not but remark, to any other cause, and he answered, “I hope your lordship does not consider me as a stranger, seeing we are quite next door neighbours, as one may say, in the country; and I think the nobility should be very friendly with one another, it is a pleasing sight, my lord, and what ought to be.” “Sir, you are very condescending,” said the Earl, making him a half bow, “and all the nobility are very much obliged to you.” He bowed again, and left him, to take a seat near Lady Drelincourt, with the polite attention of the old school, to whose precepts he was very partial; and Lord Dunderton congratulated himself on having made such a clever, civil speech, that it must please the Earl, or the deuce was in him. The attention of the company was now attracted by the voice of a female, who bid very loudly for a pair of elegant pistols, which Mr. Sellwell had warmly recommended to the attention of the gentlemen, assuring them that they were so admirably bored as to send unerring destruction, if the hand that held them possessed, in the smallest degree, the cool and steady courage so eminently the characteristic of the age. Notwithstanding Mr. Sellwell’s compliments, the gentlemen did not appear ambitious of possessing such unerring weapons; the beauty of the mounting indeed attracted some of them, but they would probably have been just as much prized if they had not been bored, for with many it was decreed quite obsolete to fire; to meet and measure the ground, being sufficient to satisfy anyone, however bitterly affronted. The lady proving victorious, insisted on having the prize delivered into her own hands; and stepping forward to receive it, presented the blooming countenance of Miss Clayton, whose roseate tints of health, and exercise, put the deepest rouge of the languid ladies of quality to the blush. She examined the pistols carefully, drew the triggers, snapped them, and professed herself well pleased with her purchase, whilst the gentlemen, admiring the novelty of it, and attracted by her smart figure, began to stare at her, and ask who she was. “Egad, a spirited girl,” said Lord John Talbot; “if it were not so consumedly hot, and I were somewhat nearer, I would positively chat a little with her; prithee, Courtney, who is she? and where does she come from?” “Her name,” replied Courtney, “ is Clayton, and the merry-looking, fresh-coloured old

gentleman beside her, is a worthy baronet, her uncle, who has given her an excellent education in his stables, and trained her as carefully as any of his favorite hounds. She will scour the country in a fox-chase, and is always sure to be in at the death: she shoots flying, and will bring you down as many birds as you please: she will make an excellent wife, and I’ll answer for her never having the vapours: shall I introduce you?” “No, indeed,” replied his lordship, “I will not trouble you, I have as many eccentricities on my hands as I can manage; the colour of her cheeks would throw me into a plethora; and I should not be able to die in peace, for her yoix, yoix, tally-ho!”
Henry was tempted to bid for a pretty cabinet, containing every necessary implement for work and drawing; it was most ingeniously contrived, and was the production of a French nobleman’s leisure hours: if the amusement be thought trifling, let it be remembered, that it was not vicious; and too often, the plans of vice are conceived in the moments of idleness. “Ah! how terrible,” exclaimed Lady Laura to Lord Courtney, “to see that sweet little cabinet go for such a trifle; it was poor Lady Lightly’s favorite: poor woman, how shocked I am! she could not draw, but she got the sweetest little sketches and paintings from the emigrants, very cheap, and that just did as well: poor woman, how I pity her! I would have bought it myself, to make her a present of it, if I were not almost a beggar already;” pointing to a pile of chips before her, “I have half ruined myself with purchases, but I always did long for this sweet china, whenever I saw it; did you ever behold such brilliant colours?” He replied in his usual rattling strain of gallantry; but his purchase had attracted curiosity, and he was rather puzzled to answer the numerous questions addressed to him on the subject. Lady Harriett simpered, imagining that she could guess his designs; and Mr. Dunderton, who had lately paid her great attention, whenever he could do it unobserved by her guardian, affecting to be in depair, whispered to her, “Happy Courtney! he can testify his love in a thousand ways, of which my cruel fate denies me the power.” He might have said, for fate read father, as Lord Dunderton had too recently acquired riches, to distribute them very profusely; he knew how easily “they make to themselves wings and fly away;” he therefore resolved to secure the possession of them, by keeping their pinions closely cut, infinitely to the chagrin of his son, who often found all his eloquence, unable to procure a discharge of his tailor’s bill, or even a dinner for his young friends, in return of the numerous entertainment which he was obliged to accept from them. Miss Dunderton did not fare much better, and often complained bitterly to her mamma, that it was a shame for a lord’s daughter to go so shabbily dressed, when every miss in the city, was as fine as hands and pins could make her. The prudent mother generally steered a middle course, commending her husband’s care for his family, and, at the same time, supplying her son with cash when she could get it; and always allowing her daughter to order to a sufficient quantity of materials for one dress, to make half a dozen fashionable wet draperies. All her indulgence did not, however, lessen the mortification, that the young people felt at their father’s parsimony; from which, wisely resolving to deliver themselves, they entered into an agreement, to mutually aid, abet, and assist each other, in every scheme that might appear favorable to their interest. Miss Dunderton promised to befriend her brother in gaining Lady Harriett; and he, in return, engaged to make her a present of an elegant wardrobe on the day of his marriage, and to find her titled husband among his acquaintance. Knowing however the Earl’s intentions, with respect to his ward, they felt the necessity of observing the greatest

caution. In order therefore to avoid any suspicion, Mr. Dunderton prevailed on his sister to give up, for the present, her designs on Lord Courtney, to which she consented, as she had previously exerted every art of which she was mistress to gain his attention, without reaping the success that she wished for, and had once flattered herself with the hope of obtaining. The company now began to disperse, and the major part of them who had been constant visitors at the house, amused themselves with condemning the elegance of the decorations, and complimenting their own foresight, in having always prophesied the end of such profusion. Nor reigns ambition in bold man alone, Soft female hearts the rude invader own; But there indeed it deals in nicer things Than routing armies, or dethroning kings. YOUNG. MISS Clayton was perfectly satisfied with the amusement she had found at the auction, and declared that it was the pleasantest morning she had spent since she came to town. The truth was, that this young lady was not exempt from her sex’s ruling passion, a love of admiration; on the contrary, it was as ardent in her bosom, as in that of a birthnight belle: the only difference was, that to obtain it, one assumed the manners of an amazon, the other of a courtezan; one dressed almost in man’s attire, the other almost in that of nature. Both understood the meaning of the word admiration in its modern sense, that is to signify, exciting wonder; not in the old-fashioned acceptation, when it was understood as synonimous with esteem and love. When Miss Clayton came to town with her uncle, she had hoped to be considered as the most dashing character of the day; but was mortified to find that folly there assumed such various forms, that every road to notoriety was crowded with votaries, who warmly disputed the prize so anxiously sought after. She rode in a full gallop, and over- leaped every obstacle in vain, for a rival candidate drove to the goal, four in hand, and outstripped all other competitors by her dexterous velocity. The purchase of the pistols was however an idea entirely new. Miss Clayton was consoled by having started one so original, and resolving to secure her fame by firing them on the first opportunity, she wore them constantly, and looked so dauntless, that the most unbounded insolence, would have required additional courage, to risk offending her. She one day rode with her uncle, to visit a friend at some distance from town; and, in chattering over other times, Sir John lengthened his morning-call, until they were almost involved in the obscurity of night before their return. “Ods daggers” said Sir John, “I wish we had not stayed so late; I do not half like this gloomy look out. Halloo! you Jacob, keep close to my back: I feel very ticklish, my teeth chatter, I believe its with the cold; but London is grown a shocking wicked place since I was there last, and we may be robbed and murdered, Lord help us! before we get home.” “Trust me, sir,” replied his valiant niece, “no one shall do the first, unless they likewise manage to do the last, and I believe to that they would find pretty stout resistance.” Miss Clayton was inspired by the consciousness of possessing her redoubtable pistols; but poor Sir John had nothing to raise his spirits, and replied, in desponding tones, “Oh! my dear, do not talk of making any resistance. What, if any of the bloody cut-throats should be lurking about, and over-hear you. I’m all in a tremble, I wish I was in bed and fast asleep, Lord help me! I would not get up for my dinner, not if the king himself, God bless him, was to send to ask me. Resistance! no, marry, we would not, make any resistance; I should be overthankful to come off with a whole skin; for what is money but paltry trash, beneath the care of a wise man?” Honest Jacob’s back felt as

ticklish as his master’s and he was not much consoled by calling to mind the old proverb, that “The devil takes the hindermost.” They had not proceeded far, when Jacob exclaimed, in tremulous accents, “Oh! please your honor here be tew men a coming; they be quite handy to us, and there be but one of these tew pistols loaded; will your honor please to take him?” “No, no, tr-tr-tr-truly,” replied his honor, “I am but a very indifferent marksman, thou may’st use it thyself.” Jacob would have declined the favor, but the horsemen came up to them, and after a very close examination of their features, one of the strangers exclaimed, “Surely I see Sir John Clayton?” “No you don’t,” replied the cautious baronet, “if you are seeking for him, my friend, I advise you to look further on.” He then, in a low voice, informed his niece that the fellow pretending to know him, was all a hum; that there was no end of their tricks in London; but that they should not bamboozle him. Now the terrible intruder happened to be no other than Mr. Breresford, who, like them, was rather later on the road than he thought agreeable, and seeing a party before him, he found “his breast with sympathetic fear alarmed,” and slackened his pace, till, on the assurance of his servant, that he could distinguish a petticoat among them, he took courage to quicken it again, as he had never heard of highway-women. He was much pleased to see the face of an acquaintance instead of a robber, but was somewhat disconcerted by the baronet’s denying his name; he resolved therefore to try the lady, and coming round to her, said “Surely I cannot mistake, have I not the pleasure of seeing Miss Clayton?” “Yes, sir.” replied the undaunted nymph, “pray receive my address.” Saying this, she snapped one of her pistols at him, and he, with a piteous shriek, fell off his horse. “Oh, Lord! my dear,” cried the worthy baronet, “what have you done? poor miserable sinner, he is killed; oh! what shall we do?