'Can you devise no
remedy?' 'None,' said the minstrel, blushing through his very eyeballs. 'Well,' cried Betterton, 'is the council of war over?' 'Yes, Sir,' said I, 'and I consent to conclude a peace.' 'I thought you would,' cried Betterton; 'so now for the terms.' After much altercation, these articles (written by Betterton, with his
pencil, and signed by him and the warden, who went down for the
purpose) were agreed upon by the contending powers. Art. 1. All the prisoners, at present in the castle, shall be forthwith
    released. Art. 2. The troops of the contending powers shall consign their arms into
    the hands of the respective leaders. Art. 3. The commandant of the besieged army shall evacuate the castle, at
    the head of his men, and take a northerly direction; and at the
    same moment the commandant of the besieging army shall lead his
    forces in a southerly direction. Art. 4. The Lady Cherubina De Willoughby shall depart from the castle as
    soon as both armies are out of sight; and she shall not hold
    communication, direct or indirect, with the warden, for the space
    of twenty-four hours. Art. 5. The minstrel, Higginson, shall be permitted to remain with the Lady
    Cherubina, as her escort. (Signed) BETTERTON. SULLIVAN. While Betterton returned to his army, for the purpose of announcing the
peace, I fixed with Jerry to meet him in London at the expiration of
twenty-four hours. I now perceived Susan running towards the castle, with all her men; and
as soon as she got under the walls, she cried:

'No peace; no peace; but bloody, bloody war! Come down here, you wretch
with the steel bonnet, till I tear your eyes out;--you special babe of
hell, that robbed me of the only friend I had on earth!' And she ran on
with the most horrible imprecations, and vows of vengeance. 'Arrah, and is that Susy?' cried one of my men, leaning over the
battlements. 'Patrick O'Brien!' exclaimed she. 'Oh! Patrick, Patrick, are you so
faithless as to be taking part with my mortal enemy?' 'I am taking part with my countrymen,' cried Patrick; 'and we have just
made a peace; so by gog, if you break it, 'tis yourself will be my
mortual innimy!' 'Dear, dear Patrick!' said she, 'don't let that vile woman decoy you
from me, and I will do whatever you desire.' 'Then I desires you to go back this moment,' said Patrick. Susan retired to the main body, without uttering a word. The several articles were then executed in due form. The prisoners were
liberated: the soldiers on both sides laid down their arms. I
distributed all my remaining money amongst my men: they thanked me with
a shout; and then, headed by the warden, issued from the castle. At the
same time, Betterton and his party marched off the field. When Jerry had got almost out of sight, he halted his men, faced them
towards the castle, and all gave three last cheers. I waved my
handkerchief, and cried like a child. I then took a tender leave of my dear Black Chamber; and with a heavy
heart, and a tardy step, departed from my castle, till better days
should enable me to revisit it. I proceeded with the minstrel to the
poor woman's cottage, whence I now write; and I have just dispatched
him for a chaise, as I shall return to London immediately. My heart is almost broken. Adieu. MS.

O YE, WHOEVER YE ARE, WHOM CHANCE OR MISFORTUNE MAY HEREAFTER CONDUCT
TO THIS SPOT, TO YOU I SPEAK, TO YOU REVEAL THE STORY OF MY WRONGS,
AND ASK YOU TO REVENGE THEM. VAIN HOPE! YET IT IMPARTS SOME COMFORT
TO BELIEVE, THAT WHAT I NOW WRITE MAY ONE DAY MEET THE EYE OF A
FELLOW-CREATURE; THAT THE WORDS WHICH TELL MY SUFFERINGS MAY ONE DAY
DRAW PITY FROM THE FEELING HEART. KNOW THEN, THAT ON THE NIGHT OF THE FATAL DAY WHICH SAW ME DRIVEN FROM
MY CASTLE, BY RUTHLESS FOES, FOUR MEN IN BLACK VISAGES, RUSHED INTO
THE COTTAGE WHERE I HAD TAKEN SHELTER, BORE ME FROM IT, AND FORCED ME
AND MY MINSTREL INTO A CARRIAGE. WE TRAVELLED MILES IN IMPENETRABLE
SILENCE. AT LENGTH THEY STOPPED, CAST A CLOAK OVER MY FACE, AND
CARRIED ME IN THEIR ARMS, ALONG WINDING PASSAGES, AND UP AND DOWN
FLIGHTS OF STEPS. THEY THEN TOOK OFF THE CLOAK, AND I FOUND MYSELF IN
AN ANTIQUE AND GOTHIC APARTMENT. MY CONDUCTORS LAID DOWN A LAMP, AND
DISAPPEARED. I HEARD THE DOOR BARRED UPON ME. O SOUND OF DESPAIR! O
MOMENT OF UNUTTERABLE ANGUISH! SHUT OUT FROM DAY, FROM FRIENDS, FROM
LIFE--IN THE PRIME OF MY YEARS, IN THE HEIGHT OF MY TRANSGRESSIONS,--I
SINK UNDER THE----

                     *      *      *      *      *

ALMOST AN HOUR HAS NOW PASSED IN SOLITUDE AND SILENCE. WHY AM I
BROUGHT HITHER? WHY CONFINED THUS RIGOROUSLY? THE HORRORS OF DEATH ARE
BEFORE MY EYES. O DIRE EXTREMITY! O STATE OF LIVING DEATH! IS THIS A
VISION? ARE THESE THINGS REAL? ALAS, I AM BEWILDERED. *      *      *      *      *

Such, Biddy, was the manuscript that I scribbled last night, after the
mysterious event which it relates. You shall now hear the particulars
of all that has occurred to me since. After the ruffians had departed, and I had rallied my spirits, I took
up the lamp, and began examining the chamber. It was spacious, and the
feeble light that I carried could but just penetrate it. Part of the
walls were hidden with historical arras, worked in colourless and
rotten worsted, which depicted scenes from the Provençal Romances; the
deeds of Charlemagne and his twelve peers; the Crusaders, Troubadours,
and Saracens; and the Necromantic feats of the Magician Jurl. The walls
were wainscotted with black larchwood; and over the painted and
escutcheoned windows hung iron visors, tattered pennons, and broken
shields. An antique bed of decayed damask, with a lofty tester, stood
in a corner; and a few grand moth-eaten chairs, tissued and fringed
with threads of tarnished gold, were round the room. At the farther
end, a picture of a soldier on horseback, darting his spear upon a man,
who held up his hands in a supplicating attitude, was enclosed in a
frame of uncommon size, that reached down to the ground. An old harp,
which occupied one corner, proved imprisonment, and some clots of blood
upon the floor proved murder. I gazed with delight at this admirable apartment. It was a perfect
treasure: nothing could be more complete: all was in the best style of
horror; and now, for the first time, I felt the full consciousness of
being as real a heroine as ever existed. I then indulged myself with imagining the frightful scenes I should
undergo here. Such attempts to murder me, such ghosts, such mysteries! figures flitting in the dusty perspective, quick steps along the
corridor, groans, and an ill-minded lord of the castle. In the midst of this pleasing reverie, methought I heard a step
approaching. It stopped at the door, the bolts were undrawn, and an
antiquated waiting-woman, in fardingale, ruffles, flounces, and
flowered silk, bustled into the room. 'My lord,' said she, 'desires me to let your ladyship know that he will
do himself the honour of waiting on you in half-an-hour.' 'Tell your lord,' said I, 'that I shall be ready to receive him: but
pray, my good woman,' said I, 'what is the name of your lord?' 'Good woman!' cried she, bridling up; 'no more good woman than
yourself: Dame Ursulina, if you please.' 'Well then, Dame Ursulina, what is his name?' 'The Baron Hildebrand,' answered she. 'The only feudal chieftain left
in England.' 'And what is the name of his castle?' 'Gogmagog,' answered she: 'and it is situated in the Black Forest of
Grodolphon, whose oaks are coeval with the reign of Brute.' 'And, alas!' cried I, 'why have I been seized? Why thus imprisoned? Why----'

The Dame laid her finger across her lips, and grinned volumes of
mystery. 'At least, tell me,' said I, with a searching look, 'how comes that
blood on the floor; for it appears but just spilt?' 'Lauk!' cried she, 'that blood is there these fifty years. Sure your
ladyship has often read in romances of blood on floors, and daggers,
that looked as fresh as a daisy at the end of centuries. But,
alas-o-day! modern blood won't keep like the good old blood. Ay, ay,
ay; the times have degenerated in every thing;--even in harps. Look at
that harp yonder: I warrant 'tis in excellent tune at this moment,
albeit no human finger has touched it these ten years: and your
ladyship must remember reading of other cobwebbed harps in old castles,
that required no tuning-hammer, after lying by whole ages. But, indeed,
they do say, that the ghost keeps this harp in order, by playing on it
o' nights.' 'The ghost!' exclaimed I. 'Ay, by my fackins,' said she; 'sure this is the haunted chamber of the
northern tower; and such sights and noises--Santa Catharina of Sienna,
and St. Bridget, and San Pietro, and Santa Benedicta, and St.
Radagunda, defend me!' Then, aspirating an ejaculation, she hastily hobbled out of the room,
and locked the door after her, without giving me farther satisfaction. However, the visit from Baron Hildebrand occupied my mind more than the
ghost; and I sat expecting it with great anxiety. At last, I heard a
heavy tread along the corridor: the door was unbarred, and a huge, but
majestic figure, strode into the chamber. The black plume towering on
his cap, the armorial coat, Persian sash, and Spanish cloak, conspiring
with the most muscular frown imaginable, made him look truly
tremendous. As he flung himself into a chair, he cast a Schedoniac scowl at me;
while I felt, that one glance from the corner of a villain's eye is
worth twenty straight-forward looks from an honest man. My heart
throbbed audible, my bosom heaved like billows: I threw into my
features a conventual smile, and stood before him, in all the silence
of despair, something between Niobe, patience, and a broken lily. 'Lady!' cried he, with a voice that vibrated through my brain; 'I am
the Baron Hildebrand, that celebrated ruffian. My plans are terrible
and unsearchable. Hear me. 'My daughter, the Lady Sympathina, though long betrothed to the Marquis
De Furioso, has long been enamoured of the Lord Montmorenci. In vain
have I tried entreaties and imprecations: nothing will induce her to
relinquish him; even though he has himself confessed to her that you
reign sole tormentress of his heart. 'While doubtful what course to take, I heard, from my vassals, of your
having seized on a neighbouring castle, and of Montmorenci's being
there with you. The moment was too precious to be lost. I planted armed
spies about the castle, with orders to make you and him prisoners the
first opportunity. These orders are executed, and his lordship is a
captive in the western turret. 'Now, Madam, you must already guess my motive for having taken this
step. It is to secure your immediate marriage with his lordship, and
thus to terminate for ever my daughter's hopes, and my own inquietude. In two days, therefore, be prepared to give him your hand, or to suffer
imprisonment for life.' 'My lord,' said I, 'I am a poor, weak, timid girl, but yet not
unmindful of my noble lineage. I cannot consent to disgrace it. My
lord, I will not wed Montmorenci.' 'You will not?' cried he, starting from his seat. 'I will not,' said I, in a tone of the sweetest obstinacy. 'Insolent!' exclaimed he, and began to pace the chamber with prodigious
strides. Conceive the scene;--the tall figure of Hildebrand passing
along, with folded arms; the hideous desolation of the room, and my
shrinking figure. It was great, very great. It resembled a Pandemonium,
where an angel of light was tormented by a fiend. Yet insult and
oppression had but added to my charms, as the rose throws forth fresh
fragrance by being mutilated. On a sudden he stopped short before me. 'What is your reason for refusing to marry him?' said he. 'My lord,' answered I, 'I do not feel for his lordship the passion of
love.' 'Love!' cried he, with yells of laughter. 'Why this is Sympathina's
silly rhodomontade. Love! There is no such passion. But mark me, Madam:
soon shall you learn that there is such a passion as revenge!' And with
these words he rushed out of the chamber. Nothing could be better than my conduct on this occasion. I was
delighted with it, and with the castle, and with every thing. I
therefore knelt and chaunted a vesper hymn, so soft, and so solemn;
while my eyes, like a magdalen's, were cast to the planets. Adieu. I had flung myself on the bed: my lamp was extinguished; and now sleep
began to pour its opiate over me, when, (terrible to tell!) methought I
heard steps stealing through my very chamber. 'She sleeps,' whispered a voice. 'Then poniard her at once,' said another. 'Remember, I must have five ducats,' said the first. 'Four,' said the second: 'Grufflan, the tormentor of innocents, would
charge but two.' 'Then I will betray the murder.' 'I will take good care you shall not.' 'How so?' 'I will assassinate you after it.' 'Diavolo! 'Tis prudent, however. But by St. Jago, I will not consent to
be assassinated under a ducat a-piece to my children.' 'Well, you shall have them.' 'Then, Maestro mio illustrissimo, the Bravo Abellino is your povero
devotissimo!' The next instant my strained eyeballs saw a figure half starting from
behind the tattered arras, in a long cloak, and flat cap. His right
hand held a dagger, and his left a dark lantern, that cast a yellow
glare on the ruffianly sculpture of his visage. I screamed;--but sorry am I to say, less like a heroine than a
sea-gull;--and the bravo advanced. On a sudden, the door of the chamber
was burst open, and Montmorenci rushed forward, with a brandished
sword. At the same moment, Baron Hildebrand sprang from behind the
tapestry. 'Turn, villain!' cried Montmorenci; and a desperate battle began. My life was the stake. I hung upon every blow, winced as the steel
descended on Montmorenci, and moved as he moved, with agonised mimicry. At length, victory declared in his favour. The bandit lay lifeless, and
the baron was disarmed; but escaped out of the chamber. 'Let us fly!' cried my preserver, snatching me to his heart. 'I have
bribed a domestic.--A horse is in waiting.--Let us fly!' 'Let us, let us!' said I, disengaging myself. 'Yet hold!' cried he. 'I have saved your life. Save mine, by consenting
to an immediate union.' 'Ay, my lord----'

'What?' 'I cannot.' 'Cannot!' 'Come, my lord; do come!' 'On my knees, lady----'

'Seize the villain, and immure him in the deepest dungeon!' exclaimed
the baron, rushing into the room with his domestics. Some of them laid hold on Montmorenci, the rest bore off the body of
the bandit. The baron and I were left alone. 'My lord,' said I, flinging myself at his feet (for alas, I had now
lost all my magnanimity), 'that man is my horror and detestation. But
only promise to spare my life for one day more, and indeed, indeed, I
will try if I can make up my mind to marry him.' ''Tis well,' said the baron. 'To-night you sleep secure: to-morrow
decides your fate.' He spoke, and stalked out of the chamber. This horrid castle--would I had never set foot in it. I will escape if
I can, I am resolved. I have already tried the walls, for a sliding
pannel or a concealed door; but nothing of the kind can I discover. And
yet something of the kind there must be, else how could the baron and
bravo have entered my chamber? I protest this facility of intrusion in
antique apartments is extremely distressing. For besides its exposing
one to be murdered, just think how it exposes one to be peeped at. I
declare I dare not even undress, lest some menial should be leering
through a secret crevice. Oh, that I were once more in the mud cottage! I am sick of castles. Adieu. This morning, after a maid had cleaned out the room, Dame Ursulina
brought breakfast. 'Graciousnessosity!' cried she, 'here is the whole castle in such a
fluster; hammering and clamouring, and paddling at all manner of
possets, to make much of the fine company that is coming down to the
baron to-day.' 'Heavens!' exclaimed I, 'when will my troubles cease? Doubtless they
are a most dissolute set. An amorous Verezzi, an insinuating Cavigni,
and an abandoned Orsino; besides some lovely voluptuary, some
fascinating desperado, who plays the harp, and poisons by the hour.' 'La, not at all,' said the dame. 'We shall have none but old Sir
Charles Grandison, and his lady, Miss Harriet Byron, that was;--old Mr.
Mortimer Delville, and his lady, Miss Cecilia, that was;--and old Lord
Mortimer, and his lady, Miss Amanda, that was.' 'Can it be possible?' cried I. 'Why these are all heroes and heroines!' 'Pon my conversation, and by my fig, and as I am a true maiden, so they
are,' said she; 'for my lord scorns any other sort of varment. And we
shall have such tickling and pinching; and fircumdandying, and
cherrybrandying, and the genteel poison of bad wine; and the warder
blowing his horn, and the baron in his scowered armour, and I in a coif
plaited high with ribbons all about it, and in the most rustling silk I
have. And Philip, the butler, meets me in the dark. "Oddsboddikins,"
says he (for that is his pet oath), "mayhap I should know the voice of
that silk?" "Oddspittikins," says I, "peradventure thou should'st;" and
then he catches me round the neck, and----'

'There, there!' cried I, 'you distract me.' 'Marry come up!' muttered she. 'Some people think some people--Marry
come up, quotha!' And she flounced out of the room. I sat down to breakfast, astonished at what I had just heard. Harriet
Byron, Cecilia, Amanda, and their respective consorts, all alive and
well! Oh, could I get but one glimpse of them, speak ten words with
them, I should die content. I pictured them to myself, adorned with all
the venerable loveliness of a virtuous old age,--even in greyness
engaging, even in wrinkles interesting. Hand in hand they walk down the
gentle slope of life, and often pause to look back upon the scenes that
they have passed--the happy vale of their childhood, the turretted
castle, the cloistered monastery. This reverie was interrupted by the return of Dame Ursulina. 'The baron,' said she, 'has just gone off to London; we think either
for the purpose of consulting physicians about his periodical madness,
or of advising government to propose a peace with France. So my young
mistress, the Lady Sympathina, is anxious to visit you during his
absence,--as he prohibited her;--and she has sent me to request that
you will honor her with your permission.' 'Tell her I shall be most happy to see and to solace a lady of her
miseries,' answered I. 'And I trust we shall swear an eternal
friendship when we meet.' 'Friendship,' said the dame, 'is the soft soother of human cares. O, to
see two fair females sobbing respondent, while their blue eyes shine
through their tears like hyacinths bathed in the dews of the morning!' 'Why, dame,' cried I, 'how did you manage to pick up such a charming
sentiment, and such elegant language?' 'Marry come up!' said she, 'I havn't lived, not I, not with heroines,
not for nothing. Marry come up, quotha!' And this frumpish old woman
sailed out of the chamber in a great fume. I now prepared for an interview of congenial souls; not was I long kept
in suspense. Hardly had the dame disappeared, when the door opened
again, and a tall, thin, lovely girl, flew into the room. She stopped
opposite me. Her yellow ringlets hung round her pale face like a mist
round the moon. Again she advanced, took both my hands, and stood
gazing on my features. 'Ah, what wonder,' said she, 'that Montmorenci should be captivated by
these charms! No, I will not, cannot take him from you. He is your's,
my friend. Marry him, and leave me to the solitude of a cloister.' 'Never!' cried I. 'Ah, madam, ah, Sympathina, your magnanimity amazes,
transports me. No, my friend; your's he shall, he must be; for you love
him, and I hate him.' 'Hate him!' cried she; 'and wherefore? Ah, what a form is his, and ah,
what a face! Locks like the spicy cinnamon; eyes half dew, half
lightning; lips like a casket of jewels, loveliest when open----'

'And teeth like the Sybil's books,' said I; 'for two of them are
wanting.' 'Ah,' cried she, 'this I am informed is your reason for not marrying
him; as if his charms lay in his teeth, like Sampson's strength in his
hair.' 'Upon my honor,' said I, 'I would not marry him, if he had five hundred
teeth. But you, my friend, you shall marry him, in spite of his teeth.' 'Ah,' cried she, 'and see my father torture you to death?' 'It were not torture,' said I, 'to save you from it.' 'It were double torture,' cried she, 'to be saved by your's.' 'Justice,' said I, 'demands the sacrifice.' 'Generosity,' said she, 'would spare the victim.' 'Is it generosity,' said I, 'to wed me with one I hate?' 'Is it justice,' said she, 'to wed me with one who hates me?' 'Ah, my friend,' cried I, 'you may vanquish me in Antithetical and
Gallican repartee, but never shall you conquer me in sentimental
magnanimity.' 'Let us then swear an eternal friendship,' cried she. 'I swear!' said I. 'I swear!' said she. We rushed into each other's arms. 'And now,' cried she, when the first transports had subsided, 'how do
you like being a heroine?' 'Above all things in the world,' said I. 'And how do you get on at the profession?' asked she. 'It is not for me to say,' replied I. 'Only this, that ardor and
assiduity are not wanting on my part.' 'Of course then,' said she, 'you shine in all the requisite qualities. Do you blush well?' 'As well as can be expected,' said I. 'Because,' said she, 'blushing is my chief beauty. I blush one tint and
three-fourths with joy; two tints, including forehead and bosom, with
modesty; and four with love, to the points of my fingers. My father
once blushed me against the dawn for a tattered banner to a rusty
poniard.' 'And who won?' said I. 'It was play or pay,' replied she; 'and the morning happened to be
misty, so there was no sport in that way; but I fainted, which was just
as good, if not better. Are you much addicted to fainting?' 'A little,' said I. ''Pon honor?' 'Well, ma'am, to be honest with you, I am afraid I have never fainted
yet; but at a proper opportunity I flatter myself----'

'Nay, love,' said she, 'do not be distressed about the matter. If you
weep well, 'tis a good substitute. Do you weep well?' 'Extremely well, indeed,' said I. 'Come then,' cried she, 'we will weep on each other's necks.' And she
flung her arms about me. We remained some moments in motionless
endearment. 'Are you weeping?'