said the magistrate. 'Not at all,' answered I, 'for I have never seen the man in my life. But whoever rescues me now, you know, is destined to marry me
hereafter. That is the rule.' 'You are an impudent minx,' said the magistrate, 'and shall pay dear
for your jocularity. Have you parents?' 'I cannot tell.' 'Friends?' 'None.' 'Where do you live?' 'No where.' 'At least 'tis plain where you will die. What is your name?' 'Cherubina.' 'Cherubina what?' 'I know not.' 'Not know? I protest this is the most hardened profligate I have ever
met. Commit her instantly.' I now saw that something must be done; so summoning all my most
assuasive airs, I related the whole adventure, just as it had occurred. Not a syllable obtained belief. The fatal sixpence carried all before
it. I recollected the fate of Angelica Angela Angelina, and shuddered. What should I do? One desperate experiment remained. 'There were four guineas and half a guinea in the purse,' said I to the
girl. 'To be sure there were,' cried she. 'How cunning you are to tell me my
own news.' 'Now,' said I, 'answer me at once, and without hesitation, whether it
is the half guinea or one of the guineas that is notched in three
places, like the teeth of a saw?' She paused a little, and then said; 'I have a long story to tell about
those same notches. I wanted a silk handkerchief yesterday, so I went
into a shop to buy one, and an impudent ugly young fellor was behind
the counter. Well, he began ogling me so, I was quite ashamed; and says
he to me, there is the change of your two pound note, says he, a guinea
and a half in gold, says he, and you are vastly handsome, says he. And
there are three notches in one of the coins, says he; guess which, says
he, but it will pass all the same, says he, and you are prodigious
pretty, says he. So indeed, I was so ashamed, that though I looked at
the money, and saw the three notches, I have quite forgotten which they
were in--guinea or half guinea; for my sight spread so, with shame at
his compliments, that the half guinea looked as big as the guinea. Well, out I ran, blushing like a poor, terrified little thing, and sure
enough, a horrid accident was near happening me in my hurry. For I was
just running under the wheel of a carriage, when a gentleman catches me
in his arms, and says he, you are prodigious pretty, says he; and I
frowned so, you can't think; and I am sure, I never remembered to look
at the money since; and this is the whole truth, I pledge you my credit
and honour, and _by the immaculate Wenus_, as the gentlemen say.' The accusing witness who insulted the magistrate's bench with the oath,
leered as she gave it in; and the recording clerk, as he wrote it down,
drew a line under the words, and pointed them out for ever. 'Then you saw the three notches?' said I. 'As plain as I see you now,' replied she, 'and a guilty poor thing you
look.' 'And yet,' said I, 'if his Excellenza examines, he will find that there
is not a single notch in any one of the coins.' ''Tis the case indeed,' said the magistrate, after looking at them. He then questioned both of us more minutely, and turning to me, said,
'Your conduct, young woman, is unaccountable: but as your accuser has
certainly belied herself, she has probably belied you. The money, by
her own account, cannot be her's, but as it was found in your
possession, it may be your's. I therefore feel fully justified in
restoring it to you, and in acquitting you of the crime laid to your
charge.' Jerry Sullivan uttered a shout of joy. I received the purse with silent
dignity, gave Maria back her sixpence, and hurried out of the room. Jerry followed me. 'Why then,' cried he, shaking me heartily by the hand, as we walked
along, 'only tell me how I can serve you, and 'tis I am the man that
will do it; though, to be sure, you must be the greatest little
scapegrace (bless your heart!) in the three kingdoms.' 'Alas!' said I, 'you mistake my character. I am heiress to an immense
territory, and a heroine--the proudest title that can adorn a woman.' 'I never heard of that title before,' said Jerry, 'but I warrant 'tis
no better than it should be.' 'You shall judge for yourself,' said I. 'A heroine is a young lady,
rather taller than usual, and often an orphan; at all events, possessed
of the finest eyes in the world. Though her frame is so fragile, that a
breath of wind might scatter it like chaff, it is sometimes stouter
than a statue of cast iron. She blushes to the tips of her fingers, and
when other girls would laugh, she faints. Besides, she has tears,
sighs, and half sighs, at command; lives a month on a mouthful, and is
addicted to the pale consumption.' 'Why then, much good may it do her,' cried Jerry; 'but in my mind, a
phthisicky girl is no great treasure; and as for the fashion of living
a month on a mouthful, let me have a potatoe and chop for my dinner,
and a herring on Saturday nights, and I would not give a farthing for
all the starvation you could offer me. So when I finish my bit of
herring, my wife says to me, winking, a fish loves water, says she, and
immediately she fetches me a dram.' 'These are the delights of vulgar life,' said I. 'But to be thin,
innocent, and lyrical; to bind and unbind her hair; in a word, to be
the most miserable creature that ever augmented a brook with tears,
these, my friend, are the glories of a heroine.' 'Famous glories, by dad!' cried Jerry; 'but as I am a poor man, and not
particular, I can contrive to make shift with health and happiness, and
to rub through life without binding my hair.--Bind it? by the powers,
'tis seldom I even comb it.' As I was all this time without my bonnet (for in my hurry from
Betterton's I had left it behind me), I determined to purchase one. So
I went into a shop, with Jerry, and asked the woman of it for an
interesting and melancholy turn of bonnet. She looked at me with some surprise, but produced several; and I fixed
on one which resembled a bonnet that I had once seen in a picture of a
wood nymph. So I put it on me, wished the woman good morning, and was
walking away. 'You have forgotten to pay me, Miss,' said she. 'True,' replied I, 'but 'tis no great matter. Adieu.' 'You shall pay me, however,' cried she, ringing a bell, and a man
entered instantly from an inner room. 'Here is a hussey,' exclaimed she, 'who refuses to pay me for a
bonnet.' 'My sweet friend,' said I to her, 'a distressed heroine, which I am, I
assure you, runs in debt every where. Besides, as I like your face, I
mean to implicate you in my plot, and make you one of the _dramatis
personæ_ in the history of my life. Probably you will turn out to be
my mother's nurse's daughter. At all events, I give you my word, I will
pay you at the _denouement_, when the other characters come to be
provided for; and meantime, to secure your acquaintance, I must insist
on owing you money.' 'By dad,' said Jerry, 'that is the first of all ways to lose an
acquaintance.' 'The bonnet or the money!' cried the man, stepping between me and the
door. 'Neither the one nor the other,' answered I. 'No, Sir, to run in debt
is part of my plan, and by what right dare you interfere to save me
from ruin? Pretty, indeed, that a girl at my time of life cannot select
her own misfortunes! Sir, your conduct astonishes, shocks, disgusts
me.' To such a reasonable appeal the man could not reply, so he snatched at
my bonnet. Jerry jumped forward, and arrested his arm. 'Hands off, bully!' cried the shopman. 'No, in troth,' said Jerry; 'and the more you bid me, the more I won't
let you go. If her ladyship has set her heart on a robbery, I am not
the man to balk her fancy. Sure, did not she save me from a gaol? And
sure, would not I help her to a bonnet? A bonnet? 'Pon my conscience,
she shall have half a dozen. 'Tis I that would not much mind being
hanged for her!' So saying, he snatched a parcel of bonnets from the counter, and was
instantly knocked down by the shopman. He rose, and both began a
furious conflict. In the midst of it, I was attempting to rush from the
shop, when I found my spangled muslin barbarously seized by the woman,
who tore it to pieces in the struggle; and pulling off the bonnet, gave
me a horrid slap in the face. I would have cuffed her nicely in return,
only that she was more than my match; but I stamped at her with my
feet. At first I was shocked at having made this unheroic gesture; till
I luckily recollected, that Amanda once stamped at an amorous footman. Meantime Jerry had stunned his adversary with a blow; so taking this
opportunity of escape, he dragged me with him from the shop, and
hurried me through several streets, without uttering a word. At length I was so much exhausted, that we stopped; and strange figures
we were: Jerry's face smeared with blood, nothing on my head, my long
hair hanging loose about me, and my poor spangled muslin all in rags. 'Here,' said Jerry to an old woman who was selling apples at the corner
of the street, 'take care of this young body, while I fetch her a
coach.' And off he ran. The woman looked at me with a suspicious eye, so I resolved to gain her
good opinion. It struck me that I might extract pathos from an apple,
and taking one from her stall, 'An apple, my charming old friend,' said
I, 'is the symbol of discord. Eve lost Paradise by tasting it, Paris
exasperated Juno by throwing it.' --A loud burst of laughter made me
turn round, and I perceived a crowd already at my elbow. 'Who tore her gown?' said one. 'Ask her spangles,' said another. 'Or her hair,' cried a third. ''Tis long enough to hang her,' cried a fourth. 'The king's hemp will do that job for her,' added a fifth. A pull at my muslin assailed me on the one side, and when I turned
about, my hair was thrown over my face on the other. 'Good people,' said I, 'you know not whom you thus insult. I am
descended from illustrious, and perhaps Italian parents----'

A butcher's boy advanced, and putting half a hat under his arm; 'Will
your ladyship,' said he, 'permit me to hand you into that there shop?' I bowed assent, and he led me, nothing loath. Peals of laughter
followed us. 'Now,' said I, as I stood at the door, 'I will reward your gallantry
with half a guinea.' As I drew forth my money, I saw his face reddening, his cheeks
swelling, and his mouth pursing up. 'What delicate sensibility!' said I, 'but positively you must not
refuse this trifle.' He took it, and then, just think, the brute laughed in my face! 'I will give this guinea,' cried I, quite enraged, 'to the first who
knocks that ungrateful down.' Hardly had I spoken, when he was laid prostrate. He fell against the
stall, upset it, and instantly the street was strewn with apples, nuts,
and cakes. He rose. The battle raged. Some sided with him, some against
him. The furious stall-woman pelted both parties with her own apples;
while the only discreet person there, was a ragged little girl, who
stood laughing at a distance, and eating one of the cakes. In the midst of the fray, Jerry returned with a coach. I sprang into
it, and he after me. 'The guinea, the guinea!' cried twenty voices at once. At once twenty
apples came rattling against the glasses. 'Pay me for my apples!' cried the woman. 'Pay me for my windows!' cried the coachman. 'Drive like a devil,' cried Jerry, 'and I will pay you like an
emperor!' 'Much the same sort of persons, now-a-days,' said the coachman, and
away we flew. The guinea, the guinea! died along the sky. I thought I
should have dropt with laughter. My dear friend, do you not sympathize with my sorrows? Desolate,
destitute, and dependent on strangers, what is to become of me? I
declare I am extremely unhappy. I write from Jerry's house, where I have taken refuge for the present;
and as soon as I am settled elsewhere, you shall hear from me again. Adieu. Jerry Sullivan is a petty woollendraper in St. Giles's, and occupies
the ground-floor of a small house. At first his wife and daughter eyed
me with some suspicion; but when he told them how I had saved him from
ruin, and that I was somehow or other a great lady in disguise, they
became very civil, and gave me a tolerable breakfast. Then fatigued and
sleepy, I threw myself on a bed, and slept till two. I woke with pains in all my limbs; but anxious to forward the
adventures of my life, I rose, and called mother and daughter to a
consultation on my dress. They furnished me with their best
habiliments, for which I agreed to give them two guineas; and I then
began equipping myself. While thus employed, I heard the voices of husband and wife in the next
room, rising gradually to the matrimonial key. At last the wife
exclaims,

'A Heroine? I will take my corporal oath, there is no such title in all
England; and if she has the four guineas, she never came honestly by
them; so the sooner she parts with them the better; and not a step
shall she stir in our cloathes till she launches forth three of them. So that's that, and mine's my own, and how do you like my manners,
Ignoramus?' 'How dare you call me Ignoramus?' cried Jerry. 'Blackguard if you like,
but no ignoramus, I believe. I know what I could call you, though.' 'Well,' cried she, 'saving a drunkard and a scold, what else can you
call me?' 'I won't speak another word to you,' said Jerry; 'I would not speak to
you, if you were lying dead in the kennel.' 'Then you're an ugly unnatural beast, so you are,' cried she, 'and your
Miss is no better than a bad one; and I warrant you understand one
another well.' This last insinuation was sufficient for me. What! remain in a house
where suspicion attached to my character? What! act so diametrically,
so outrageously contrary to the principle of aspersed heroines, who are
sure on such occasions to pin up a bundle, and set off? I spurned the
mean idea, and resolved to decamp instantly. So having hastened my
toilette, I threw three guineas on the table, and then looked for a pen
and ink, to write a sonnet on gratitude. I could find nothing, however,
but a small bit of chalk, and with this substitute, I scratched the
following lines on the wall. SONNET ON GRATITUDE

    _Addressed to Jerry Sullivan_

    As some deputed angel, from the spheres
      Of empyrean day, with nectar dewed,
    Through firmamental wildernesses steers,
      To starless tracts of black infinitude--

Here the chalk failed me, and just at the critical moment for my simile
had also failed me, nor could I have ever gotten beyond infinitude. I
got to the street door, however, and without fear of being overheard;
to such an altitude of tone had words arisen between husband and wife,
who were now contesting a most delicate point--which of them had beaten
the other last. 'I know,' cried Jerry, 'that I gave the last blow.' 'Then take the first now,' cried his wife, as I shut the door. Anticipating the probability that I should have occasion for Jerry's
services again, I marked the number of the house, and then hastened
along the street. It was swarming and humming like a hive of bees, and
I felt as if I could never escape alive out of it. Here a carriage
almost ran over me; there a waggoner's whip almost blinded me. Now a
sweep brushed against me. 'Beauty!' cried a man like a monkey, and
chucked my chin, while a fellow with a trunk shoved me aside. I now turned into a street called Bond Street, where a long procession
of carriages was passing. I remarked that the coachmen (they could not
be gentlemen, I am sure) appeared to stand in great estimation; for the
ladies of one carriage used to nod most familiarly to the driver of
another. Indeed, I had often heard it said, that ladies and coachmen
are sometimes particularly intimate; but till now I could never believe
it. The shops next attracted my attention, and I stopped to look at some of
them. You cannot conceive any thing more charming: Turkish turbans,
Indian shawls, pearls, diamonds, fans, feathers, laces; all shewn for
nothing at the windows. I had but one guinea remaining! At length feeling tired and hungry, and my feet being quite foundered,
I determined to lose no farther time in taking lodgings. Perceiving
'Apartments to let,' written on a door, I rapped, and a servant girl
opened it. 'Pray,' said I to her, 'are your northern apartments uninhabited?' She replied that there were two rooms on the second floor disengaged,
and comfortably furnished. 'I do not want them comfortable,' said I; 'but are they furnished with
tapestry and old pictures? That is the point.' 'There is only master's face over the chimney,' said she. 'Do the doors creek on their hinges?' asked I. 'That they don't,' said she, 'for I oiled 'em all only yesterday.' 'Then you shewed a depraved taste,' cried I. 'At least, are the
apartments haunted?' 'Lauk, no!' said she, half shutting the door. 'Well then, my good girl, tell me candidly whether your mistress is
like the landladies one reads of. Is she a fat, bustling little woman,
who would treat me to tea, cakes, and plenty of gossip, and at the end
of a week, say to me, "out, hussy, tramp this moment;" or is she a
pale, placid matron, worn to a thread-paper, and whose story is
interwoven with mine?' 'Deuce take your impudence!' cried she, slapping the door in my face. I tried other houses with no better success; and even when I merely
asked for common lodgings, without stipulating for spectres or
tapestry, the people would not accommodate me, unless I could procure
some recommendation besides my own. As I had no friend to give me a character, it became necessary to make
a friend; so I began to look about for a fit subject. Passing a shop
where eggs and butter were sold, and lodgings to be let, I perceived a
pretty woman sitting behind the counter, and a fine infant playing upon
it. I thought that all this bore an auspicious appearance; so I
tottered into the shop, and placing myself opposite to the woman, I
gazed at her with an engaging and gentle intelligence. She demanded my
business. 'Interesting creature!' whispered I, pressing her hand as it rested on
the counter. 'O may that little rosy fatling----'

Unfortunately there was an egg in the hand that I took, which I crushed
by the compression, and the yolk came oozing between her fingers. 'Reptile!' cried she, as she threw the fragments in my face. 'Savage!' cried I, as I ran out of the shop, and wiped off the eggy
dishonours. At length I reached an immense edifice, which appeared to me the castle
of some brow-knitting baron. Ponderous columns supported it, and
statues stood in the niches. The portal lay open. I glided into the
hall. As I looked anxiously around, I beheld a cavalier descending a
flight of steps. He paused, muttered some words, laid his hand upon his
heart, dropped it, shook his head, and proceeded. I felt instantly interested in his fate; and as he came nearer,
perceived, that surely never lighted on this orb, which he hardly
seemed to touch, a more delightful vision. His form was tall, his face
oval, and his nose aquiline. Seducing sweetness dwelled in his smile,
and as he pleased, his expressive eyes could sparkle with rapture, or
beam with sensibility. Once more he paused, frowned, and waving his
arm, exclaimed, with an elegant energy of enunciation! 'To watch the minutes of this night, that if again this apparition
come, he may approve our eyes, and speak to it!' That moment a pang, poignant, but delicious, transfixed my bosom. Too
well I felt and confessed it the dart of love. In sooth, too well I
knew that my heart was lost to me for ever. Silly maiden! But fate had
decreed it. I rushed forward, and sank at the feet of the stranger. 'Pity and protect a destitute orphan!' cried I. 'Here, in this
hospitable castle, I may hope for repose and protection. Oh, Signor,
conduct me to your respected mother, the Baroness, and let me pour into
her ear my simple and pathetic tale.' 'O ho! simple and pathetic!' cried he. 'Come, my dear, let me hear it.' I seated myself on the steps, and told him my whole story. During the
recital, the noble youth betrayed extreme sensibility. Sometimes he
turned his head aside to conceal his emotion; and sometimes stifled a
hysterical laugh of agony. When I had ended, he begged to know whether I was quite certain that I
had ten thousand pounds in my power. I replied, that as Wilkinson's
daughter, I certainly had; but that the property must devolve to some
one else, as soon as I should be proved a nobleman's daughter. He then made still more accurate inquiries about it; and after having
satisfied himself:

'Beshrew my heart!' exclaimed he; 'but I will avenge your injuries; and
ere long you shall be proclaimed and acknowledged the Lady Cherubina De
Willoughby. Meantime, as it will be prudent for you to lie concealed
from the search of your enemies, hear the project which I have formed. I lodge at present in Drury-lane, an obscure street; and as one
apartment in the house is unoccupied, you can hire it, and remain
there, a beautiful recluse, till fortune and my poor efforts shall
rescue from oppression the most enchanting of her sex.' He spoke, and seizing my hand, carried it to his lips. 'What!' cried I, 'do you not live in this castle, and are you not its
noble heir?' 'This is no castle,' said he, 'but Covent Garden Theatre.' 'And you?' asked I with anxiety. 'Am an actor,' answered he. 'And your name?' 'Is Abraham Grundy.' 'Then, Mr. Abraham Grundy,' said I, 'allow me to have the satisfaction
of wishing you a very good evening.' 'Stay!' cried he, detaining me, 'and you shall know the whole truth. My
birth is illustrious, and my real name Lord Altamont Mortimer
Montmorenci. But like you, I am enveloped in a cloud of mysteries, and
compelled to the temporary resource of acting. Hereafter I will
acquaint you with the most secret particulars of my life; but at
present, you must trust to my good faith, and accept of my protection.' 'Generous Montmorenci!' exclaimed I, giving him my hand, which he
pressed upon his heart. 'Now,' said he, 'you must pass at these lodgings as my near relation,
or they will not admit you.' At first, I hesitated at deviating from veracity; but soon consented,
on recollecting, that though heroines begin with praising truth,
necessity makes them end with being the greatest story-tellers in the
world. Nay, Clarissa Harlowe, when she had a choice, often preferred
falsehood to fact. During our walk to the lodgings, Montmorenci instructed me how to play
my part, and on our arrival, introduced me to the landlady, who was
about fifty, and who looked as if the goddess of fasting had bespoken
her for a hand-maid. With an amiable effrontery, and a fine easy flow of falsehood, he told
her, as we had concerted, that I was his second cousin, and an orphan;
my name Miss Donald (Amanda's assumed name), and that I had come to
Town for the purpose of procuring by his interest, an appointment at
the Theatre. The landlady said she would move heaven and earth, and her own bed, for
so good a gentleman; and then consented to give me her sleeping-room on
the ground-floor, at some trifle or other,--I forget what. I have also
the use of a parlour adjoining it. There is, however, nothing
mysterious in these chambers, but a dark closet belonging to the
parlour, whither I may fly for refuge, when pursued by my persecutors. Thus, my friend, the plot of my history begins to take a more
interesting shape, and a fairer order of misfortune smiles upon me. Trust me, there is a taste in distress as well as in millinery. Far be
from me the loss of eyes or limbs, such publicity as the pillory
affords, or the grossness of a jail-fever. I would be sacrificed to the
lawless, not to the laws, dungeoned in the holy Inquisition, not
clapped into Bridewell, recorded in a novel, not in the Newgate
Calender. Were I inelegantly unhappy, I should be wretched indeed. Yes, my Biddy, sensations hitherto unknown now heave my white bosom,
vary the carnation of my cheeks, and irradiate my azure eyes. I sigh,
gaze on vacancy, start from a reverie; now bite, now moisten my coral
lip, and pace my chamber with unequal steps. Too sure I am deeply,
distractedly in love, and Altamont Mortimer Montmorenci is the first of
men. Adieu. The landlady, his lordship, and another lodger, are accustomed to dine
in common; and his lordship easily persuaded me to join the party. Accordingly, just as I had finished my last letter, dinner was
announced, so having braided my tresses, I tripped up stairs, and
glided into the room. You must know I have practised tripping, gliding,
flitting, and tottering, with great success. Of these, tottering ranks
first, as it is the approved movement of heroic distress. 'I wonder where our mad poet can be?' said the hostess; and as she
spoke, an uncouth figure entered, muttering in emphatic accents,

    'The hounds around bound on the sounding ground.' He started on seeing me, and when introduced by his lordship, as Mr.
Higginson, his fellow lodger, and a celebrated poet, he made an
unfathomable bow, rubbed his hands, and reddened to the roots of his
hair. This personage is tall, gaunt, and muscular; with a cadaverous
countenance, and black hair in strings on his forehead. I find him one
of those men who spend their lives in learning how the Greeks and
Romans lived; how they spoke, dressed, ate; what were their coins and
houses, &c.; but neglect acquainting themselves with the manners and
customs of their own times. Montmorenci tells me that his brain is
affected by excessive study; but that his manners are harmless. At dinner, Montmorenci looked all, said all, did all, which conscious
nobility, united with ardent attachment, could inspire in a form
unrivalled, and a face unexcelled. I perceived that the landlady
regarded him with eyes of tender attention, and languishing allurement,
but in vain. I was his magnet and his Cynosure. As to Higginson, he did not utter a word during dinner, except asking
for a bit of _lambkin_; but he preserved a perpetuity of gravity in
his face, and stared at me, the whole time, with a stupid and
reverential fixedness. When I spoke, he stopped in whatever attitude
he happened to be; whether with a glass at his mouth, or a fork half
lifted to it. After dinner, I proposed that each of us should relate the history of
our lives; an useful custom established by heroines, who seldom fail of
finding their account in it; as they are almost always sure to
discover, by such means, either a grandmother or a murder. Thus too,
the confession of a monk, the prattle of an old woman, a diamond cross
on a child's neck, or a parchment, are the certain forerunners of
virtue vindicated, vice punished, rights restored, and matrimony made
easy. The landlady was asked to begin. 'I have nothing to tell of myself,' said she, 'but that my mother left
me this house, and desired me to look out for a good husband, Mr.
Grundy; and I am not as old as I look; for I have had my griefs, as
well as other folks, and every tear adds a year, as they say; and 'pon
my veracity, Mr. Grundy, I was but thirty-two last month. And my
bitterest enemies never impeached my character, that is what they
did'nt, nor could'nt; they dare'nt to my face. I am a perfect snowdrop
for purity. Who presumes to go for to say that a lord left me an
annuity or the like?