Her cousin prefaced his speech with a solemn bow and though she could not hear a word of
it, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips the words "apology," "Hunsford," and
"Lady Catherine de Bourgh." It vexed her to see him expose himself to such a man. Mr. Darcy was
eyeing him with unrestrained wonder, and when at last Mr. Collins allowed him time to speak,
replied with an air of distant civility. Mr. Collins, however, was not discouraged from speaking again,
and Mr. Darcy's contempt seemed abundantly increasing with the length of his second speech, and
at the end of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way. Mr. Collins then returned to
Elizabeth. "I have no reason, I assure you," said he, "to be dissatisfied with my reception. Mr. Darcy seemed
much pleased with the attention. He answered me with the utmost civility, and even paid me the
compliment of saying that he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine's discernment as to be certain
she could never bestow a favour unworthily. It was really a very handsome thought. Upon the whole,
I am much pleased with him." As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turned her attention almost
entirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley; and the train of agreeable reflections which her observations
gave birth to, made her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled in that very
house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affection could bestow; and she felt capable, under
such circumstances, of endeavouring even to like Bingley's two sisters. Her mother's thoughts she
plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not to venture near her, lest she might
hear too much. When they sat down to supper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky
perverseness which placed them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to find that her
mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely, openly, and of nothing else but her
expectation that Jane would soon be married to Mr. Bingley. It was an animating subject, and Mrs.
Bennet seemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of the match. His being such
a charming young man, and so rich, and living but three miles from them, were the first points of
self-gratulation; and then it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were of Jane, and
to be certain that they must desire the connection as much as she could do. It was, moreover, such a
promising thing for her younger daughters, as Jane's marrying so greatly must throw them in the way
of other rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to be able to consign her single
daughters to the care of their sister, that she might not be obliged to go into company more than she
liked. It was necessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because on such occasions it
is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs. Bennet to find comfort in staying home at any
period of her life. She concluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equally
fortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was no chance of it. In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother's words, or persuade her to
describe her felicity in a less audible whisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she could perceive
that the chief of it was overheard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposite to them. Her mother only scolded
her for being nonsensical. "What is Mr. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I am sure we owe him no such
particular civility as to be obliged to say nothing he may not like to hear." "For heaven's sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be for you to offend Mr. Darcy? You
will never recommend yourself to his friend by so doing!" Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother would talk of her views in the
same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed and blushed again with shame and vexation. She could not
help frequently glancing her eye at Mr. Darcy, though every glance convinced her of what she
dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she was convinced that his attention
was invariably fixed by her. The expression of his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to
a composed and steady gravity. At length, however, Mrs. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, who had been long yawning at
the repetition of delights which she saw no likelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham
and chicken. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval of tranquillity; for, when
supper was over, singing was talked of, and she had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little
entreaty, preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silent entreaties, did she
endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance, but in vain; Mary would not understand them;
such an opportunity of exhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song. Elizabeth's eyes
were fixed on her with most painful sensations, and she watched her progress through the several
stanzas with an impatience which was very ill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving,
amongst the thanks of the table, the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on to favour them
again, after the pause of half a minute began another. Mary's powers were by no means fitted for
such a display; her voice was weak, and her manner affected. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked at
Jane, to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly talking to Bingley. She looked at his two
sisters, and saw them making signs of derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however,
imperturbably grave. She looked at her father to entreat his interference, lest Mary should be singing
all night. He took the hint, and when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud, "That will do
extremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let the other young ladies have time to
exhibit." Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; and Elizabeth, sorry for her, and
sorry for her father's speech, was afraid her anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now
applied to. "If I," said Mr. Collins, "were so fortunate as to be able to sing, I should have great pleasure, I am
sure, in obliging the company with an air; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and
perfectly compatible with the profession of a clergyman. I do not mean, however, to assert that we
can be justified in devoting too much of our time to music, for there are certainly other things to be
attended to. The rector of a parish has much to do. In the first place, he must make such an
agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and not offensive to his patron. He must write
his own sermons; and the time that remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the care
and improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from making as comfortable as
possible. And I do not think it of light importance that he should have attentive and conciliatory
manners towards everybody, especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment. I cannot
acquit him of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who should omit an occasion of testifying
his respect towards anybody connected with the family." And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, he concluded
his speech, which had been spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room. Many stared-many
smiled; but no one looked more amused than Mr. Bennet himself, while his wife seriously
commended Mr. Collins for having spoken so sensibly, and observed in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas,
that he was a remarkably clever, good kind of young man. To Elizabeth it appeared that, had her family made an agreement to expose themselves as much as
they could during the evening, it would have been impossible for them to play their parts with more
spirit or finer success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sister that some of the exhibition
had escaped his notice, and that his feelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly
which he must have witnessed. That his two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, should have such an
opportunity of ridiculing her relations, was bad enough, and she could not determine whether the
silent contempt of the gentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable. The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was teased by Mr. Collins, who continued
most perseveringly by her side, and though he could not prevail on her to dance with him again, put
it out of her power to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up with somebody else,
and offer to introduce him to any young lady in the room. He assured her, that as to dancing, he was
perfectly indifferent to it; that his chief object was by delicate attentions to recommend himself to
her and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to her the whole evening. There
was no arguing upon such a project. She owed her greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often
joined them, and good-naturedly engaged Mr. Collins's conversation to herself. She was at least free from the offense of Mr. Darcy's further notice; though often standing within a
very short distance of her, quite disengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be
the probable consequence of her allusions to Mr. Wickham, and rejoiced in it. The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart, and, by a manoeuvre of Mrs.
Bennet, had to wait for their carriage a quarter of an hour after everybody else was gone, which gave
them time to see how heartily they were wished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and her
sister scarcely opened their mouths, except to complain of fatigue, and were evidently impatient to
have the house to themselves. They repulsed every attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and by
so doing threw a languor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by the long speeches of
Mr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Bingley and his sisters on the elegance of their
entertainment, and the hospitality and politeness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Darcy said nothing at all. Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene. Mr. Bingley and Jane
were standing together, a little detached from the rest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth
preserved as steady a silence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was too much
fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of "Lord, how tired I am!" accompanied by a
violent yawn. When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Bennet was most pressingly civil in her hope of seeing
the whole family soon at Longbourn, and addressed herself especially to Mr. Bingley, to assure him
how happy he would make them by eating a family dinner with them at any time, without the
ceremony of a formal invitation. Bingley was all grateful pleasure, and he readily engaged for taking
the earliest opportunity of waiting on her, after his return from London, whither he was obliged to go
the next day for a short time. Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the house under the delightful persuasion that,
allowing for the necessary preparations of settlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she
should undoubtedly see her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or four months. Of
having another daughter married to Mr. Collins, she thought with equal certainty, and with
considerable, though not equal, pleasure. Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and
though the man and the match were quite good enough for her, the worth of each was eclipsed by
Mr. Bingley and Netherfield. The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins made his declaration in form. Having
resolved to do it without loss of time, as his leave of absence extended only to the following
Saturday, and having no feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even at the moment,
he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all the observances, which he supposed a regular part
of the business. On finding Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together, soon after
breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words:
"May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth, when I solicit for the honour
of a private audience with her in the course of this morning?" Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs. Bennet answered instantly, "Oh
dear!-yes-certainly. I am sure Lizzy will be very happy-I am sure she can have no objection. Come, Kitty, I want you up stairs." And, gathering her work together, she was hastening away, when
Elizabeth called out:
"Dear madam, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must excuse me. He can have nothing to
say to me that anybody need not hear. I am going away myself." "No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you to stay where you are." And upon Elizabeth's seeming really,
with vexed and embarrassed looks, about to escape, she added: "Lizzy, I insist upon your staying and
hearing Mr. Collins." Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction-and a moment's consideration making her also
sensible that it would be wisest to get it over as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again
and tried to conceal, by incessant employment the feelings which were divided between distress and
diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as soon as they were gone, Mr. Collins began. "Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far from doing you any disservice, rather
adds to your other perfections. You would have been less amiable in my eyes had there not been this
little unwillingness; but allow me to assure you, that I have your respected mother's permission for
this address. You can hardly doubt the purport of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may
lead you to dissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost as soon as I
entered the house, I singled you out as the companion of my future life. But before I am run away
with by my feelings on this subject, perhaps it would be advisable for me to state my reasons for
marrying-and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the design of selecting a wife, as I
certainly did." The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run away with by his feelings, made
Elizabeth so near laughing, that she could not use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop
him further, and he continued:
"My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing for every clergyman in easy
circumstances (like myself) to set the example of matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am
convinced that it will add very greatly to my happiness; and thirdly-which perhaps I ought to have
mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice and recommendation of the very noble lady whom I
have the honour of calling patroness. Twice has she condescended to give me her opinion (unasked
too!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before I left Hunsford-between our
pools at quadrille, while Mrs. Jenkinson was arranging Miss de Bourgh's footstool, that she said, 'Mr. Collins, you must marry. A clergyman like you must marry. Choose properly, choose a gentlewoman
for my sake; and for your own, let her be an active, useful sort of person, not brought up high, but
able to make a small income go a good way. This is my advice. Find such a woman as soon as you can,
bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit her.' Allow me, by the way, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do
not reckon the notice and kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of the
advantages in my power to offer. You will find her manners beyond anything I can describe; and your
wit and vivacity, I think, must be acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and
respect which her rank will inevitably excite. Thus much for my general intention in favour of
matrimony; it remains to be told why my views were directed towards Longbourn instead of my own
neighbourhood, where I can assure you there are many amiable young women. But the fact is, that
being, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honoured father (who, however, may live
many years longer), I could not satisfy myself without resolving to choose a wife from among his
daughters, that the loss to them might be as little as possible, when the melancholy event takes
place-which, however, as I have already said, may not be for several years. This has been my
motive, my fair cousin, and I flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem. And now nothing
remains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of the violence of my affection. To
fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and shall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I
am well aware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand pounds in the four per
cents, which will not be yours till after your mother's decease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. On that head, therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may assure yourself that no ungenerous
reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are married." It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now. "You are too hasty, sir," she cried. "You forget that I have made no answer. Let me do it without
further loss of time. Accept my thanks for the compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of
the honour of your proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than to decline them." "I am not now to learn," replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of the hand, "that it is usual with
young ladies to reject the addresses of the man whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first
applies for their favour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second, or even a third time. I
am therefore by no means discouraged by what you have just said, and shall hope to lead you to the
altar ere long." "Upon my word, sir," cried Elizabeth, "your hope is a rather extraordinary one after my declaration. I
do assure you that I am not one of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are so
daring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a second time. I am perfectly serious in
my refusal. You could not make me happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world
who could make you so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, I am persuaded she
would find me in every respect ill qualified for the situation." "Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so," said Mr. Collins very gravely-"but I cannot
imagine that her ladyship would at all disapprove of you. And you may be certain when I have the
honour of seeing her again, I shall speak in the very highest terms of your modesty, economy, and
other amiable qualification." "Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. You must give me leave to judge for myself,
and pay me the compliment of believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and by
refusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise. In making me the offer, you
must have satisfied the delicacy of your feelings with regard to my family, and may take possession
of Longbourn estate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter may be considered,
therefore, as finally settled." And rising as she thus spoke, she would have quitted the room, had Mr.
Collins not thus addressed her:
"When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, I shall hope to receive a more
favourable answer than you have now given me; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at
present, because I know it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man on the first
application, and perhaps you have even now said as much to encourage my suit as would be
consistent with the true delicacy of the female character." "Really, Mr. Collins," cried Elizabeth with some warmth, "you puzzle me exceedingly. If what I have
hitherto said can appear to you in the form of encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal
in such a way as to convince you of its being one." "You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that your refusal of my addresses is
merely words of course. My reasons for believing it are briefly these: It does not appear to me that
my hand is unworthy of your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer would be any other
than highly desirable. My situation in life, my connections with the family of de Bourgh, and my
relationship to your own, are circumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into further
consideration, that in spite of your manifold attractions, it is by no means certain that another offer
of marriage may ever be made you. Your portion is unhappily so small that it will in all likelihood
undo the effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I must therefore conclude that you
are not serious in your rejection of me, I shall choose to attribute it to your wish of increasing my
love by suspense, according to the usual practice of elegant females." "I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to that kind of elegance which consists in
tormenting a respectable man. I would rather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. I
thank you again and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, but to accept them is
absolutely impossible. My feelings in every respect forbid it. Can I speak plainer? Do not consider me
now as an elegant female, intending to plague you, but as a rational creature, speaking the truth
from her heart." "You are uniformly charming!" cried he, with an air of awkward gallantry; "and I am persuaded that
when sanctioned by the express authority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail of
being acceptable." To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would make no reply, and immediately and in
silence withdrew; determined, if he persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flattering
encouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be uttered in such a manner as to be
decisive, and whose behaviour at least could not be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an
elegant female. Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of his successful love; for Mrs. Bennet,
having dawdled about in the vestibule to watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw
Elizabeth open the door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than she entered the
breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and herself in warm terms on the happy prospect of
their nearer connection. Mr. Collins received and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure,
and then proceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the result of which he trusted he
had every reason to be satisfied, since the refusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would
naturally flow from her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character. This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet; she would have been glad to be equally satisfied
that her daughter had meant to encourage him by protesting against his proposals, but she dared not
believe it, and could not help saying so. "But, depend upon it, Mr. Collins," she added, "that Lizzy shall be brought to reason. I will speak to
her about it directly. She is a very headstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest but I
will make her know it." "Pardon me for interrupting you, madam," cried Mr. Collins; "but if she is really headstrong and
foolish, I know not whether she would altogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation,
who naturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. If therefore she actually persists in rejecting
my suit, perhaps it were better not to force her into accepting me, because if liable to such defects of
temper, she could not contribute much to my felicity." "Sir, you quite misunderstand me," said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed. "Lizzy is only headstrong in such
matters as these. In everything else she is as good-natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr.
Bennet, and we shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure." She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to her husband, called out as she
entered the library, "Oh! Mr. Bennet, you are wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar. You must
come and make Lizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will not have him, and if you do not make
haste he will change his mind and not have her." Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed them on her face with a calm
unconcern which was not in the least altered by her communication. "I have not the pleasure of understanding you," said he, when she had finished her speech. "Of what
are you talking?" "Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Collins, and Mr. Collins begins to say
that he will not have Lizzy." "And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems an hopeless business." "Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that you insist upon her marrying him." "Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion." Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to the library. "Come here, child," cried her father as she appeared. "I have sent for you on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr. Collins has made you an offer of marriage. Is it true?" Elizabeth replied that it
was. "Very well-and this offer of marriage you have refused?" "I have, sir." "Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon your accepting it. Is it not so, Mrs. Bennet?" "Yes, or I will never see her again." "An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you must be a stranger to one of your
parents. Your mother will never see you again if you do not marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see
you again if you do." Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning, but Mrs. Bennet, who had
persuaded herself that her husband regarded the affair as she wished, was excessively disappointed. "What do you mean, Mr. Bennet, in talking this way? You promised me to insist upon her marrying
him." "My dear," replied her husband, "I have two small favours to request. First, that you will allow me
the free use of my understanding on the present occasion; and secondly, of my room. I shall be glad
to have the library to myself as soon as may be." Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, did Mrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again; coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to
secure Jane in her interest; but Jane, with all possible mildness, declined interfering; and Elizabeth,
sometimes with real earnestness, and sometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks. Though
her manner varied, however, her determination never did. Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed. He thought too well of
himself to comprehend on what motives his cousin could refuse him; and though his pride was hurt,
he suffered in no other way. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of her
deserving her mother's reproach prevented his feeling any regret. While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spend the day with them. She was
met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying to her, cried in a half whisper, "I am glad you are come, for
there is such fun here! What do you think has happened this morning? Mr. Collins has made an offer
to Lizzy, and she will not have him." Charlotte hardly had time to answer, before they were joined by Kitty, who came to tell the same
news; and no sooner had they entered the breakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet was alone, than she
likewise began on the subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreating her to
persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of all her family. "Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas,"
she added in a melancholy tone, "for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me. I am cruelly
used, nobody feels for my poor nerves." Charlotte's reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth. "Aye, there she comes," continued Mrs. Bennet, "looking as unconcerned as may be, and caring no
more for us than if we were at York, provided she can have her own way. But I tell you, Miss Lizzy-if
you take it into your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way, you will never get a
husband at all-and I am sure I do not know who is to maintain you when your father is dead. I shall
not be able to keep you-and so I warn you. I have done with you from this very day. I told you in the
library, you know, that I should never speak to you again, and you will find me as good as my word. I
have no pleasure in talking to undutiful children. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talking to
anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can have no great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I suffer! But it is always so. Those who do not complain are never pitied." Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible that any attempt to reason with her or
soothe her would only increase the irritation. She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any
of them, till they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered the room with an air more stately than
usual, and on perceiving whom, she said to the girls, "Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you,
hold your tongues, and let me and Mr. Collins have a little conversation together." Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, but Lydia stood her ground,
determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte, detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose
inquiries after herself and all her family were very minute, and then by a little curiosity, satisfied
herself with walking to the window and pretending not to hear. In a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet began
the projected conversation: "Oh! Mr. Collins!" "My dear madam," replied he, "let us be for ever silent on this point. Far be it from me," he presently
continued, in a voice that marked his displeasure, "to resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignation to inevitable evils is the duty of us all; the peculiar duty of a young man who has been so
fortunate as I have been in early preferment; and I trust I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from
feeling a doubt of my positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand; for I have
often observed that resignation is never so perfect as when the blessing denied begins to lose
somewhat of its value in our estimation. You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespect
to your family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions to your daughter's favour,
without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet the compliment of requesting you to interpose your
authority in my behalf. My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted my dismission
from your daughter's lips instead of your own. But we are all liable to error. I have certainly meant
well through the whole affair. My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with
due consideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my manner has been at all
reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologise." The discussion of Mr. Collins's offer was now nearly at an end, and Elizabeth had only to suffer from
the uncomfortable feelings necessarily attending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusions of
her mother. As for the gentleman himself, his feelings were chiefly expressed, not by embarrassment
or dejection, or by trying to avoid her, but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely
ever spoke to her, and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of himself were
transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose civility in listening to him was a seasonable
relief to them all, and especially to her friend. The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet's ill-humour or ill health. Mr. Collins was also in
the same state of angry pride. Elizabeth had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but
his plan did not appear in the least affected by it. He was always to have gone on Saturday, and to
Saturday he meant to stay. After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton to inquire if Mr. Wickham were returned, and to lament
over his absence from the Netherfield ball. He joined them on their entering the town, and attended
them to their aunt's where his regret and vexation, and the concern of everybody, was well talked
over. To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged that the necessity of his absence had been
self-imposed. "I found," said he, "as the time drew near that I had better not meet Mr. Darcy; that to be in the
same room, the same party with him for so many hours together, might be more than I could bear,
and that scenes might arise unpleasant to more than myself." She highly approved his forbearance, and they had leisure for a full discussion of it, and for all the
commendation which they civilly bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked
back with them to Longbourn, and during the walk he particularly attended to her. His accompanying
them was a double advantage; she felt all the compliment it offered to herself, and it was most
acceptable as an occasion of introducing him to her father and mother. Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield. The
envelope contained a sheet of elegant, little, hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady's fair,
flowing hand; and Elizabeth saw her sister's countenance change as she read it, and saw her dwelling
intently on some particular passages. Jane recollected herself soon, and putting the letter away, tried
to join with her usual cheerfulness in the general conversation; but Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the
subject which drew off her attention even from Wickham; and no sooner had he and his companion
taken leave, than a glance from Jane invited her to follow her up stairs. When they had gained their
own room, Jane, taking out the letter, said:
"This is from Caroline Bingley; what it contains has surprised me a good deal. The whole party have
left Netherfield by this time, and are on their way to town-and without any intention of coming
back again. You shall hear what she says." She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information of their having just resolved
to follow their brother to town directly, and of their meaning to dine in Grosvenor Street, where Mr.
Hurst had a house. The next was in these words: "I do not pretend to regret anything I shall leave in
Hertfordshire, except your society, my dearest friend; but we will hope, at some future period, to
enjoy many returns of that delightful intercourse we have known, and in the meanwhile may lessen
the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved correspondence. I depend on you for
that." To these highflown expressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust; and
though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she saw nothing in it really to lament; it was
not to be supposed that their absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley's being there; and
as to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must cease to regard it, in the enjoyment
of his. "It is unlucky," said she, after a short pause, "that you should not be able to see your friends before
they leave the country. But may we not hope that the period of future happiness to which Miss
Bingley looks forward may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful intercourse you
have known as friends will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction as sisters? Mr. Bingley will not be
detained in London by them." "Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into Hertfordshire this winter. I will read it
to you:"
"When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which took him to London might
be concluded in three or four days; but as we are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time
convinced that when Charles gets to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have
determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend his vacant hours in a
comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintances are already there for the winter; I wish that I could
hear that you, my dearest friend, had any intention of making one of the crowd-but of that I
despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in the gaieties which that
season generally brings, and that your beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss
of the three of whom we shall deprive you." "It is evident by this," added Jane, "that he comes back no more this winter." "It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean that he should." "Why will you think so? It must be his own doing. He is his own master. But you do not know all. I will read you the passage which particularly hurts me. I will have no reserves fromyou." "Mr. Darcy is impatient to see his sister; and, to confess the truth, we are scarcely less eager to meet
her again. I really do not think Georgiana Darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance, and
accomplishments; and the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into something
still more interesting, from the hope we dare entertain of her being hereafter our sister. I do not
know whether I ever before mentioned to you my feelings on this subject; but I will not leave the
country without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them unreasonable. My brother
admires her greatly already; he will have frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most
intimate footing; her relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister's partiality is
not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most capable of engaging any woman's heart. With all
these circumstances to favour an attachment, and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest
Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness of so many?" "What do you think of this sentence, my dear Lizzy?" said Jane as she finished it. "Is it not clear
enough? Does it not expressly declare that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister;
that she is perfectly convinced of her brother's indifference; and that if she suspects the nature of my
feelings for him, she means (most kindly!) to put me on my guard? Can there be any other opinion on
the subject?" "Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. Will you hear it?" "Most willingly." "You shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is in love with you, and wants
him to marry Miss Darcy.