They will blindfold, and conduct you to her. You will know her by
    her striking likeness to her picture in the gallery. Be silent,
    courageous, and circumspect. 'AN UNKNOWN FRIEND.' What a flood of new feelings gushed upon my soul, as I laid down the
billet, and lifted my filial eyes to heaven! I was about to behold my
mother. Mother--endearing name! I pictured to myself, that unfortunate
lady, stretched on a mattrass of straw, her eyes sunken in their
sockets, yet still retaining a portion of their wonted fire; her frame
emaciated, her voice feeble, her hand damp and chill. Fondly did I
depict our meeting--our embrace; she gently pushing me from her, to
gaze on all the lineaments of my countenance, and then baring my temple
to search for the mole. All, all is convincing; and she calls me the
softened image of my noble father! Two tedious hours I waited in extreme anxiety, till at length the clock
struck twelve. My heart beat responsive, and in a few moments after, I
heard the promised signal at my door. I unbolted it, and beheld two men
in masks and cloaks. They blindfolded me, and each taking an arm, led
me along. Not a word passed. We traversed several suites of apartments,
ascended flights of stairs, descended others; now went this way, now
that; obliquely, circularly, angularly; till I began actually to
imagine we were all the time in one spot. At length my conductors stopped. 'Unlock the postern gate,' whispered one, 'while I light a torch.' 'We are betrayed!' said the other, 'for this is the wrong key.' 'Then thou beest the traitor,' cried the first. 'Thou liest, dost lie, and art lying!' cried the second. 'Take that!' exclaimed the first. A groan followed, and the wretch
dropped to the ground. 'You have murdered him!' cried I, sickening with horror. 'I have only hamstrung him, my lady,' said the fellow. 'He will be lame
for life.' 'Treason!' shouted the wounded man. His companion burst open the gate; a sudden current of wind met us, and
we fled along with incredible speed, while low moans and smothered
shrieks were heard at either side of us. 'Gracious heaven, where are we?' cried I. 'In the cavern of death!' said my conductor, 'famous for rats and
banditti.' On a sudden innumerable footsteps echoed behind us. We ran swifter. 'Fire!' cried a ferocious accent, almost at my ear; and in a moment
several pistols were discharged. I stopped, unable to move, breathe, or speak. 'I am wounded all over, right and left, fore and aft!' cried my
conductor. 'Am I bleeding?' said I, feeling myself with my hands. 'No, blessed St. Anthony be praised!' answered he; 'and now all is
safe, for we are at the cell, and the banditti have turned into the
wrong passage.' He stopped, and unlocked a door. 'Enter,' said he, 'and behold your unhappy mother!' He led me forward, took the bandage from my eyes, and retiring, locked
the door upon me. Agitated already by the terrors of my dangerous expedition, I felt
additional horror on finding myself in a dismal cell, lighted with a
lantern; where, at a small table, sat a woman suffering under a
corpulency unparalleled in the memoirs of human monsters. She was clad
in sackcloth, her head was swathed in linen, and had grey locks on it,
like horses' tails. Hundreds of frogs were leaping about the floor; a
piece of mouldy bread, a mug of water, and a manuscript, lay on the
table; some straw, strewn with dead snakes and skulls, occupied one
corner, and the farther side of the cell was concealed behind a black
curtain. I stood at the door, doubtful, and afraid to advance; while the
prodigious prisoner sat examining me from head to foot. At last I summoned courage to say, 'I fear, Madam, I am an intruder
here. I have certainly been shewn into the wrong room.' 'It is, it is my own, my only daughter, my Cherubina!' cried she, with
a tremendous voice. 'Come to my maternal arms, thou living picture of
the departed Theodore!' 'Why, Ma'am,' said I, 'I would with great pleasure, but I am afraid
that---- Oh, Madam, indeed, indeed, I am quite sure you cannot be my
mother!' 'For shame!' cried she. 'Why not?' 'Why, Madam,' answered I, 'my mother was of a thin habit; as her
picture proves.' 'And so was I once,' said she. 'This deplorable plumpness is owing to
want of exercise. You see, however, that I retain all my former
paleness.' 'Pardon me,' said I, 'for I must say that your face is a rich scarlet.' 'And is this our tender meeting?' cried she. 'After ten years'
imprisonment, to be disowned by my daughter, and taunted with sarcastic
insinuations against my face? Here is a pretty joke! Tell me, girl,
will you embrace me, or will you not?' 'Indeed, Madam,' answered I, 'I will embrace you presently.' 'Presently!' cried she. 'Yes,' said I, 'depend upon it I will. Only let me get over the first
shock.' 'Shock!' vociferated she. Dreading her violence, and feeling myself bound to do the duties of a
daughter, I kneeled at her feet, and said:

'Ever excellent, ever exalted author of my being, I beg thy maternal
blessing!' My mother raised me from the ground, and hugged me to her heart, with
such cruel vigour, that almost crushed, I cried out stoutly, and
struggled for release. 'And now,' said she, relaxing her grasp, 'let us talk over our wrongs. This manuscript is a faithful narrative of my life, previous to my
marriage. It was written by my female confidant, to divert her grief,
during the long and alarming illness of her Dutch pug. Take it to your
chamber, and blot it with your tears, my love.' I put the scroll in my bosom. 'Need I shock your gentle feelings,' continued she, 'by relating my
subsequent story? Suffice it, that as soon as you were stolen, I went
mad about the woods, till I was caught; and on recovering my senses, I
found myself in this infernal dungeon. Look at that calendar of small
sticks, notched all over with my dismal days and nights. Ten long years
I have eaten nothing but bread. Oh, ye favourite pullets, oh ye
inimitable apple-pies, shall I never, never, taste you more? Oft too,
my reason wanders. Oft I see figures that rise like furies, to torment
me. I see them when asleep; I see them now--now!' She sat in a fixed attitude of horror, while her straining eyes moved
slowly round, as if they followed something. I stood shuddering, and
hating her more and more every moment. 'Gentle companion of my confinement!' cried she, apostrophizing a huge
toad that she pulled out of her bosom; 'dear, spotted fondling; thou,
next to my Cherubina, art worthy of my love. Embrace each other, my
friends.' And she put the hideous pet into my hand. I screamed and
dropped it. 'Oh!' cried I, in a passion of despair, 'what madness possessed me to
undertake this execrable enterprize!' and I began beating with my hand
against the door. 'Do you want to leave your poor mother?' said she, in a whimpering
tone. 'Oh! I am so frightened!' said I. 'You will spend the night here, however,' cried she; 'and probably your
whole life too; for no doubt the ruffian who brought you hither was
employed by Lady Gwyn to entrap you.' When I heard this terrible suggestion, my blood ran cold, and I began
crying bitterly. 'Come, my love!' said my mother, 'and let me lull thee to repose on my
soft bosom. What is the world to us? Here in each other's society, we
will enjoy all that affection, all that virtue can confer. Come, my
daughter, and let me clasp thee to my heart once more!' 'Ah,' cried I, 'spare me!' 'What!' exclaimed she, 'do you spurn my proffered embrace?' 'Dear, no, Madam,' answered I. 'But--but you squeeze one so!' My mother made a huge stride towards me; then stood groaning and
rolling her eyes. 'Help!' cried I, half frantic; 'help! help!' I was stopped by a suppressed titter of infernal laughter, as if from
many demons; and on looking towards the black curtain, whence the sound
came, I saw it agitated; and about twenty terrific faces appeared
peeping through slits in it, and making grins of a most diabolical
nature. I hid my face in my hands. ''Tis the banditti!' cried my mother. As she spoke, the door opened, a bandage was flung over my eyes, and I
was hurried off, almost senseless, in some one's arms; till at length,
I found myself alone in my own chamber. Such was the detestable adventure of to-night. Oh, Biddy, that I should
have lived to meet this mother of mine! How different from the mothers
that other heroines contrive to rummage out in northern turrets and
ruined chapels! I am out of all patience. Liberate her I will, of
course, and make a suitable provision for her, when I get possession of
my property, but positively, never will I sleep under the same roof
with--(ye powers of filial love forgive me!) such a living mountain of
human horror. Adieu. While her ladyship is busied in preparing for the ball of to-morrow
night, I find time to copy my mother's memoirs for your perusal. Were
she herself elegant and interesting, perhaps I might think them so too;
and if I dislike them, it must be because I dislike her; for the plot,
sentiment, diction, and pictures of nature, differ little from what we
find in other novels. _Il Castello di Grimgothico_,

    OR

    MEMOIRS OF LADY HYSTERICA BELAMOUR. A NOVEL. _By Anna Maria Marianne Matilda Pottingen_,

    Author of the Bloody Bodkin, Sonnets on most of the Planets, &c.
    &c. &c.

    Oh, Sophonisba, Sophonisba, oh! THOMPSON. CHAPTER I

    Blow, blow, thou wintry wind.--SHAKESPEARE. Blow, breezes, blow.--MOORE. A STORM.--A RUSTIC REPAST.--AN ALARM.--UNCOMMON READINESS IN A
    CHILD.--AN INUNDATED STRANGER.--A CASTLE OUT OF REPAIR.--AN
    IMPAIRED CHARACTER. It was on a nocturnal night in autumnal October; the wet rain fell
    in liquid quantities, and the thunder rolled in an awful and
    Ossianly manner. The lowly, but peaceful inhabitants of a small,
    but decent cottage, were just sitting down to their homely, but
    wholesome supper, when a loud knocking at the door alarmed them. Bertram armed himself with a ladle. 'Lackadaisy!' cried old
    Margueritone, and little Billy seized the favourable moment to fill
    his mouth with meat. Innocent fraud! happy childhood! The father's lustre and the mother's bloom.--THOMPSON. Bertram then opened the door; when lo! pale, breathless, dripping,
    and with a look that would have shocked the Humane Society, a
    beautiful female tottered into the room. 'Lackadaisy, Ma'am,' said Margueritone, 'are you wet?' 'Wet!' exclaimed the fair unknown, wringing a rivulet of rain from
    the corner of her robe; 'O ye gods, wet!' Margueritone felt the justice, the gentleness of the reproof, and
    turned the subject, by recommending a glass of spirits. Spirit of my sainted sire. The stranger sipped, shook her head, and fainted. Her hair was long
    and dark, and the bed was ready; so since she seems in distress, we
    will leave her there awhile; lest we should betray an ignorance of
    the world, in appearing not to know the proper time for deserting
    people. On the rocky summit of a beetling precipice, whose base was lashed
    by the angry Atlantic, stood a moated, and turreted structure,
    called Il Castello di Grimgothico. As the northern tower had remained uninhabited since the death of
    its late lord, Henriques De Violenci, lights and figures were,
    _par consequence_, observed in it at midnight. Besides, the
    black eyebrows of the present baron had a habit of meeting for
    several years, and _quelquefois_, he paced the picture-gallery
    with a hurried step. These circumstances combined, there could be
    no doubt of his having committed murder. Accordingly, all avoided
    him, except the Count Stiletto, and the hectic, but heavenly
    Hysterica. The former, he knew, was the most pale-faced, flagitious
    character in the world. But birds of a plume associate. The latter
    shall be presented to the reader in the next chapter. CHAPTER II

    'Oh!'--MILTON. 'Ah!'--POPE. A HISTORY.--A MYSTERY.--AN ORIGINAL REFLECTION ON DEATH.--THE
    HEROINE DESCRIBED.--THE LANDSCAPE NOT DESCRIBED.--AN AWFUL REASON
    GIVEN. One evening, the Baroness De Violenci, having sprained her left leg
    in the composition of an ecstatic ode, resolved not to go to Lady
    Penthesilea Rouge's rout. While she was sitting alone, at a plate
    of prawns, the footman entered with a basket, which had just been
    left for her. 'Lay it down, John,' said she, touching his forehead with her fork. That gay-hearted young fellow did as he was desired, and capered
    out of the room. Judge of her astonishment, when she found, on opening it, a little
    cherub of a baby sleeping within. An oaken cross, with 'HYSTERICA,' inscribed in chalk, was appended
    at its neck, and a mark, like a bruised gooseberry, added interest
    to its elbow. As she and her lord never had children (at least she could answer
    for herself), she determined, _sur le champ_, on adopting the
    pretty Hysterica. Fifteen years did this worthy woman dedicate to the progress of her
    little charge; and in that time, taught her every mortal
    accomplishment. Her sigh, particularly, was esteemed the softest in
    Europe. But the stroke of death is inevitable; come it must at last, and
    neither virtue nor wisdom can avoid it. In a word, the good old
    Baroness died, and our heroine fell senseless on her body. O what a fall was there, my countrymen! But it is now time to describe our heroine. As Milton tells us,
    that Eve was '_more lovely than Pandora_' (an imaginary lady,
    who never existed but in the brains of poets), so do we declare,
    and are ready to stake our lives, that our heroine excelled in her
    form the Timinitilidi, whom no man ever saw; and, in her voice, the
    music of the spheres, which no man ever heard. Perhaps her face was
    not perfect; but it was more--it was interesting--it was oval. Her
    eyes were of the real, original old blue; and her eyelashes of the
    best silk. You forget the thickness of her lips, in the casket of
    pearls which they enshrined; and the roses of York and Lancaster
    were united in her cheek. A nose of the Grecian order surmounted
    the whole. Such was Hysterica. But alas! misfortunes are often gregarious, like sheep. For one
    night, when our heroine had repaired to the chapel, intending to
    drop her customary tear on the tomb of her sainted benefactress,
    she heard on a sudden,

        Oh, horrid, horrible, and horridest horror! the distant organ peal a solemn voluntary. While she was preparing,
    in much terror and astonishment, to accompany it with her voice,
    four men in masks rushed from among some tombs, and bore her to a
    carriage, which instantly drove off with the whole party. In vain
    she sought to soften them by swoons, tears, and a simple little
    ballad: they sat counting murders, and not minding her. As the blinds of the carriage were closed the whole way, we wave a
    description of the country which they traversed. Besides, the
    prospect within the carriage will occupy the reader enough; for in
    one of the villains, Hysterica discovered--Count Stiletto! She
    fainted. On the second day, the carriage stopped at an old castle, and she
    was conveyed into a tapestried apartment, where the delicate
    creature instantly fell ill of an inverted eyelash, caused by
    continual weeping. She then drew upon the contemplation of future
    sorrows, for a supply of that melancholy which her immediate
    exigencies demanded. CHAPTER III

    Be thou a spirit of health, or goblin
    damn'd?--SHAKESPEARE. FRESH EMBARRASSMENTS.--AN INSULT FROM A SPECTRE.--GRAND
    DISCOVERIES.--A SHRIEK.--A TEAR.--A SIGH.--A BLUSH.--A SWOON. It is a remark founded upon the nature of man, and universally
    credited by the thinking part of the world, that to suffer is an
    attribute of mortality. Impressed with a due conviction of this important precept, our
    heroine but smiled as she heard Stiletto lock her door. It was now
    midnight, and she took up her lamp to examine the chamber. Rusty
    daggers, mouldering bones, and ragged palls, lay scattered in all
    the profusion of feudal plenty. Several horrors now made their appearance; but the most uncommon
    was a winged eyeball that fluttered before her face. Say, little, foolish, fluttering thing? She began shrieking and adjusting her hair at a mirror, when lo! she beheld the reflection of a ghastly visage peeping over her
    shoulder! Much disconcerted, the trembling girl approached the bed. An impertinent apparition, with a peculiar nose, stood there, and
    made faces at her. She felt offended at the freedom, to say nothing
    of her being half dead with fright. 'Is it not enough,' thought she, 'to be harassed by beings of this
    world, but those of the next too must think proper to interfere? I
    am sure,' said she, as she raised her voice in a taunting manner,
    '_En verité_, I have no desire to meddle with _their_ affairs. _Sur ma vie_, I have no taste for brim-stone. So let me just
    advise a _certain_ inhabitant of a _certain_ world (not the
    _best_, I believe,) to think less of _my_ concerns, and more of
    _his own_.' Having thus asserted her dignity, without being too personal, she
    walked to the casement in tears, and sang these simple lines, which
    she graced with intermittent sobs. SONG

        Alas, well-a-day, woe to me,
          Singing willow, willow, willow;
        My lover is far, far at sea. On a billow, billow, billow. Ah, Theodore, would thou could'st be,
         On my pillow, pillow, pillow! Here she heaved a deep sigh, when, to her utter astonishment, a
    voice, as if from a chamber underneath; took up the tune with these
    words:

        SONG

        Alas, well-a-day, woe to me,
          Singing sorrow, sorrow, sorrow;
        A ducat would soon make me free,
          Could I borrow, borrow, borrow;
        And then I would pillow with thee,
          To-morrow, morrow, morrow! Was it?--It was!--Yes, it _was_ the voice of her love, her life,
    her long-lost Theodore De Willoughby!!! How should she reach him? Forty times she ran round and round her chamber, with agitated
    eyes and distracted tresses. Here we must pause a moment, and express our surprise at the
    negligence of the sylphs and sylphids, in permitting the ringlets
    of heroines to be so frequently dishevelled. O ye fat-cheeked
    little cherubims, who flap your innocent wings, and fly through
    oceans of air in a minute, without having a hair of your heads
    discomposed,--no wonder that such stiff ringlets should be made of
    gold! At length Hysterica found a sliding pannel. She likewise found a
    moth-eaten parchment, which she sat down to peruse. But, gentle
    reader, imagine her emotions, on decyphering these wonderful words. MANUSCRIPT

        ---- Six tedious years ---- ---- and all for what? ---- ----
        ---- ---- ---- ---- No sun, no moon. ---- ---- Murd ---- ----
        Adul ---- ---- because I am the wife of Lord Belamour. ----
        ---- then tore me from him, and my little Hysterica ---- ----
        ---- ---- ---- Cruel Stiletto! ---- ---- He confesses that he
        put the sleeping babe into a basket ---- ---- sent her to the
        Baroness de Violenci ---- ---- oaken cross ---- ---- Chalk ----
        ---- bruised gooseberry ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- I am poisoned
        ---- ---- a great pain across my back ---- ---- i ---- j ---- k
        ---- ---- Oh! ---- Ah! ---- Oh! ---- ---- ---- ----

        _Fascinante Peggina Belamour._

    This then was the mother of our heroine; and the MS. elucidated,
    beyond dispute, the mysteries which had hitherto hung over the
    birth of that unfortunate orphan. We need not add that she fainted, recovered, passed through the
    pannel, discovered the dungeon of her Theodore; and having asked
    him how he did,

        'Comment vous portez vous?' fell into unsophisticated hysterics. CHAPTER IV

    Sure such a pair were never seen,
    So justly formed to meet by nature.--SHERIDAN. A TENDER DIALOGUE.--AN INTERESTING FLIGHT.--A MISCHIEVOUS CLOUD. --OUR HERO HITS UPON A SINGULAR EXPEDIENT.--FAILS.--TAKES A
    TRIP TO THE METROPOLIS. 'And is this you?' cried the delighted youth, as she revived. 'Indeed, indeed it is,' said she. 'Are you quite, quite sure?' cried he. 'Indeed, indeed I am,' said she. 'Well, how do you do?' cried he. 'Pretty well I thank you,' said she. They then separated, after fixing to meet again. One night, as they were indulging each other in innocent
    endearments, and filling up each finer pause with lemonade, a
    sudden thought struck Lord Theodore. 'Let us escape,' said he. 'Let us,' said she. 'Gods, what a thought was there!' They then contrived this ingenious mode of accomplishing their
    object. In one of the galleries which lay between their chambers,
    there was a window. Having opened it, they found that they had
    nothing to do but get out at it. They therefore fled into the
    neighbouring forest. Happy, happy, happy pair!--DRYDEN. But it is an incontrovertible truism, that _les genres humains_
    are liable to disaster; for in consequence of a cloud that
    obscured the moon, Hysterica fell into a snow-pit. What could
    Theodore do? To save her was impossible; to perish with her would
    be suicide. In this emergency, he formed a bold project, and ran
    two miles for assistance. But alas! on his return, not a trace of
    her could be found. He was quite _au desespoir_; so, having called
    her long enough, he called a chaise, and set off for London. CHAPTER V

    'Tis she!--POPE. O Vous!--TELEMACHUS. All hail!--MACBETH. AN EXTRAORDINARY RENCONTRE.--PATHETIC REPARTEES.--NATURAL
    CONSEQUENCES RESULTING FROM AN EXCESS IN SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS. --TERRIFIC NONSENSE TALKED BY TWO MANIACS. One night as Lord Theodore, on his return from the theatre, was
    passing along a dark alley, he perceived a candle lighting in a
    small window, on the ground-floor of a deciduous hovel. An indescribable sensation, an unaccountable something, whispered
    to him, in still, small accents, 'peep through the pane.' He did
    so; but what were his emotions, when he beheld--whom? Why the very
    young lady that he had left for dead in the forest--his
    Hysterica!!! She was clearstarching in a dimity bedgown. He sleeked his eyebrows with his finger, then flung open the sash,
    and stood before her. '_Ah, ma belle Amie!_' cried he. 'So I have caught you at last. I
    really thought you were dead.' 'I am dead to love and to hope!' said she. 'O ye powers!' cried he, making a blow at his forehead. 'There are many kinds of powers,' said she carelessly: 'perhaps you
    now mean the powers of impudence, Mr.--I beg pardon--Lord Theodore
    De Willoughby, I believe.' 'I believe so,' retorted he, 'Mrs.--or rather Lady
    Hys--Hys--Hys.' --

    'Hiss away, my lord!' exclaimed the sensitive girl, and fainted. Lord Theodore rushed at a bottle that stood on the dresser, and
    poured half a pint of it into her mouth; but perceiving by the
    colour that it was not water, he put it to his lips;--it was
    brandy. In a paroxysm of despair he swallowed the contents; and at
    the same moment Hysterica woke from her fainting-fit, in a high
    delirium. 'What have you done to me?' stammered she. 'Oh! I am lost.' 'What!' exclaimed the youth, who had also got a brain-fever; 'after my
    preserving you in brandy?' 'I am happy to hear it,' lisped she;
    'and every thing round me seems to be happy, for every thing round
    me seems to be dancing!' Both now began singing, with dreadful facetiousness; he, 'fill the
    bowl,' and she, 'drink to me only.' At length they sang themselves asleep. CHAPTER VI

    Take him for all in all,
    We ne'er shall look upon his like again.--SHAKESPEARE. BIRTH, PARENTAGE, AND EDUCATION OF OUR HERO.--AN ASPIRING
    PORTER.--ECLAIRCISSEMENT. Lord Theodore De Willoughby was the son of Lord De Willoughby, of
    De Willoughby Castle. After having graduated at Oxford, he took,
    not alone a tour of the Orkney Islands, but an opportunity of
    saving our heroine's life.