






In an old family mansion, situated on an estate in Gloucestershire known
by the name of Rosevalley, resided Mrs Mowbray, and Adeline her only
child. Mrs Mowbray's father, Mr Woodville, a respectable country gentleman,
married, in obedience to the will of his mother, the sole surviving
daughter of an opulent merchant in London, whose large dower paid off
some considerable mortgages on the Woodville estates, and whose mild and
unoffending character soon gained that affection from her husband after
marriage, which he denied her before it. Nor was it long before their happiness was increased, and their union
cemented, by the birth of a daughter; who continuing to be an only
child, and the probable heiress of great possessions, became the idol
of her parents, and the object of unremitted attention to those who
surrounded her. Consequently, one of the first lessons which Editha
Woodville learnt was that of egotism, and to consider it as the chief
duty of all who approached her, to study the gratification of her whims
and caprices. But, though rendered indolent in some measure by the blind folly of her
parents, and the homage of her dependents, she had a taste above the
enjoyments which they offered her. She had a decided passion for literature, which she had acquired from
a sister of Mr Woodville, who had been brought up amongst literary
characters of various pursuits and opinions; and this lady had imbibed
from them a love of free inquiry, which she had little difficulty in
imparting to her young and enthusiastic relation. But, alas! that inclination for study, which, had it been directed to
proper objects, would have been the charm of Miss Woodville's life,
and the safeguard of her happiness, by giving her a constant source of
amusement within herself; proved to her, from the unfortunate direction
which it took, the abundant cause of misery and disappointment. For her, history, biography, poetry, and discoveries in natural
philosophy, had few attractions, while she pored with still unsatisfied
delight over abstruse systems of morals and metaphysics, or new theories
in politics; and scarcely a week elapsed in which she did not receive,
from her aunt's bookseller in London, various tracts on these her
favourite subjects. Happy would it have been for Miss Woodville, if the merits of the works
which she so much admired could have been canvassed in her presence by
rational and unprejudiced persons: but, her parents and friends being
too ignorant to discuss philosophical opinions or political controversies,
the young speculator was left to the decision of her own inexperienced
enthusiasm. To her, therefore, whatever was bold and uncommon seemed new
and wise; and every succeeding theory held her imagination captive till
its power was weakened by one of equal claims to singularity. She soon, however, ceased to be contented with reading, and was eager
to become a writer also. But, as she was strongly imbued with the
prejudices of an ancient family, she could not think of disgracing that
family by turning professed author: she therefore confined her little
effusions to a society of admiring friends, secretly lamenting the loss
which the literary world sustained in her being born a gentlewoman. Nor is it to be wondered at, that, as she was ambitious to be, and to be
thought, a deep thinker, she should have acquired habits of abstraction,
and absence, which imparted a look of wildness to a pair of dark eyes,
that beamed with intelligence, and gave life to features of the most
perfect regularity. To reverie, indeed, she was from childhood inclined; and her life was
long a life of reverie. To her the present moment had scarcely ever
existence; and this propensity to lose herself in a sort of ideal world,
was considerably increased by the nature of her studies. Fatal and unproductive studies! While, wrapt in philosophical abstraction,
she was trying to understand a metaphysical question on the mechanism
of the human mind, or what constituted the true nature of virtue, she
suffered day after day to pass in the culpable neglect of positive
duties; and while imagining systems for the good of society, and the
furtherance of general philanthropy, she allowed individual suffering in
her neighbourhood to pass unobserved and unrelieved. While professing
her unbounded love for the great family of the world, she suffered her
own family to pine under the consciousness of her neglect; and viciously
devoted those hours to the vanity of abstruse and solitary study,
which might have been better spent in amusing the declining age of her
venerable parents, whom affection had led to take up their abode with
her. Let me observe, before I proceed further, that Mrs Mowbray scrupulously
confined herself to theory, even in her wisest speculations; and being
too timid, and too indolent, to illustrate by her conduct the various
and opposing doctrines which it was her pride to maintain by turns, her
practice was ever in opposition to her opinions. Hence, after haranguing with all the violence of a true Whig on the
natural rights of man, or the blessings of freedom, she would 'turn
to a Tory in her elbow chair', and govern her household with despotic
authority; and after embracing at some moments the doubts of the
sceptic, she would often lie motionless in her bed, from apprehension
of ghosts, a helpless prey to the most abject superstition. Such was the mother of ADELINE MOWBRAY! such was the woman who, having
married the heir of Rosevalley, merely to oblige her parents, saw
herself in the prime of life a rich widow, with an only child, who was
left by Mr Mowbray, a fond husband, but an ill-judging parent, entirely
dependent on her! At the time of Mr Mowbray's death, Adeline Mowbray was ten years old,
and Mrs Mowbray thirty; and like an animal in an exhausted receiver,
she had during her short existence been tormented by the experimental
philosophy of her mother. Now it was judged right that she should learn nothing, and now that she
should learn every thing. Now, her graceful form and well-turned limbs
were to be free from any bandage, and any clothing save what decency
required,--and now they were to be tortured by stiff stays, and fettered
by the stocks and the back-board. All Mrs Mowbray's ambition had settled in one point, one passion,
and that was EDUCATION. For this purpose she turned over innumerable
volumes in search of rules on the subject, on which she might improve,
anticipating with great satisfaction the moment when she should be held
up as a pattern of imitation to mothers, and be prevailed upon, though
with graceful reluctance, to publish her system, without a name, for the
benefit of society. But, however good her intentions were, the execution of them was
continually delayed by her habits of abstraction and reverie. After
having over night arranged the tasks of Adeline for the next day,--lost
in some new speculations for the good of her child, she would lie in bed
all the morning, exposing that child to the dangers of idleness. At one time Mrs Mowbray had studied herself into great nicety with
regard to the diet of her daughter; but, as she herself was too much
used to the indulgences of the palate to be able to set her in reality
an example of temperance, she dined in appearance with Adeline at one
o'clock on pudding without butter, and potatoes without salt; but while
the child was taking her afternoon's walk, her own table was covered
with viands fitted for the appetite of opulence. Unfortunately, however, the servants conceived that the daughter as
well as the mother had a right to regale clandestinely; and the little
Adeline used to eat for her supper, with a charge not to tell her mamma,
some of the good things set by from Mrs Mowbray's dinner. It happened that, as Mrs Mowbray was one evening smoothing Adeline's
flowing curls, and stroking her ruddy cheek, she exclaimed triumphantly,
raising Adeline to the glass, 'See the effect of temperance and low
living! If you were accustomed to eat meat, and butter, and drink any
thing but water, you would not look so healthy, my love, as you do now. O the excellent effects of a vegetable diet!' The artless girl, whose conscience smote her during the whole of this
speech, hung her blushing head on her bosom:--it was the confusion of
guilt; and Mrs Mowbray perceiving it earnestly demanded what it meant,
when Adeline, half crying, gave a full explanation. Nothing could exceed the astonishment and mortification of Mrs Mowbray;
but, though usually tenacious of her opinions, she in this case profited
by the lesson of experience. She no longer expected any advantage from
clandestine measures:--but Adeline, her appetites regulated by a proper
exertion of parental authority, was allowed to sit at the well-furnished
table of her mother, and was precluded, by a judicious and open
indulgence, from wishing for a secret and improper one; while the
judicious praises which Mrs Mowbray bestowed on Adeline's ingenuous
confession endeared to her the practice of truth, and laid the foundation
of a habit of ingenuousness which formed through life one of the
ornaments of her character--Would that Mrs Mowbray had always been
equally judicious! Another great object of anxiety to her was the method of clothing
children; whether they should wear flannel, or no flannel; light shoes,
to give agility to the motions of the limbs; or heavy shoes, in order to
strengthen the muscles by exertion;--when one day, as she was turning
over a voluminous author on this subject, the nurserymaid hastily
entered the room, and claimed her attention, but in vain; Mrs Mowbray
went on reading aloud:--

'Some persons are of opinion that thin shoes are most beneficial to
health; others, equally worthy of respect, think thick ones of most use:
and the reasons for these different opinions we shall class under two
heads--'

'Dear me, ma'am!' cried Bridget, 'and in the meantime Miss Adeline will
go without any shoes at all.' 'Do not interrupt me, Bridget,' cried Mrs Mowbray, and proceeded to read
on. 'In the first place, it is not clear, says a learned writer, whether
children require any clothing at all for their feet.' At this moment Adeline burst open the parlour door, and, crying bitterly,
held up her bleeding toes to her mother. 'Mamma, mamma!' cried she, 'you forget to send for a pair of new shoes
for me; and see, how the stones in the gravel have cut me!' This sight, this appeal, decided the question in dispute. The feet of
Adeline bleeding on a new Turkey carpet proved that some clothing for
the feet was necessary; and even Mrs Mowbray for a moment began to
suspect that a little experience is better than a great deal of theory. Meanwhile, in spite of all Mrs Mowbray's eccentricities and caprices,
Adeline, as she grew up, continued to entertain for her the most perfect
respect and affection. Her respect was excited by the high idea which she had formed of her
abilities,--an idea founded on the veneration which all the family
seemed to feel for her on that account,--and her affection was excited
even to an enthusiastic degree by the tenderness with which Mrs Mowbray
had watched over her during an alarming illness. For twenty-one days Adeline had been in the utmost danger; nor is it
probable that she would have been able to struggle against the force
of the disease, but for the unremitting attention of her mother. It
was then, perhaps, for the first time that Mrs Mowbray felt herself a
mother:--all her vanities, all her systems, were forgotten in the danger
of Adeline,--she did not even hazard an opinion on the medical treatment
to be observed. For once she was contented to obey instructions in
silence; for once she was never caught in a reverie; but, like the
most common-place woman of her acquaintance, she lived to the present
moment:--and she was rewarded for her cares by the recovery of her
daughter, and by that daughter's most devoted attachment. Not even the parents of Mrs Mowbray, who, because she talked on subjects
which they could not understand, looked up to her as a superior being,
could exceed Adeline in deference to her mother's abilities; and when,
as she advanced in life, she was sometimes tempted to think her deficient
in maternal fondness, the idea of Mrs Mowbray bending with pale and
speechless anxiety over her sleepless pillow used to recur to her
remembrance, and in a moment the recent indifference was forgotten. Nor could she entirely acquit herself of ingratitude in observing this
seeming indifference: for, whence did the abstraction and apparent
coldness of Mrs Mowbray proceed? From her mind's being wholly engrossed
in studies for the future benefit of Adeline. Why did she leave the
concerns of her family to others? why did she allow her infirm but
active mother to superintend all the household duties? and why did she
seclude herself from all society, save that of her own family, and Dr
Norberry, her physician and friend, but that she might devote every hour
to endeavours to perfect a system of education for her beloved and only
daughter, to whom the work was to be dedicated? 'And yet,' said Adeline mentally, 'I am so ungrateful sometimes as to
think she does not love me sufficiently.' But while Mrs Mowbray was busying herself in plans for Adeline's
education, she reached the age of fifteen, and was in a manner educated;
not, however, by her,--though Mrs Mowbray would, no doubt, have been
surprised to have heard this assertion. Mrs Mowbray, as I have before said, was the spoiled child of rich
parents; who, as geniuses were rarer in those days than they are now,
spite of their own ignorance, rejoiced to find themselves the parents of
a genius; and as their daughter always disliked the usual occupations
of her sex, the admiring father and mother contented themselves with
allowing her to please herself; say to each other, 'She must not be
managed in a common way; for you know, my dear, she is one of your
geniuses,--and they are never like other folks.' Mrs Woodville, the mother, had been brought up with all the ideas of
economy and housewifery which at that time of day prevailed in the city,
and influenced the education of the daughters of citizens. 'My dear,' said she one day to Adeline, 'as you are no genius, you know,
like your mother, (and God forbid you should! for one is quite enough in
a family,) I shall make bold to teach you every thing that young women
in my young days used to learn, and my daughter may thank me for it some
time or other: for you know, my dear, when I and my good man die, what
in the world would come of my poor Edith, if so be she had no one to
manage for her! for, Lord love you! she knows no more of managing a
family, and such-like, than a newborn babe.' 'And can you, dear grandmother, teach me to be of use to my mother?' said Adeline. 'To be sure, child; for as you are no genius, no doubt you can learn all
them sort of things that women commonly know:--so we will begin
directly.' In a short time Adeline, stimulated by the ambition of being useful,
(for she had often heard her mother assert that utility was the
foundation of all virtue,) became as expert in household affairs as Mrs
Woodville herself: even the department of making pastry was now given up
to Adeline, and the servants always came to her for orders, saying, that
'as their mistress was a learned lady, and that, and so could not be
spoken with except here and there on occasion, they wished their young
mistress, who was more easy spoken, would please to order:' and as Mr
and Mrs Woodville's infirmities increased every day, Adeline soon
thought it right to assume the entire management of the family. She also took upon herself the office of almoner to Mrs Woodville, and
performed it with an activity unknown to her; for she herself carried
the broth and wine that were to comfort the infirm cottager; she herself
saw the medicine properly administered that was to preserve his suffering
existence: the comforts the poor required she purchased herself; and in
sickness she visited, in sorrow she wept with them. And though Adeline
was almost unknown personally to the neighbouring gentry, she was
followed with blessings by the surrounding cottagers; while many a
humble peasant watched at the gate of the park to catch a glimpse of
his young benefactress, and pray to God to repay to the heiress of
Rosevalley the kindness which she had shown to him and his offspring. Thus happy, because usefully employed, and thus beloved and respected,
because actively benevolent, passed the early years of Adeline Mowbray;
and thus was she educated, before her mother had completed her system of
education. It was not long before Adeline took on herself a still more important
office. Mrs Mowbray's steward was detected in very dishonest practices;
but, as she was too much devoted to her studies to like to look into her
affairs with a view to dismiss him, she could not be prevailed on to
discharge him from her service. Fortunately, however, her father on his
death-bed made it his request that she would do so; and Mrs Mowbray
pledged herself to obey him. 'But what shall I do for a steward in Davison's place?' said she soon
after her father died. 'Is one absolutely necessary?' returned Adeline modestly. 'Surely
farmer Jenkins would undertake to do all that is necessary for half the
money; and, if he were properly overlooked--'

'And pray who can overlook him properly?' asked Mrs Mowbray. 'My grandmother and I,' replied Adeline timidly: 'we both like business
and--'

'Like business!--but what do you know of it?' 'Know!' cried Mrs Woodville, 'why, daughter, Lina is very clever at it,
I assure you!' 'Astonishing! She knows nothing yet of accounts.' 'Dear me! how mistaken you are, child! She knows accounts perfectly
well.' 'Impossible!' replied Mrs Mowbray: 'who should have taught her? I have
been inventing an easy method of learning arithmetic, by which I was
going to teach her in a few months.' 'Yes, child: but I, thinking it a pity that the poor girl should learn
nothing, like, till she was to learn every thing, taught her according
to the old way; and I cannot but say she took to it very kindly. Did not
you, Lina?' 'Yes, grandmother,' said Adeline; 'and as I love arithmetic very much,
I am quite anxious to keep all my mother's accounts, and overlook the
accounts of the person whom she shall employ to manage her estates in
future.' To this Mrs Mowbray, half pleased and half mortified, at length
consented; and Adeline and farmer Jenkins entered upon their
occupations. Shortly after Mrs Woodville was seized with her last
illness; and Adeline neglected every other duty, and Mrs Mowbray
her studies, 'to watch, and weep, beside a parent's bed.' But watch and weep was all that Mrs Mowbray did: with every possible
wish to be useful, she had so long given way to habits of abstraction,
and neglect of everyday occupations, that she was rather a hindrance
than a help in the sick room. During Adeline's illness, excessive fear of losing her only child had
indeed awakened her to unusual exertion; and as all that she had to
do was to get down, at stated times, a certain quantity of wine and
nourishment, her task though wearisome was not difficult: but to sooth
the declining hours of an aged parent, to please the capricious appetite
of decay, to assist with ready and skilful alacrity the shaking hand of
the invalid, jealous of waiting on herself and wanting to be cheated
into being waited upon;--these trifling yet important details did not
suit the habits of Mrs Mowbray. But Adeline was versed in them all; and
her mother, conscious of her superiority in these things, was at last
contented to sit by inactive, though not unmoved. One day, when Mrs Mowbray had been prevailed upon to lie down for an
hour or two in another apartment, and Adeline was administering to Mrs
Woodville some broth which she had made herself, the old lady pressed
her hand affectionately, and cried, 'Ah! child, in a lucky hour I made
bold to interfere, and teach you what your mother was too clever to
learn. Wise was I to think one genius enough in a family,--else, what
should I have done now? My daughter, though the best child in the world,
could never have made such nice broth as this to comfort me, so hot, and
boiled to a minute like! bless her! she'd have tried, that she would,
but ten to one but she'd have smoked it, overturned it, and scalt her
fingers into the bargain.--Ah, Lina, Lina! mayhap the time will come
when you, should you have a sick husband or a child to nurse, may bless
your poor grandmother for having taught you to be useful.' 'Dear grandmother,' said Adeline tenderly, 'the time has come: I am, you
see, useful to you; and therefore I bless you already for having taught
me to be so.' 'Good girl, good girl! just what I would have you! And forgive me, Lina,
when I own that I have often thanked God for not making you a genius! Not but what no child can behave better than mine; for, with all her
wit and learning, she was always so respectful, and so kind to me and
my dear good man, that I am sure I could not but rejoice in such a
daughter; though, to be sure, I used to wish she was more conversible
like; for, as to the matter of a bit of chat, we never gossiped together
in our lives. And though, to be sure, the squires' ladies about are none
of the brightest, and not to compare with my Edith, yet still they would
have done for me and my dear good man to gossip a bit with. So I was
vexed when my daughter declared she wanted all her time for her studies,
and would not visit any body, no, not even Mrs Norberry, who is to be
sure a very good sort of a woman, though a little given to speak ill of
her neighbours. But then so we are all, you know: and, as I say, why, if
one spoke well of all alike, what would be the use of one person's being
better than his neighbours, except for conscience's sake? But, as I was
going to say, my daughter was pleased to compliment me, and declare she
was sure I could amuse myself without visiting women so much inferior to
me; and she advised my beginning a course of study, as she called it.' 'And did you?' asked Adeline with surprise. 'Yes. To oblige her, my good man and I began to read one Mr Locke on the
Conduct of the Human Understanding; which my daughter said would teach
us to think.' 'To think?' said Adeline. 'Yes.--Now, you must know, my poor husband did not look upon it as very
respectful like in Edith to say that, because it seemed to say that we
had lived all these years without having thought at all; which was not
true, to be sure, because we were never thoughtless like, and my husband
was so staid when a boy that he was called a little old man.' 'But I am sure,' said Adeline, half smiling, 'that my mother did not
mean to insinuate that you wanted proper thought.' 'No, I dare say not,' resumed the old lady, 'and so I told my husband,
and so we set to study this book: but, dear me! it was Hebrew Greek to
us--and so dull!' 'Then you did not get through it, I suppose?' 'Through it, bless your heart! No--not three pages! So my good man says
to Edith, says he, "You gave us this book, I think, child, to teach us
to think?" "Yes, sir," says she. "And it has taught us to think," says
he:--"it has taught us to think that it is very dull and disagreeable." So my daughter laughed, and said her father was witty; but, poor soul! he did not mean it. 'Well, then: as, to amuse us, we liked to look at the stars sometimes,
she told us we had better learn their names, and study astronomy; and so
we began that: but that was just as bad as Mr Locke; and we knew no more
of the stars and planets, than the man in the moon. Yet that's not right
to say, neither; for, as he is so much nearer the stars, he must know
more about them than any one whomsoever. So at last my daughter found
out that learning was not our taste; so she left us to please ourselves,
and play cribbage and draughts in an evening as usual.' Here the old lady paused, and Adeline said affectionately, 'Dear
grandmother, I doubt you exert yourself too much: so much talking can't
be good for you.' 'O! yes, child!' replied Mrs. Woodville: 'it is no trouble at all to me,
I assure you, but quite natural and pleasant like: besides, you know I
shall not be able to talk much longer, so let me make the most of my
time now.' This speech brought tears into the eyes of Adeline; and seeing her
mother re-enter the room, she withdrew to conceal the emotion which she
felt, lest the cheerful loquacity of the invalid, which she was fond of
indulging, should be checked by seeing her tears. But it had already
received a check from the presence of Mrs Mowbray, of whose superior
abilities Mrs Woodville was so much in awe, that, concluding her daughter
could not bear to hear her nonsense, the old lady smiled kindly on her
when with a look of tender anxiety she hastened to her bedside, and
then, holding her hand, composed herself to sleep. In a few days more, she breathed her last on the supporting arm of
Adeline; and lamented in her dying moments, that she had nothing
valuable in money to leave, in order to show Adeline how sensible she
was of her affectionate attentions: 'but you are an only child,' she
added, 'and all your mother has will be yours.' 'No doubt,' observed Mrs Mowbray eagerly; and her mother died
contented. At this period Adeline's ambition had led her to form new plans, which
Mrs Woodville's death left her at liberty to put in execution. Whenever
the old lady reminded her that she was no genius, Adeline had felt as
much degraded as if she had said that she was no conjuror; and though
she was too humble to suppose that she could ever equal her mother, she
was resolved to try to make herself more worthy of her, by imitating
her in those pursuits and studies on which were founded Mrs Mowbray's
pretensions to superior talents. She therefore made it her business to inquire what those studies and
pursuits were; and finding that Mrs Mowbray's noted superiority was
built on her passion for abstruse speculations, Adeline eagerly devoted
her leisure hours to similar studies: but, unfortunately, these new
theories, and these romantic reveries, which only served to amuse
Mrs Mowbray's fancy, her more enthusiastic daughter resolved to make
conscientiously the rules of her practice. And while Mrs Mowbray
expended her eccentric philosophy in words, as Mr Shandy did his grief,
Adeline carefully treasured up hers in her heart, to be manifested only
by its fruits. One author in particular, by a train of reasoning captivating though
sophistical, and plausible though absurd, made her a delighted convert
to his opinions, and prepared her young and impassioned heart for the
practice of vice, by filling her mind, ardent in the love of virtue,
with new and singular opinions on the subject of moral duty. On the works
of this writer Adeline had often heard her mother descant in terms of
the highest praise; but she did not feel herself so completely his
convert on her own conviction, till she had experienced the fatal
fascination of his style, and been conveyed by his bewitching pen from
the world as it is, into a world as it _ought_ to be. This writer, whose name was Glenmurray, amongst other institutions,
attacked the institution of marriage; and after having elaborately
pointed out its folly and its wickedness, he drew so delightful a
picture of the superior purity, as well as happiness, of an union
cemented by no ties but those of love and honour, that Adeline, wrought
to the highest pitch of enthusiasm for a new order of things, entered
into a solemn compact with herself to act, when she was introduced into
society, according to the rules laid down by this writer. Unfortunately for her, she had no opportunity of hearing these opinions
combated by the good sense and sober experience of Dr Norberry then
their sole visitant; for at this time the American war was the object
of attention to all Europe: and as Mrs Mowbray, as well as Dr Norberry,
were deeply interested in this subject, they scarcely ever talked on
any other; and even Glenmurray and his theories were driven from Mrs
Mowbray's remembrance by political tracts and the eager anxieties of
a politician. Nor had she even leisure to observe, that while she was
feeling all the generous anxiety of a citizen of the world for the sons
and daughters of American independence, her own child was imbibing,
through her means, opinions dangerous to her well-being as a member of
any civilized society, and laying, perhaps, the foundation to herself
and her mother of future misery and disgrace. Alas! the astrologer in
the fable was but too like Mrs Mowbray! But even had Adeline had an opportunity of discussing her new opinions
with Dr Norberry, it is not at all certain that she would have had the
power. Mrs Mowbray was, if I may be allowed the expression, a showing-off
woman, and loved the information which she acquired, less for its own
sake than for the supposed importance which it gave her amongst her
acquaintance, and the means of displaying her superiority over other
women. Before she secluded herself from society in order to study
education, she had been the terror of the ladies in the neighbourhood;
since, despising small talk, she would always insist on making the
gentlemen of her acquaintance (as much terrified sometimes as their
wives) engage with her in some literary or political conversation. She wanted to convert every drawing-room into an arena for the mind,
and all her guests into intellectual gladiators. She was often heard
to interrupt two grave matrons in an interesting discussion of an
accouchement, by asking them if they had read a new theological tract,
or a pamphlet against the minister? If they softly expatiated on the
lady-like fatigue of body which they had endured, she discoursed in
choice terms on the energies of the mind; and she never received or paid
visits without convincing the company that she was the most wise, most
learned, and most disagreeable of companions. But Adeline, on the contrary, studied merely from the love of study,
and not with a view to shine in conversation; nor dared she venture
to expatiate on subjects which she had often heard Mrs Woodville say
were very rarely canvassed, or even alluded to, by women. She remained
silent, therefore, on the subject nearest her heart, from choice as well
as necessity, in the presence of Dr Norberry, till at length she imbibed
the political mania herself, and soon found it impossible to conceal
the interest which she took in the success of the infant republic. She
therefore one day put into the doctor's hands some _bouts rimes_ which
she had written on some recent victory of the American arms; exclaiming
with a smile, 'I, too, am a politician!' and was rewarded by an
exclamation of 'Why girl--I protest you are as clever as your mother!' This unexpected declaration fixed her in the path of literary ambition:
and though wisely resolved to fulfil, as usual, every feminine duty,
Adeline was convinced that she, like her mother, had a right to be an
author, a politician, and a philosopher; while Dr Norberry's praises of
her daughter convinced Mrs Mowbray, that almost unconsciously she had
educated her into a prodigy, and confirmed her in her intention of
exhibiting herself and Adeline to the admiring world during the next
season at Bath; for at Bath she expected to receive that admiration
which she had vainly sought in London. Soon after their marriage, Mr Mowbray had carried his lively bride to
the metropolis, where she expected to receive the same homage which had
been paid to her charms at the assize-balls in her neighbourhood. What
then must have been her disappointment, when, instead of hearing as
she passed, 'That is Miss Woodville, the rich heiress--or the great
genius--or the great beauty'--or, 'That is the beautiful Mrs Mowbray,'
she walked unknown and unobserved in public and in private, and found
herself of as little importance in the wide world of the metropolis, as
the most humble of her acquaintance in a country ball-room. True, she
had beauty, but then it was unset-off by fashion; nay, more, it was
eclipsed by unfashionable and tasteless attire; and her manner, though
stately and imposing in an assembly where she was known, was wholly
unlike the manners of the world, and in a London party appeared arrogant
and offensive. Her remarks, too, wise as they appeared to her and Mr
Mowbray, excited little attention,--as the few persons to whom they were
known in the metropolis were wholly ignorant of her high pretensions,
and knew not that they were discoursing with a professed genius, and
the oracle of a provincial circle. Some persons, indeed, surprised at
hearing from the lips of eighteen, observations on morals, theology, and
politics, listened to her with wonder, and even attention, but turned
away observing--

  'Such things, 'tis true, are neither new nor rare,
   The only wonder is, how they got there:'

till at length, disappointed, mortified, and disgusted, Mrs Mowbray
impatiently returned to Rosevalley, where in beauty, in learning, and in
grandeur she was unrivalled, and where she might deal out her dogmas,
sure of exciting respectful attention, however she might fail of calling
for a more flattering tribute from her auditors. But in the narrower
field of Bath she expected to shine forth with greater éclat than in
London, and to obtain admiration more worthy of her acceptance than any
which a country circle could offer. To Bath, therefore, she prepared to
go; and the young heart of Adeline beat high with pleasure at the idea
of mixing with that busy world which her fancy had often clothed in the
most winning attractions. But her joy, and Mrs Mowbray's was a little over-clouded at the
moment of their departure, by the sight of Dr Norberry's melancholy
countenance. What was to be, as they fondly imagined, their gain, was
his loss, and with a full heart he came to bid them adieu. For Adeline he had conceived not only affection, but esteem amounting
almost to veneration; for she appeared to him to unite various and
opposing excellencies. Though possessed of taste and talents for
literature, she was skilled in the minutest details of housewifery and
feminine occupations: and at the same time she bore her faculties so
meekly, that she never wounded the self-love of any one, by arrogating
to herself any superiority. Such Adeline appeared to her excellent old friend; and his affection
for her was, perhaps, increased by the necessity which he was under
of concealing it at home. The praises of Mrs Mowbray and Adeline were
odious to the ears of Mrs Norberry and her daughters,--but especially
the praises of the latter,--as the merit of Adeline was so uniform, that
even the eye of envy could not at that period discover any thing in
her vulnerable to censure: and as the sound of her name excited in
his family a number of bad passions and corresponding expressions of
countenance, the doctor wisely resolved to keep his feelings, with
regard to her, locked up in his own bosom. But he persisted in visiting at the Park daily; and it is no wonder,
therefore, that the loss, even for a few months, of the society of its
inhabitants should by him be anticipated as a serious calamity. 'Pshaw!' cried he, as Adeline, with an exulting bound sprung after her
mother into the carriage, 'how gay and delighted you are! though my
heart feels sadly queer and heavy.' 'My dear friend,' cried Mrs Mowbray, 'I must miss your society wherever
I go.' --'I wish you were going too,' said Adeline: 'I shall often think
of you.' 'Pshaw, girl! don't lie,' replied Dr Norberry, swallowing a
sigh as he spoke: 'you will soon forget an old fellow like me.' --'Then
I conclude that you will soon forget us.'--'He!