"It's no possible!" exclaimed the deacon. "Possible here or possible there, Mr Girdwood," quo' I, "it's oure cauld
for me to stand talking wi' you here; we'll learn the rights o't in the
morning; so, good-night;" and with that I pulled down the window. But
scarcely had I done so, when a shout of laughter came gathering up the
street, and soon after poor drunken Robin was brought along by the cuff
of the neck, between two of the town-officers, one of them carrying his
drum. The next day he was put out of office for ever, and folk
recollecting in what manner I had acted towards him before, the outcry
about my arbitrary power was forgotten in the blame that was heaped upon
those who had espoused Robin's cause against me. For a long period of time, I had observed that there was a gradual mixing
in of the country gentry among the town's folks. This was partly to be
ascribed to a necessity rising out of the French Revolution, whereby men
of substance thought it an expedient policy to relax in their ancient
maxims of family pride and consequence; and partly to the great increase
and growth of wealth which the influx of trade caused throughout the
kingdom, whereby the merchants were enabled to vie and ostentate even
with the better sort of lairds. The effect of this, however, was less
protuberant in our town than in many others which I might well name, and
the cause thereof lay mainly in our being more given to deal in the small
way; not that we lacked of traders possessed both of purse and
perseverance; but we did not exactly lie in the thoroughfare of those
mighty masses of foreign commodities, the throughgoing of which left, to
use the words of the old proverb, "goud in goupins" with all who had the
handling of the same. Nevertheless, we came in for our share of the
condescensions of the country gentry; and although there was nothing like
a melting down of them among us, either by marrying or giving in
marriage, there was a communion that gave us some insight, no overly to
their advantage, as to the extent and measure of their capacities and
talents. In short, we discovered that they were vessels made of ordinary
human clay; so that, instead of our reverence for them being augmented by
a freer intercourse, we thought less and less of them, until, poor
bodies, the bit prideful lairdies were just looked down upon by our
gawsie big-bellied burgesses, not a few of whom had heritable bonds on
their estates. But in this I am speaking of the change when it had come
to a full head; for in verity it must be allowed that when the country
gentry, with their families, began to intromit among us, we could not
make enough of them. Indeed, we were deaved about the affability of old
crabbit Bodle of Bodletonbrae, and his sister, Miss Jenny, when they
favoured us with their company at the first inspection ball. I'll ne'er
forgot that occasion; for being then in my second provostry, I had, in
course of nature, been appointed a deputy lord-lieutenant, and the town-
council entertaining the inspecting officers, and the officers of the
volunteers, it fell as a duty incumbent on me to be the director of the
ball afterwards, and to the which I sent an invitation to the laird and
his sister little hoping or expecting they would come. But the laird,
likewise being a deputy lord-lieutenant, he accepted the invitation, and
came with his sister in all the state of pedigree in their power. Such a
prodigy of old-fashioned grandeur as Miss Jenny was!--but neither shop
nor mantuamaker of our day and generation had been the better o't. She
was just, as some of the young lasses said, like Clarissa Harlowe, in the
cuts and copperplates of Mrs Rickerton's set of the book, and an older
and more curious set than Mrs Rickerton's was not in the whole town;
indeed, for that matter, I believe it was the only one among us, and it
had edified, as Mr Binder the bookseller used to say, at least three
successive generations of young ladies, for he had himself given it twice
new covers. We had, however, not then any circulating library. But for
all her antiquity and lappets, it is not to be supposed what respect and
deference Miss Jenny and her brother, the laird, received--nor the small
praise that came to my share, for having had the spirit to invite them. The ball was spoken of as the genteelest in the memory of man, although
to my certain knowledge, on account of the volunteers, some were there
that never thought to mess or mell in the same chamber with Bodletonbrae
and his sister, Miss Jenny. Intending these notations for the instruction of posterity, it would not
be altogether becoming of me to speak of the domestic effects which many
of the things that I have herein jotted down had in my own family. I
feel myself, however, constrained in spirit to lift aside a small bit of
the private curtain, just to show how Mrs Pawkie comported herself in the
progressive vicissitudes of our prosperity, in the act and doing of which
I do not wish to throw any slight on her feminine qualities; for, to
speak of her as she deserves at my hand, she has been a most excellent
wife, and a decent woman, and had aye a ruth and ready hand for the
needful. Still, to say the truth, she is not without a few little
weaknesses like her neighbours, and the ill-less vanity of being thought
far ben with the great is among others of her harmless frailities. Soon after the inspection ball before spoken of, she said to me that it
would be a great benefit and advantage to our family if we could get
Bodletonbrae and his sister, and some of the other country gentry, to
dine with us. I was not very clear about how the benefit was to come to
book, for the outlay I thought as likely o'ergang the profit; at the same
time, not wishing to baulk Mrs Pawkie of a ploy on which I saw her mind
was bent, I gave my consent to her and my daughters to send out the
cards, and make the necessary preparations. But herein I should not take
credit to myself for more of the virtue of humility than was my due;
therefore I open the door of my secret heart so far ajee, as to let the
reader discern that I was content to hear our invitations were all
accepted. Of the specialities and dainties of the banquet prepared, it is not
fitting that I should treat in any more particular manner, than to say
they were the best that could be had, and that our guests were all
mightily well pleased. Indeed, my wife was out of the body with
exultation when Mrs Auchans of that Ilk begged that she would let her
have a copy of the directions she had followed in making a flummery,
which the whole company declared was most excellent. This compliment was
the more pleasant, as Lady Auchans was well known for her skill in
savoury contrivances, and to have anything new to her of the sort was a
triumph beyond our most sanguine expectations. In a word, from that day
we found that we had taken, as it were, a step above the common in the
town. There were, no doubt, some who envied our good fortune; but, upon
the whole, the community at large were pleased to see the consideration
in which their chief magistrate was held. It reflected down, as it were,
upon themselves a glaik of the sunshine that shone upon us; and although
it may be a light thing, as it is seemingly a vain one, to me to say, I
am now pretty much of Mrs Pawkie's opinion, that our cultivation of an
intercourse with the country gentry was, in the end, a benefit to our
family, in so far as it obtained, both for my sons and daughters, a
degree of countenance that otherwise could hardly have been expected from
their connexions and fortune, even though I had been twice provost. But a sad accident shortly after happened, which had the effect of making
it as little pleasant to me to vex Mr Hickery with a joke about the
Tappit-hen, as it was to him. Widow Fenton, as I have soberly hinted;
for it is not a subject to be openly spoken of, had many ill-assorted and
irregular characters among her customers; and a gang of play-actors
coming to the town, and getting leave to perform in Mr Dribble's barn,
batches of the young lads, both gentle and semple, when the play was
over, used to adjourn to her house for pies and porter, the commodities
in which she chiefly dealt. One night, when the deep tragedy of Mary
Queen of Scots was the play, there was a great concourse of people at
"The Theatre Royal," and the consequence was, that the Tappit-hen's
house, both but and ben, was, at the conclusion, filled to overflowing. The actress that played Queen Elizabeth, was a little-worth termagant
woman, and, in addition to other laxities of conduct, was addicted to the
immorality of taking more than did her good, and when in her cups, she
would rant and ring fiercer than old Queen Elizabeth ever could do
herself. Queen Mary's part was done by a bonny genty young lady, that
was said to have run away from a boarding-school, and, by all accounts,
she acted wonderful well. But she too was not altogether without a flaw,
so that there was a division in the town between their admirers and
visiters; some maintaining, as I was told, that Mrs Beaufort, if she
would keep herself sober, was not only a finer woman, but more of a lady,
and a better actress, than Miss Scarborough, while others considered her
as a vulgar regimental virago. The play of Mary Queen of Scots, causing a great congregation of the
rival partizans of the two ladies to meet in the Tappit-hen's public,
some contention took place about the merits of their respective
favourites, and, from less to more, hands were raised, and blows given,
and the trades'-lads, being as hot in their differences as the gentlemen,
a dreadful riot ensued. Gillstoups, porter bottles, and penny pies flew
like balls and bomb-shells in battle. Mrs Fenton, with her mutch off,
and her hair loose, with wide and wild arms, like a witch in a whirlwind,
was seen trying to sunder the challengers, and the champions. Finding,
however, her endeavours unavailing, and fearing that murder would be
committed, she ran like desperation into the streets, crying for help. I
was just at the time stepping into my bed, when I heard the uproar, and,
dressing myself again, I went out to the street; for the sound and din of
the riot came raging through the silence of the midnight, like the
tearing and swearing of the multitude at a house on fire, and I thought
no less an accident could be the cause. On going into the street, I met several persons running to the scene of
action, and, among others, Mrs Beaufort, with a gallant of her own, and
both of them no in their sober senses. It's no for me to say who he was;
but assuredly, had the woman no been doited with drink, she never would
have seen any likeness between him and me, for he was more than twenty
years my junior. However, onward we all ran to Mrs Fenton's house, where
the riot, like a raging caldron boiling o'er, had overflowed into the
street. The moment I reached the door, I ran forward with my stick raised, but
not with any design of striking man, woman, or child, when a ramplor
devil, the young laird of Swinton, who was one of the most outstrapolous
rakes about the town, wrenched it out of my grip, and would have, I dare
say, made no scruple of doing me some dreadful bodily harm, when suddenly
I found myself pulled out of the crowd by a powerful-handed woman, who
cried, "Come, my love; love, come:" and who was this but that scarlet
strumpet, Mrs Beaufort, who having lost her gallant in the crowd, and
being, as I think, blind fou, had taken me for him, insisting before all
present that I was her dear friend, and that she would die for me--with
other siclike fantastical and randy ranting, which no queen in a tragedy
could by any possibility surpass. At first I was confounded and
overtaken, and could not speak; and the worst of all was, that, in a
moment, the mob seemed to forget their quarrel, and to turn in derision
on me. What might have ensued it would not be easy to say; but just at
this very critical juncture, and while the drunken latheron was casting
herself into antic shapes of distress, and flourishing with her hands and
arms to the heavens at my imputed cruelty, two of the town-officers came
up, which gave me courage to act a decisive part; so I gave over to them
Mrs Beaufort, with all her airs, and, going myself to the guardhouse,
brought a file of soldiers, and so quelled the riot. But from that night
I thought it prudent to eschew every allusion to Mrs Fenton, and tacitly
to forgive even Swinton for the treatment I had received from him, by
seeming as if I had not noticed him, although I had singled him out by
name. Mrs Pawkie, on hearing what I had suffered from Mrs Beaufort, was very
zealous that I should punish her to the utmost rigour of the law, even to
drumming her out of the town; but forbearance was my best policy, so I
only persuaded my colleagues to order the players to decamp, and to give
the Tappit-hen notice, that it would be expedient for the future sale of
her pies and porter, at untimeous hours, and that she should flit her
howff from our town. Indeed, what pleasure would it have been to me to
have dealt unmercifully, either towards the one or the other?