_Old Play._

That evening, after the departure of the noble and distressed Musgrave,
Douglas was sitting all alone musing in a secret apartment of the
pavilion, when he heard a gentle tap at the door. "Who's there?" inquired he surlily: "It is I, my lor'," said a petulant treble voice
without. "Aha! my excellent nondescript little fellow, Colin Roy, is it
you? Why, you may come in." Colin entered dressed in a most elegant and
whimsical livery, and, forgetting himself, made the Douglas two or three
graceful courtesies instead of bows. "Aye, hem," said he, "that's very well for the page of a princess. I
suppose you have been studying the graces from your accomplished
mistress? But where have you been all this while? I have felt the loss
of you from my hand grievously." "I have been waiting on my royal mistress, my lor', informing her of all
that is going on at the siege, and of your good fortune in the late
captures you have made, wherein she rejoices exceedingly, and wishes you
all good fortune and forward success; and, in token of kind remembrance,
she sends you this heart of ruby set in gold and diamonds,--a gem that
befits your lordship well to wear. And many more matters she has given
me in charge, my lor'." Douglas kissed the locket, and put it in his bosom, and then uttered
abundance of the extravagant bombast peculiar to that age. He called her
his guardian angel, his altar of incense, and the saint of his devotion,
the buckler of his arm, the sword in his hand, and the jewel of his
heart. "Do you think, Colin," added he, "that ever there was a maiden
born like this royal lady of my love?" "Why, my lor', I am not much skilled in these matters, but I believe the
wench, my mistress, is well enough;--that is, she is well formed. And
yet she is but so so." "How dare you, you piece of unparalleled impudence, talk of your royal
mistress in that strain? Or where did you ever see a form or features so
elegant, and so bewitchingly lovely?" "Do you think so?--Well, I'm glad of it. I think she is coarse and
masculine. Where did I ever see such a form, indeed! Yes I have seen a
much finer limb, and an arm, and a hand too! What think you of that for
a hand, my lor'?" --(and with that the urchin clapped his hand on the
green table, first turning up the one side of it and then the
other.) --"I say if that hand were as well kept, and that arm as well
loaden with bracelets, and the fingers with diamond rings, it would be
as handsome as your princess's, of which you boast so much,--aye, and
handsomer too." "You are a privileged boy, Colin, otherwise I would kick you heartily,
and, moreover, cause you to be whipped by the hand of the common
executioner. However, you are a confidant,--all is well from you; and,
to say the truth, yours is a very handsome hand for a boy's hand,--so is
your arm. But what are they to those of my lovely and royal
Margaret?--mere deformity! the husk to the wheat!" "Indeed, my lor', you have an excellent taste, and a no less gifted
discernment!" "I cannot conceive of any earthly being equalling my beauteous princess,
whether in the qualifications of body or mind." "I rejoice to hear it. How blind love is! Why, in sober reality, there
is the Lady Jane Howard. Is there any comparison between the princess
and that lady in beauty?" "She is, I confess, a most exquisite creature, Colin, even though rival
to my adorable lady; in justice it must be acknowledged she is _almost_
peerless in beauty. I do not wonder at Musgrave's valour when I see the
object of it. But why do you redden as with anger, boy, to hear my
commendations of that hapless lady?" "I, my lord? How should I redden with anger? On my honour, craving my
Lord Douglas' pardon, I am highly pleased. I think she is much more
beautiful than you have said, and that, you should have spoken of her in
a more superlative degree, and confessed frankly that you would
willingly exchange your betrothed lady for her. I cannot chuse but think
her very beautiful; too beautiful, indeed, with her blue eyes, white
teeth, and ruddy lips. I dont like such bright blue eyes. I could almost
find in my heart to scratch them out, she is so like a wanton. So you
don't wonder at Lord Musgrave's valour, after having seen his mistress? Well, I advise your lordship, your captainship, and your besiegership,
that there are some who wonder very much at your want of valour. I tell
you this in confidence. My mistress thinks you hold her charms only at a
small avail, that you have not _gone into_ that castle long ago, and
turned out these Englishmen, or hung them up by the necks if they
refused. Musgrave went in and took it at once, for the favour of his
mistress; because, forsooth, he deemed her worthy of the honour of such
a bold emprize. Why, then, do not you do the same? My mistress, to be
sure, is a woman,--a very woman; but she says this, that it is
superabundantly ungallant of you not to have _gone in_ and taken
possession of the castle long ago. Do you know that (poor kind
creature!) she has retired to a convent, where she continues in a state
of sufferance, using daily invocations at the shrines of saints for your
success. And she has, moreover, made a vow not to braid her hair, nor
dress herself in princely apparel until the day of your final success. Surely, my lor', you ought _to take that castle_, and relieve my dear
mistress from this durance. I almost weep when I think of her, and must
say with her that she has been shabbily used, and that she has reason to
envy Lady Jane Howard even in her captivity." "Colin, you are abundantly impertinent: but there is no stopping of
your tongue once it is set a-going. As to the taking of castles, these
things come not under the cognizance of boys or women. But indeed I knew
not that my sovereign lady the princess had absconded from the courtly
circle of her father's palace, and betaken herself to a convent on my
account. Every thing that I hear of that jewel endears her to me the
more." "What? even her orders for you _to go into the castle_, and put out the
English? I assure you, my lor', she insists upon it. Whether it is her
impatience to be your bride, I know not, but she positively will not be
satisfied unless you very soon _go into that castle_, and put the
Englishmen all to the outside of it, where you are now; or hang them,
and bury them out of sight before she visits the place to congratulate
you." "Boy, I have no patience with you. Cease your prating, and inform me
where my beloved mistress is, that I may instantly visit her." "No; not for the Douglas' estate, which is now in the fire, and may
soon be brought to the anvil, will I inform you of that. But, my lor',
you know I must execute my commission. And I tell you again, unless you
take this castle very soon, you will not only lose the favour of my
mistress, but you will absolutely break her heart. Nothing less will
satisfy her. I told her, there was a great moat, more than a hundred
feet deep, and as many wide, that surrounded the castle, and flowed up
to the base of its walls; that there was a large river on each side of
it, and that they were both dammed and appeared like two standing
seas--but all availed nought. 'There is a moat,' said I; 'But let him go
over that,' said she; 'let him swim it, or put a float on it. What is it
to cross a pool a hundred feet wide? How did Lord Musgrave pass over
it?' 'There are strong walls on the other side,' said I: 'But let him go
over these,' said she, 'or break a hole through them and go in. Men
built the walls, why may not men pull them down? How did Musgrave get
over them?' 'There are armed men within,' said I: 'But they are only
Englishmen,' said she; 'Let Douglas' men put their swords into them,
and make them stand back. How did Musgrave get in when it was defended
by gallant Scots? Douglas is either no lover, or else no warrior,' added
she; 'or perhaps he is neither the one nor the other.'" "Peace, sapling," said Douglas, frowning and stamping with his foot,
"Peace, and leave the pavilion instantly." Colin went away visibly
repressing a laugh, which irritated Douglas still the more; and as the
urchin went, he muttered in a crying whine, "My mistress is very
shabbily used!--very shabbily! To have promised herself to a knight if
he will but take a castle for her, and to have fasted, and prayed, and
vowed vows for him, and yet he dares not go in and take it. And I am
shabbily used too; and that I'll tell her! Turned out before I get half
her message delivered! But I must inform you, my lor', before I go, that
since you are making no better use of the advantage given you, I demand
the prisoners back that I lodged in your hand in my lady mistress' name,
and by her orders." "I will do no such thing to the whim of a teasing impertinent stripling,
without my lady princess's hand and seal for it," said Douglas. "You shall not long want that," said Colin; and pulling a letter out
from below his sash, he gave it to him. It was the princess's hand and
seal,--it being an easy matter for Colin to get what letters he listed. Douglas opened it, and read as follows:

     "LORD DOUGLAS,--In token of my best wishes for your success, I send
     you these, with greeting. I hope you will take immediate advantage
     of the high superiority afforded you in this contest, by putting
     some indelible mark, or public stain, on the lusty dame I put into
     your hands. If Musgrave be a knight of any gallantry he will never
     permit it, but yield. As I cannot attend personally, I request that
     the mode and degree of punishment you inflict may be left to my
     page Colin. That you have not been successful by such means
     already, hath much surprised

         MARGARET." "This is not a requisition to give you up the prisoners," said Douglas,
"but merely a request that the punishment inflicted may be left to you,
a request which must not be denied to the lady of my heart. Now, pray,
Master Colin Roy MacAlpin, what punishment do you decree for the Lady
Jane Howard? For my part, though I intended to threaten the most
obnoxious treatment, to induce my opponent to yield, I could not for my
dearest interests injure the person of that exquisite lady." "You could not, in good troth? I suppose my mistress has good reason to
be jealous of you two. But since the power is left with me I shall
prevent that; I shall see her punished as she deserves: I'll have no
shameful exposures of a woman, even were she the meanest plebeian, but
I'll mar her beauty that she thinks so much of, and that _you_ think so
much of. I'll have have her nose cut off; and two of her fore teeth
drawn; and her cheeks and brow scolloped. I'll spoil the indecent
brightness of her gloss! She shall not sparkle with such brilliance
again, nor shall the men gloat, feasting their intolerable eyes on her,
as they do at present." "Saint Duthoe buckler me!" exclaimed the Douglas,--"what an unnatural
tyger cat it is! I have heard that such feelings were sometimes
entertained by one sovereign beauty toward another of the same sex; but
that a sprightly youth, of an amorous complexion, with bright blushing
features and carroty locks, should so depreciate female beauty, and
thirst to deface it, surpasses any thing I have witnessed in the nature
of man. Go to, you are a perverse boy, but shall be humoured as far as
my honour and character as a captain and warrior will admit." Colin paced lightly away, making a slight and graceful courtesy to the
Douglas as he glided out. "What an extraordinary, wayward, and
accomplished youth that is!" said the chief to himself. "Is it not
strange that I should converse so long with a page, as if he were my
equal? There is something in his manner and voice that overcomes me;
and though he teazes me beyond endurance, there is a sort of enchantment
about him, that I cannot give him the check. Ah me! all who submit
themselves to women, to be swayed by them or their delegates, will find
themselves crossed in every action of importance. I am resolved that no
woman shall sway me. I can love, but have not learned to submit." Colin retired to his little apartment in the pavilion; it was close to
the apartment that Douglas occupied while he remained there, and not
much longer or broader than the beautiful and romantic inhabitant. Yet
there he constantly abode when not employed about his lord, and never
mixed or conversed with the other pages. Douglas retired down to the
tower, or King's House, as it was called (from king Edward having
occupied it,) at even tide,--but Colin Roy remained in his apartment at
the pavilion. Alas! that Douglas did not know the value of the life he
left exposed in such a place! On the return of Musgrave into the castle, a council of all the
gentlemen in the fortress was called, and with eager readiness they
attended in the hall of the great western tower. The governor related to
them the heart-rending intelligence of his mistress being in the hands
of their enemies, and of the horrid fate that awaited her, as well as
his only brother, provided the garrison stood out. Every one present
perceived that Musgrave inclined to capitulate; and, as they all admired
him, they pitied his woeful plight. But no one ventured a remark. There
they sat, a silent circle, in bitter and obstinate rumination. Their
brows were plaited down, so as almost to cover their eyes; their under
lips were bent upward, and every mouth shaped like a curve, and their
arms were crossed on their breasts, while every man's right hand
instinctively rested on the hilt of his sword. Musgrave had taken his measures, whichever way the tide should run.