The spirit of life seemed to linger in his form, as a dying flame on an
altar flickers on the embers of an accepted sacrifice. WHEN we arrived at Windsor, I found that Raymond and Perdita had departed for the continent. I
took possession of my sister's cottage, and blessed myself that I lived within view of Windsor Castle. It was a curious fact, that at this period, when by the marriage of Perdita I was allied to one of the
richest individuals in England, and was bound by the most intimate friendship to its chiefest noble, I
experienced the greatest excess of poverty that I had ever known. My knowledge of the worldly
principles of Lord Raymond, would have ever prevented me from applying to him, however deep my
distress might have been. It was in vain that I repeated to myself with regard to Adrian, that his purse
was open to me; that one in soul, as we were, our fortunes ought also to be common. I could never,
while with him, think of his bounty as a remedy to my poverty; and I even put aside hastily his offers
of supplies, assuring him of a falsehood, that I needed them not. How could I say to this generous
being, "Maintain me in idleness. You who have dedicated your powers of mind and fortune to the
benefit of your species, shall you so misdirect your exertions, as to support in uselessness the strong,
healthy, and capable?" And yet I dared not request him to use his influence that I might obtain an honourable provision for
myself-for then I should have been obliged to leave Windsor. I hovered for ever around the walls of
its Castle, beneath its enshadowing thickets; my sole companions were my books and my loving
thoughts. I studied the wisdom of the ancients, and gazed on the happy walls that sheltered the
beloved of my soul. My mind was nevertheless idle. I pored over the poetry of old times; I studied
the metaphysics of Plato and Berkeley. I read the histories of Greece and Rome, and of England's
former periods, and I watched the movements of the lady of my heart. At night I could see her
shadow on the walls of her apartment; by day I viewed her in her flower-garden, or riding in the park
with her usual companions. Methought the charm would be broken if I were seen, but I heard the
music of her voice and was happy. I gave to each heroine of whom I read, her beauty and matchless
excellences-such was Antigone, when she guided the blind Oedipus to the grove of the Eumenides,
and discharged the funeral rites of Polynices; such was Miranda in the unvisited cave of Prospero;
such Haidee, on the sands of the Ionian island. I was mad with excess of passionate devotion; but
pride, tameless as fire, invested my nature, and prevented me from betraying myself by word or
look. In the mean time, while I thus pampered myself with rich mental repasts, a peasant would have
disdained my scanty fare, which I sometimes robbed from the squirrels of the forest. I was, I own,
often tempted to recur to the lawless feats of my boy-hood, and knock down the almost tame
pheasants that perched upon the trees, and bent their bright eyes on me. But they were the property
of Adrian, the nurslings of Idris; and so, although my imagination rendered sensual by privation,
made me think that they would better become the spit in my kitchen, than the green leaves of the
forest,
     Nathelesse,
  I checked my haughty will, and did not eat;
but supped upon sentiment, and dreamt vainly of "such morsels sweet," as I might not waking attain. But, at this period, the whole scheme of my existence was about to change. The orphan and
neglected son of Verney, was on the eve of being linked to the mechanism of society by a golden
chain, and to enter into all the duties and affections of life. Miracles were to be wrought in my
favour, the machine of social life pushed with vast effort backward. Attend, O reader! while I narrate
this tale of wonders! One day as Adrian and Idris were riding through the forest, with their mother and accustomed
companions, Idris, drawing her brother aside from the rest of the cavalcade, suddenly asked him,
"What had become of his friend, Lionel Verney?" "Even from this spot," replied Adrian, pointing to my sister's cottage, "you can see his dwelling." "Indeed!" said Idris, "and why, if he be so near, does he not come to see us, and make one of our
society?" "I often visit him," replied Adrian; "but you may easily guess the motives, which prevent him from
coming where his presence may annoy any one among us." "I do guess them," said Idris, "and such as they are, I would not venture to combat them. Tell me,
however, in what way he passes his time; what he is doing and thinking in his cottage retreat?" "Nay, my sweet sister," replied Adrian, "you ask me more than I can well answer; but if you feel
interest in him, why not visit him? He will feel highly honoured, and thus you may repay a part of the
obligation I owe him, and compensate for the injuries fortune has done him." "I will most readily accompany you to his abode," said the lady, "not that I wish that either of us
should unburthen ourselves of our debt, which, being no less than your life, must remain unpayable
ever. But let us go; to-morrow we will arrange to ride out together, and proceeding towards that part
of the forest, call upon him." The next evening therefore, though the autumnal change had brought on cold and rain, Adrian and
Idris entered my cottage. They found me Curius-like, feasting on sorry fruits for supper; but they
brought gifts richer than the golden bribes of the Sabines, nor could I refuse the invaluable store of
friendship and delight which they bestowed. Surely the glorious twins of Latona were not more
welcome, when, in the infancy of the world, they were brought forth to beautify and enlighten this
"sterile promontory," than were this angelic pair to my lowly dwelling and grateful heart. We sat like
one family round my hearth. Our talk was on subjects, unconnected with the emotions that evidently
occupied each; but we each divined the other's thought, and as our voices spoke of indifferent
matters, our eyes, in mute language, told a thousand things no tongue could have uttered. They left me in an hour's time. They left me happy-how unspeakably happy. It did not require the
measured sounds of human language to syllable the story of my extasy. Idris had visited me; Idris I
should again and again see-my imagination did not wander beyond the completeness of this
knowledge. I trod air; no doubt, no fear, no hope even, disturbed me; I clasped with my soul the
fulness of contentment, satisfied, undesiring, beatified. For many days Adrian and Idris continued to visit me thus. In this dear intercourse, love, in the guise
of enthusiastic friendship, infused more and more of his omnipotent spirit. Idris felt it. Yes, divinity of
the world, I read your characters in her looks and gesture; I heard your melodious voice echoed by
her-you prepared for us a soft and flowery path, all gentle thoughts adorned it-your name, O
Love, was not spoken, but you stood the Genius of the Hour, veiled, and time, but no mortal hand,
might raise the curtain. Organs of articulate sound did not proclaim the union of our hearts; for
untoward circumstance allowed no opportunity for the expression that hovered on our lips. Oh my
pen! haste thou to write what was, before the thought of what is, arrests the hand that guides thee. If I lift up my eyes and see the desart earth, and feel that those dear eyes have spent their mortal
lustre, and that those beauteous lips are silent, their "crimson leaves" faded, for ever I am mute! But you live, my Idris, even now you move before me! There was a glade, O reader! a grassy opening
in the wood; the retiring trees left its velvet expanse as a temple for love; the silver Thames bounded
it on one side, and a willow bending down dipt in the water its Naiad hair, dishevelled by the wind's
viewless hand. The oaks around were the home of a tribe of nightingales-there am I now; Idris, in
youth's dear prime, is by my side -remember, I am just twenty-two, and seventeen summers have
scarcely passed over the beloved of my heart. The river swollen by autumnal rains, deluged the low
lands, and Adrian in his favourite boat is employed in the dangerous pastime of plucking the topmost
bough from a submerged oak. Are you weary of life, O Adrian, that you thus play with danger?-
He has obtained his prize, and he pilots his boat through the flood; our eyes were fixed on him
fearfully, but the stream carried him away from us; he was forced to land far lower down, and to
make a considerable circuit before he could join us. "He is safe!" said Idris, as he leapt on shore, and
waved the bough over his head in token of success; "we will wait for him here." We were alone together; the sun had set; the song of the nightingales began; the evening star shone
distinct in the flood of light, which was yet unfaded in the west. The blue eyes of my angelic girl were
fixed on this sweet emblem of herself: "How the light palpitates," she said, "which is that star's life. Its vacillating effulgence seems to say that its state, even like ours upon earth, is wavering and
inconstant; it fears, methinks, and it loves." "Gaze not on the star, dear, generous friend," I cried, "read not love in its trembling rays; look not
upon distant worlds; speak not of the mere imagination of a sentiment. I have long been silent; long
even to sickness have I desired to speak to you, and submit my soul, my life, my entire being to you. Look not on the star, dear love, or do, and let that eternal spark plead for me; let it be my witness
and my advocate, silent as it shines-love is to me as light to the star; even so long as that is
uneclipsed by annihilation, so long shall I love you." Veiled for ever to the world's callous eye must be the transport of that moment. Still do I feel her
graceful form press against my full-fraught heart-still does sight, and pulse, and breath sicken and
fail, at the remembrance of that first kiss. Slowly and silently we went to meet Adrian, whom we
heard approaching. I entreated Adrian to return to me after he had conducted his sister home. And that same evening,
walking among the moon-lit forest paths, I poured forth my whole heart, its transport and its hope,
to my friend. For a moment he looked disturbed-"I might have foreseen this," he said, "what strife
will now ensue! Pardon me, Lionel, nor wonder that the expectation of contest with my mother
should jar me, when else I should delightedly confess that my best hopes are fulfilled, in confiding my
sister to your protection. If you do not already know it, you will soon learn the deep hate my mother
bears to the name Verney. I will converse with Idris; then all that a friend can do, I will do; to her it
must belong to play the lover's part, if she be capable of it." While the brother and sister were still hesitating in what manner they could best attempt to bring
their mother over to their party, she, suspecting our meetings, taxed her children with them; taxed
her fair daughter with deceit, and an unbecoming attachment for one whose only merit was being
the son of the profligate favourite of her imprudent father; and who was doubtless as worthless as
he from whom he boasted his descent. The eyes of Idris flashed at this accusation; she replied, "I do
not deny that I love Verney; prove to me that he is worthless; and I will never see him more." "Dear Madam," said Adrian, "let me entreat you to see him, to cultivate his friendship. You will
wonder then, as I do, at the extent of his accomplishments, and the brilliancy of his talents." (Pardon
me, gentle reader, this is not futile vanity;-not futile, since to know that Adrian felt thus, brings joy
even now to my lone heart). "Mad and foolish boy!" exclaimed the angry lady, "you have chosen with dreams and theories to
overthrow my schemes for your own aggrandizement; but you shall not do the same by those I have
formed for your sister. I but too well understand the fascination you both labour under; since I had
the same struggle with your father, to make him cast off the parent of this youth, who hid his evil
propensities with the smoothness and subtlety of a viper. In those days how often did I hear of his
attractions, his wide spread conquests, his wit, his refined manners. It is well when flies only are
caught by such spiders' webs; but is it for the high-born and powerful to bow their necks to the flimsy
yoke of these unmeaning pretensions? Were your sister indeed the insignificant person she deserves
to be, I would willingly leave her to the fate, the wretched fate, of the wife of a man, whose very
person, resembling as it does his wretched father, ought to remind you of the folly and vice it
typifies-but remember, Lady Idris, it is not alone the once royal blood of England that colours your
veins, you are a Princess of Austria, and every life-drop is akin to emperors and kings. Are you then a
fit mate for an uneducated shepherd-boy, whose only inheritance is his father's tarnished name?" "I can make but one defence," replied Idris, "the same offered by my brother; see Lionel, converse
with my shepherd-boy"--The Countess interrupted her indignantly-"Yours! "-she cried: and then,
smoothing her impassioned features to a disdainful smile, she continued-"We will talk of this
another time. All I now ask, all your mother, Idris, requests is, that you will not see this upstart during
the interval of one month." "I dare not comply," said Idris, "it would pain him too much. I have no right to play with his feelings,
to accept his proffered love, and then sting him with neglect." "This is going too far," her mother answered, with quivering lips, and eyes again instinct by anger. "Nay, Madam," said Adrian, "unless my sister consent never to see him again, it is surely an useless
torment to separate them for a month." "Certainly," replied the ex-queen, with bitter scorn, "his love, and her love, and both their childish
flutterings, are to be put in fit comparison with my years of hope and anxiety, with the duties of the
offspring of kings, with the high and dignified conduct which one of her descent ought to pursue. But
it is unworthy of me to argue and complain. Perhaps you will have the goodness to promise me not
to marry during that interval?" This was asked only half ironically; and Idris wondered why her mother should extort from her a
solemn vow not to do, what she had never dreamed of doing-but the promise was required and
given. All went on cheerfully now; we met as usual, and talked without dread of our future plans. The
Countess was so gentle, and even beyond her wont, amiable with her children, that they began to
entertain hopes of her ultimate consent. She was too unlike them, too utterly alien to their tastes,
for them to find delight in her society, or in the prospect of its continuance, but it gave them
pleasure to see her conciliating and kind. Once even, Adrian ventured to propose her receiving me. She refused with a smile, reminding him that for the present his sister had promised to be patient. One day, after the lapse of nearly a month, Adrian received a letter from a friend in London,
requesting his immediate presence for the furtherance of some important object. Guileless himself,
Adrian feared no deceit. I rode with him as far as Staines: he was in high spirits; and, since I could not
see Idris during his absence, he promised a speedy return. His gaiety, which was extreme, had the
strange effect of awakening in me contrary feelings; a presentiment of evil hung over me; I loitered
on my return; I counted the hours that must elapse before I saw Idris again. Wherefore should this
be? What evil might not happen in the mean time? Might not her mother take advantage of Adrian's
absence to urge her beyond her sufferance, perhaps to entrap her? I resolved, let what would befall,
to see and converse with her the following day. This determination soothed me. To-morrow, loveliest
and best, hope and joy of my life, to-morrow I will see thee-Fool, to dream of a moment's delay! I went to rest. At past midnight I was awaked by a violent knocking. It was now deep winter; it had
snowed, and was still snowing; the wind whistled in the leafless trees, despoiling them of the white
flakes as they fell; its drear moaning, and the continued knocking, mingled wildly with my dreams-
at length I was wide awake; hastily dressing myself, I hurried to discover the cause of this
disturbance, and to open my door to the unexpected visitor. Pale as the snow that showered about
her, with clasped hands, Idris stood before me. "Save me!" she exclaimed, and would have sunk to
the ground had I not supported her. In a moment however she revived, and, with energy, almost
with violence, entreated me to saddle horses, to take her away, away to London-to her brother-at
least to save her. I had no horses-she wrung her hands. "What can I do?" she cried, "I am lost-we
are both for ever lost! But come-come with me, Lionel; here I must not stay,-we can get a chaise
at the nearest post-house; yet perhaps we have time! come, O come with me to save and protect
me!" When I heard her piteous demands, while with disordered dress, dishevelled hair, and aghast looks,
she wrung her hands-the idea shot across me is she also mad?-"Sweet one," and I folded her to
my heart, "better repose than wander further;-rest-my beloved, I will make a fire-you are chill." "Rest!" she cried, "repose! you rave, Lionel! If you delay we are lost; come, I pray you, unless you
would cast me off for ever." That Idris, the princely born, nursling of wealth and luxury, should have come through the
tempestuous winter-night from her regal abode, and standing at my lowly door, conjure me to fly
with her through darkness and storm-was surely a dream-again her plaintive tones, the sight of
her loveliness assured me that it was no vision. Looking timidly around, as if she feared to be
overheard, she whispered: "I have discovered-to-morrow -that is, to-day-already the to-morrow
is come-before dawn, foreigners, Austrians, my mother's hirelings, are to carry me off to Germany,
to prison, to marriage-to anything, except you and my brother -take me away, or soon they will be
here!" I was frightened by her vehemence, and imagined some mistake in her incoherent tale; but I no
longer hesitated to obey her. She had come by herself from the Castle, three long miles, at midnight,
through the heavy snow; we must reach Englefield Green, a mile and a half further, before we could
obtain a chaise. She told me, that she had kept up her strength and courage till her arrival at my
cottage, and then both failed. Now she could hardly walk. Supporting her as I did, still she lagged:
and at the distance of half a mile, after many stoppages, shivering fits, and half faintings, she slipt
from my supporting arm on the snow, and with a torrent of tears averred that she must be taken, for
that she could not proceed. I lifted her up in my arms; her light form rested on my breast.-I felt no
burthen, except the internal one of contrary and contending emotions. Brimming delight now
invested me. Again her chill limbs touched me as a torpedo; and I shuddered in sympathy with her
pain and fright. Her head lay on my shoulder, her breath waved my hair, her heart beat near mine,
transport made me tremble, blinded me, annihilated me-till a suppressed groan, bursting from her
lips, the chattering of her teeth, which she strove vainly to subdue, and all the signs of suffering she
evinced, recalled me to the necessity of speed and succour. At last I said to her, "There is Englefield
Green; there the inn. But, if you are seen thus strangely circumstanced, dear Idris, even now your
enemies may learn your flight too soon: were it not better that I hired the chaise alone? I will put you
in safety meanwhile, and return to you immediately." She answered that I was right, and might do with her as I pleased. I observed the door of a small out-
house a-jar. I pushed it open; and, with some hay strewed about, I formed a couch for her, placing
her exhausted frame on it, and covering her with my cloak. I feared to leave her, she looked so wan
and faint-but in a moment she re-acquired animation, and, with that, fear; and again she implored
me not to delay. To call up the people of the inn, and obtain a conveyance and horses, even though I
harnessed them myself, was the work of many minutes; minutes, each freighted with the weight of
ages. I caused the chaise to advance a little, waited till the people of the inn had retired, and then
made the post-boy draw up the carriage to the spot where Idris, impatient, and now somewhat
recovered, stood waiting for me. I lifted her into the chaise; I assured her that with our four horses
we should arrive in London before five o'clock, the hour when she would be sought and missed. I
besought her to calm herself; a kindly shower of tears relieved her, and by degrees she related her
tale of fear and peril. That same night after Adrian's departure, her mother had warmly expostulated with her on the
subject of her attachment to me. Every motive, every threat, every angry taunt was urged in vain. She seemed to consider that through me she had lost Raymond; I was the evil influence of her life; I
was even accused of encreasing and confirming the mad and base apostacy of Adrian from all views
of advancement and grandeur; and now this miserable mountaineer was to steal her daughter. Never, Idris related, did the angry lady deign to recur to gentleness and persuasion; if she had, the
task of resistance would have been exquisitely painful. As it was, the sweet girl's generous nature
was roused to defend, and ally herself with, my despised cause. Her mother ended with a look of
contempt and covert triumph, which for a moment awakened the suspicions of Idris. When they
parted for the night, the Countess said, "To-morrow I trust your tone will be changed: be composed; I
have agitated you; go to rest; and I will send you a medicine I always take when unduly restless-it
will give you a quiet night." By the time that she had with uneasy thoughts laid her fair cheek upon her pillow, her mother's
servant brought a draught; a suspicion again crossed her at this novel proceeding, sufficiently
alarming to determine her not to take the potion; but dislike of contention, and a wish to discover
whether there was any just foundation for her conjectures, made her, she said, almost instinctively,
and in contradiction to her usual frankness, pretend to swallow the medicine. Then, agitated as she
had been by her mother's violence, and now by unaccustomed fears, she lay unable to sleep, starting
at every sound. Soon her door opened softly, and on her springing up, she heard a whisper, "Not
asleep yet," and the door again closed. With a beating heart she expected another visit, and when
after an interval her chamber was again invaded, having first assured herself that the intruders were
her mother and an attendant, she composed herself to feigned sleep. A step approached her bed,
she dared not move, she strove to calm her palpitations, which became more violent, when she
heard her mother say mutteringly, "Pretty simpleton, little do you think that your game is already at
an end for ever." For a moment the poor girl fancied that her mother believed that she had drank poison: she was on
the point of springing up; when the Countess, already at a distance from the bed, spoke in a low
voice to her companion, and again Idris listened: "Hasten," said she, "there is no time to lose- it is
long past eleven; they will be here at five; take merely the clothes necessary for her journey, and her
jewel-casket." The servant obeyed; few words were spoken on either side; but those were caught at
with avidity by the intended victim. She heard the name of her own maid mentioned;-"No, no,"
replied her mother, "she does not go with us; Lady Idris must forget England, and all belonging to it." And again she heard, "She will not wake till late to-morrow, and we shall then be at sea." --"All is
ready," at length the woman announced. The Countess again came to her daughter's bedside: "In
Austria at least," she said, "you will obey. In Austria, where obedience can be enforced, and no
choice left but between an honourable prison and a fitting marriage." Both then withdrew; though, as she went, the Countess said, "Softly; all sleep; though all have not
been prepared for sleep, like her. I would not have any one suspect, or she might be roused to
resistance, and perhaps escape. Come with me to my room; we will remain there till the hour agreed
upon." They went. Idris, panic-struck, but animated and strengthened even by her excessive fear,
dressed herself hurriedly, and going down a flight of back-stairs, avoiding the vicinity of her mother's
apartment, she contrived to escape from the castle by a low window, and came through snow, wind,
and obscurity to my cottage; nor lost her courage, until she arrived, and, depositing her fate in my
hands, gave herself up to the desperation and weariness that overwhelmed her. I comforted her as well as I might. Joy and exultation, were mine, to possess, and to save her. Yet not
to excite fresh agitation in her, "per non turbar quel bel viso sereno," I curbed my delight. I strove to
quiet the eager dancing of my heart; I turned from her my eyes, beaming with too much tenderness,
and proudly, to dark night, and the inclement atmosphere, murmured the expressions of my
transport. We reached London, methought, all too soon; and yet I could not regret our speedy
arrival, when I witnessed the extasy with which my beloved girl found herself in her brother's arms,
safe from every evil, under his unblamed protection. Adrian wrote a brief note to his mother, informing her that Idris was under his care and guardianship. Several days elapsed, and at last an answer came, dated from Cologne. "It was useless," the haughty
and disappointed lady wrote, "for the Earl of Windsor and his sister to address again the injured
parent, whose only expectation of tranquillity must be derived from oblivion of their existence. Her
desires had been blasted, her schemes overthrown. She did not complain; in her brother's court she
would find, not compensation for their disobedience (filial unkindness admitted of none), but such a
state of things and mode of life, as might best reconcile her to her fate. Under such circumstances,
she positively declined any communication with them." Such were the strange and incredible events, that finally brought about my union with the sister of
my best friend, with my adored Idris. With simplicity and courage she set aside the prejudices and
opposition which were obstacles to my happiness, nor scrupled to give her hand, where she had
given her heart. To be worthy of her, to raise myself to her height through the exertion of talents and
virtue, to repay her love with devoted, unwearied tenderness, were the only thanks I could offer for
the matchless gift. AND now let the reader, passing over some short period of time, be introduced to our happy circle. Adrian, Idris and I, were established in Windsor Castle; Lord Raymond and my sister, inhabited a
house which the former had built on the borders of the Great Park, near Perdita's cottage, as was still
named the low-roofed abode, where we two, poor even in hope, had each received the assurance of
our felicity. We had our separate occupations and our common amusements. Sometimes we passed
whole days under the leafy covert of the forest with our books and music. This occurred during those
rare days in this country, when the sun mounts his etherial throne in unclouded majesty, and the
windless atmosphere is as a bath of pellucid and grateful water, wrapping the senses in tranquillity. When the clouds veiled the sky, and the wind scattered them there and here, rending their woof, and
strewing its fragments through the aerial plains-then we rode out, and sought new spots of beauty
and repose. When the frequent rains shut us within doors, evening recreation followed morning
study, ushered in by music and song. Idris had a natural musical talent; and her voice, which had
been carefully cultivated, was full and sweet. Raymond and I made a part of the concert, and Adrian
and Perdita were devout listeners. Then we were as gay as summer insects, playful as children; we
ever met one another with smiles, and read content and joy in each other's countenances. Our prime
festivals were held in Perdita's cottage; nor were we ever weary of talking of the past or dreaming of
the future. Jealousy and disquiet were unknown among us; nor did a fear or hope of change ever
disturb our tranquillity. Others said, We might be happy-we said-We are. When any separation took place between us, it generally so happened, that Idris and Perdita would
ramble away together, and we remained to discuss the affairs of nations, and the philosophy of life. The very difference of our dispositions gave zest to these conversations. Adrian had the superiority in
learning and eloquence; but Raymond possessed a quick penetration, and a practical knowledge of
life, which usually displayed itself in opposition to Adrian, and thus kept up the ball of discussion. At
other times we made excursions of many days' duration, and crossed the country to visit any spot
noted for beauty or historical association. Sometimes we went up to London, and entered into the
amusements of the busy throng; sometimes our retreat was invaded by visitors from among them. This change made us only the more sensible to the delights of the intimate intercourse of our own
circle, the tranquillity of our divine forest, and our happy evenings in the halls of our beloved Castle. The disposition of Idris was peculiarly frank, soft, and affectionate. Her temper was unalterably
sweet; and although firm and resolute on any point that touched her heart, she was yielding to those
she loved. The nature of Perdita was less perfect; but tenderness and happiness improved her
temper, and softened her natural reserve. Her understanding was clear and comprehensive, her
imagination vivid; she was sincere, generous, and reasonable. Adrian, the matchless brother of my
soul, the sensitive and excellent Adrian, loving all, and beloved by all, yet seemed destined not to find
the half of himself, which was to complete his happiness. He often left us, and wandered by himself
in the woods, or sailed in his little skiff, his books his only companions. He was often the gayest of
our party, at the same time that he was the only one visited by fits of despondency; his slender frame
seemed overcharged with the weight of life, and his soul appeared rather to inhabit his body than
unite with it. I was hardly more devoted to my Idris than to her brother, and she loved him as her
teacher, her friend, the benefactor who had secured to her the fulfilment of her dearest wishes. Raymond, the ambitious, restless Raymond, reposed midway on the great high-road of life, and was
content to give up all his schemes of sovereignty and fame, to make one of us, the flowers of the
field. His kingdom was the heart of Perdita, his subjects her thoughts; by her he was loved, respected
as a superior being, obeyed, waited on. No office, no devotion, no watching was irksome to her, as it
regarded him. She would sit apart from us and watch him; she would weep for joy to think that he
was hers. She erected a temple for him in the depth of her being, and each faculty was a priestess
vowed to his service. Sometimes she might be wayward and capricious; but her repentance was
bitter, her return entire, and even this inequality of temper suited him who was not formed by
nature to float idly down the stream of life. During the first year of their marriage, Perdita presented Raymond with a lovely girl. It was curious to
trace in this miniature model the very traits of its father. The same half-disdainful lips and smile of
triumph, the same intelligent eyes, the same brow and chestnut hair; her very hands and taper
fingers resembled his. How very dear she was to Perdita! In progress of time, I also became a father,
and our little darlings, our playthings and delights, called forth a thousand new and delicious feelings. Years passed thus,-even years. Each month brought forth its successor, each year one like to that
gone by; truly, our lives were a living comment on that beautiful sentiment of Plutarch, that "our
souls have a natural inclination to love, being born as much to love, as to feel, to reason, to
understand and remember." We talked of change and active pursuits, but still remained at Windsor,
incapable of violating the charm that attached us to our secluded life. Pareamo aver qui tutto il ben raccolto
  Che fra mortali in piu parte si rimembra. Now also that our children gave us occupation, we found excuses for our idleness, in the idea of
bringing them up to a more splendid career. At length our tranquillity was disturbed, and the course
of events, which for five years had flowed on in hushing tranquillity, was broken by breakers and
obstacles, that woke us from our pleasant dream. A new Lord Protector of England was to be chosen; and, at Raymond's request, we removed to
London, to witness, and even take a part in the election. If Raymond had been united to Idris, this
post had been his stepping-stone to higher dignity; and his desire for power and fame had been
crowned with fullest measure. He had exchanged a sceptre for a lute, a kingdom for Perdita. Did he think of this as we journeyed up to town? I watched him, but could make but little of him. He
was particularly gay, playing with his child, and turning to sport every word that was uttered. Perhaps
he did this because he saw a cloud upon Perdita's brow. She tried to rouse herself, but her eyes every
now and then filled with tears, and she looked wistfully on Raymond and her girl, as if fearful that
some evil would betide them. And so she felt. A presentiment of ill hung over her. She leaned from
the window looking on the forest, and the turrets of the Castle, and as these became hid by
intervening objects, she passionately exclaimed-"Scenes of happiness! scenes sacred to devoted
love, when shall I see you again! and when I see ye, shall I be still the beloved and joyous Perdita, or
shall I, heart-broken and lost, wander among your groves, the ghost of what I am!" "Why, silly one," cried Raymond, "what is your little head pondering upon, that of a sudden you have
become so sublimely dismal? Cheer up, or I shall make you over to Idris, and call Adrian into the
carriage, who, I see by his gesture, sympathizes with my good spirits." Adrian was on horseback; he rode up to the carriage, and his gaiety, in addition to that of Raymond,
dispelled my sister's melancholy. We entered London in the evening, and went to our several abodes
near Hyde Park. The following morning Lord Raymond visited me early. "I come to you," he said, "only half assured
that you will assist me in my project, but resolved to go through with it, whether you concur with me
or not. Promise me secrecy however; for if you will not contribute to my success, at least you must
not baffle me." "Well, I promise. And now--"
"And now, my dear fellow, for what are we come to London? To be present at the election of a
Protector, and to give our yea or nay for his shuffling Grace of--? or for that noisy Ryland? Do you
believe, Verney, that I brought you to town for that? No, we will have a Protector of our own. We will
set up a candidate, and ensure his success. We will nominate Adrian, and do our best to bestow on
him the power to which he is entitled by his birth, and which he merits through his virtues. "Do not answer; I know all your objections, and will reply to them in order. First, Whether he will or
will not consent to become a great man? Leave the task of persuasion on that point to me; I do not
ask you to assist me there. Secondly, Whether he ought to exchange his employment of plucking
blackberries, and nursing wounded partridges in the forest, for the command of a nation? My dear
Lionel, we are married men, and find employment sufficient in amusing our wives, and dancing our
children. But Adrian is alone, wifeless, childless, unoccupied. I have long observed him. He pines for
want of some interest in life. His heart, exhausted by his early sufferings, reposes like a new-healed
limb, and shrinks from all excitement. But his understanding, his charity, his virtues, want a field for
exercise and display; and we will procure it for him. Besides, is it not a shame, that the genius of
Adrian should fade from the earth like a flower in an untrod mountain-path, fruitless? Do you think
Nature composed his surpassing machine for no purpose? Believe me, he was destined to be the
author of infinite good to his native England. Has she not bestowed on him every gift in
prodigality?-birth, wealth, talent, goodness? Does not every one love and admire him? and does he
not delight singly in such efforts as manifest his love to all? Come, I see that you are already
persuaded, and will second me when I propose him to-night in parliament." "You have got up all your arguments in excellent order," I replied; "and, if Adrian consent, they are
unanswerable. One only condition I would make, -that you do nothing without his concurrence." "I believe you are in the right," said Raymond; "although I had thought at first to arrange the affair
differently. Be it so. I will go instantly to Adrian; and, if he inclines to consent, you will not destroy my
labour by persuading him to return, and turn squirrel again in Windsor Forest. Idris, you will not act
the traitor towards me?" "Trust me," replied she, "I will preserve a strict neutrality." "For my part," said I, "I am too well convinced of the worth of our friend, and the rich harvest of
benefits that all England would reap from his Protectorship, to deprive my countrymen of such a
blessing, if he consent to bestow it on them." In the evening Adrian visited us.-"Do you cabal also against me," said he, laughing; "and will you
make common cause with Raymond, in dragging a poor visionary from the clouds to surround him
with the fire-works and blasts of earthly grandeur, instead of heavenly rays and airs? I thought you
knew me better." "I do know you better," I replied "than to think that you would be happy in such a situation; but the
good you would do to others may be an inducement, since the time is probably arrived when you can
put your theories into practice, and you may bring about such reformation and change, as will
conduce to that perfect system of government which you delight to portray." "You speak of an almost-forgotten dream," said Adrian, his countenance slightly clouding as he
spoke; "the visions of my boyhood have long since faded in the light of reality; I know now that I am
not a man fitted to govern nations; sufficient for me, if I keep in wholesome rule the little kingdom of
my own mortality. "But do not you see, Lionel, the drift of our noble friend; a drift, perhaps, unknown to himself, but
apparent to me. Lord Raymond was never born to be a drone in the hive, and to find content in our
pastoral life. He thinks, that he ought to be satisfied; he imagines, that his present situation
precludes the possibility of aggrandisement; he does not therefore, even in his own heart, plan
change for himself. But do you not see, that, under the idea of exalting me, he is chalking out a new
path for himself; a path of action from which he has long wandered? "Let us assist him. He, the noble, the warlike, the great in every quality that can adorn the mind and
person of man; he is fitted to be the Protector of England. If I-that is, if we propose him, he will
assuredly be elected, and will find, in the functions of that high office, scope for the towering powers
of his mind. Even Perdita will rejoice. Perdita, in whom ambition was a covered fire until she married
Raymond, which event was for a time the fulfilment of her hopes; Perdita will rejoice in the glory and
advancement of her lord-and, coyly and prettily, not be discontented with her share. In the mean
time, we, the wise of the land, will return to our Castle, and, Cincinnatus-like, take to our usual
labours, until our friend shall require our presence and assistance here." The more Adrian reasoned upon this scheme, the more feasible it appeared. His own determination
never to enter into public life was insurmountable, and the delicacy of his health was a sufficient
argument against it. The next step was to induce Raymond to confess his secret wishes for dignity
and fame. He entered while we were speaking. The way in which Adrian had received his project for
setting him up as a candidate for the Protectorship, and his replies, had already awakened in his
mind, the view of the subject which we were now discussing. His countenance and manner betrayed
irresolution and anxiety; but the anxiety arose from a fear that we should not prosecute, or not
succeed in our idea; and his irresolution, from a doubt whether we should risk a defeat. A few words
from us decided him, and hope and joy sparkled in his eyes; the idea of embarking in a career, so
congenial to his early habits and cherished wishes, made him as before energetic and bold. We
discussed his chances, the merits of the other candidates, and the dispositions of the voters. After all we miscalculated. Raymond had lost much of his popularity, and was deserted by his
peculiar partizans. Absence from the busy stage had caused him to be forgotten by the people; his
former parliamentary supporters were principally composed of royalists, who had been willing to
make an idol of him when he appeared as the heir of the Earldom of Windsor; but who were
indifferent to him, when he came forward with no other attributes and distinctions than they
conceived to be common to many among themselves. Still he had many friends, admirers of his
transcendent talents; his presence in the house, his eloquence, address and imposing beauty, were
calculated to produce an electric effect. Adrian also, notwithstanding his recluse habits and theories,
so adverse to the spirit of party, had many friends, and they were easily induced to vote for a
candidate of his selection. The Duke of--, and Mr. Ryland, Lord Raymond's old antagonist, were the other candidates. The
Duke was supported by all the aristocrats of the republic, who considered him their proper
representative. Ryland was the popular candidate; when Lord Raymond was first added to the list, his
chance of success appeared small. We retired from the debate which had followed on his
nomination: we, his nominators, mortified; he dispirited to excess. Perdita reproached us bitterly. Her expectations had been strongly excited; she had urged nothing against our project, on the
contrary, she was evidently pleased by it; but its evident ill success changed the current of her ideas. She felt, that, once awakened, Raymond would never return unrepining to Windsor. His habits were
unhinged; his restless mind roused from its sleep, ambition must now be his companion through life;
and if he did not succeed in his present attempt, she foresaw that unhappiness and cureless
discontent would follow. Perhaps her own disappointment added a sting to her thoughts and words;
she did not spare us, and our own reflections added to our disquietude. It was necessary to follow up our nomination, and to persuade Raymond to present himself to the
electors on the following evening. For a long time he was obstinate. He would embark in a balloon;
he would sail for a distant quarter of the world, where his name and humiliation were unknown. But
this was useless; his attempt was registered; his purpose published to the world; his shame could
never be erased from the memories of men. It was as well to fail at last after a struggle, as to fly now
at the beginning of his enterprise. From the moment that he adopted this idea, he was changed. His depression and anxiety fled; he
became all life and activity. The smile of triumph shone on his countenance; determined to pursue
his object to the uttermost, his manner and expression seem ominous of the accomplishment of his
wishes. Not so Perdita. She was frightened by his gaiety, for she dreaded a greater revulsion at the
end. If his appearance even inspired us with hope, it only rendered the state of her mind more
painful. She feared to lose sight of him; yet she dreaded to remark any change in the temper of his
mind. She listened eagerly to him, yet tantalized herself by giving to his words a meaning foreign to
their true interpretation, and adverse to her hopes. She dared not be present at the contest; yet she
remained at home a prey to double solicitude.