But as he approached, his limbs
and stature increased, the cloak fell from his shoulders, his pilgrim’s
staff was changed into an uprooted pine-tree, and the gigantic figure of
the Harz demon passed before them in his terrors. When he came opposite
to the cart which contained the miserable Waldeck, his huge features
dilated into a grin of unutterable contempt and malignity, as he asked
the sufferer, “How like you the fire my coals have kindled?” The power
of motion, which terror suspended in his two brothers, seemed to be
restored to Martin by the energy of his courage. He raised himself
on the cart, bent his brows, and, clenching his fist, shook it at the
spectre with a ghastly look of hate and defiance. The goblin vanished
with his usual tremendous and explosive laugh, and left Waldeck
exhausted with this effort of expiring nature. The terrified brethren turned their vehicle toward the towers of a
convent, which arose in a wood of pine-trees beside the road. They were
charitably received by a bare-footed and long-bearded capuchin, and
Martin survived only to complete the first confession he had made since
the day of his sudden prosperity, and to receive absolution from the
very priest whom, precisely on that day three years, he had assisted
to pelt out of the hamlet of Morgenbrodt. The three years of precarious
prosperity were supposed to have a mysterious correspondence with the
number of his visits to the spectral fire upon the bill. The body of Martin Waldeck was interred in the convent where he expired,
in which his brothers, having assumed the habit of the order, lived and
died in the performance of acts of charity and devotion. His lands, to
which no one asserted any claim, lay waste until they were reassumed by
the emperor as a lapsed fief, and the ruins of the castle, which Waldeck
had called by his own name, are still shunned by the miner and forester
as haunted by evil spirits. Thus were the miseries attendant upon
wealth, hastily attained and ill employed, exemplified in the fortunes
of Martin Waldeck. Here has been such a stormy encounter
                 Betwixt my cousin Captain, and this soldier,
                 About I know not what!--nothing, indeed;
                 Competitions, degrees, and comparatives
                          Of soldiership!--
                                    A Faire Qurrell. The attentive audience gave the fair transcriber of the foregoing legend
the thanks which politeness required. Oldbuck alone curled up his nose,
and observed, that Miss Wardour’s skill was something like that of the
alchemists, for she had contrived to extract a sound and valuable moral
out of a very trumpery and ridiculous legend. “It is the fashion, as I
am given to understand, to admire those extravagant fictions--for me,

                            --I bear an English heart,
             Unused at ghosts and rattling bones to start.”

“Under your favour, my goot Mr. Oldenbuck,” said the German, “Miss
Wardour has turned de story, as she does every thing as she touches,
very pretty indeed; but all the history of de Harz goblin, and how he
walks among de desolate mountains wid a great fir-tree for his walking
cane, and wid de great green bush around his head and his waist--that is
as true as I am an honest man.”

“There is no disputing any proposition so well guaranteed,” answered
the Antiquary, drily. But at this moment the approach of a stranger cut
short the conversation. The new comer was a handsome young man, about five-and-twenty, in a
military undress, and bearing, in his look and manner, a good deal
of the martial profession--nay, perhaps a little more than is quite
consistent with the ease of a man of perfect good-breeding, in whom no
professional habit ought to predominate. He was at once greeted by the
greater part of the company. “My dear Hector!” said Miss M’Intyre, as
she rose to take his hand--

“Hector, son of Priam, whence comest thou?” said the Antiquary. “From Fife, my liege,” answered the young soldier, and continued, when
he had politely saluted the rest of the company, and particularly Sir
Arthur and his daughter--“I learned from one of the servants, as I rode
towards Monkbarns to pay my respects to you, that I should find the
present company in this place, and I willingly embrace the opportunity
to pay my respects to so many of my friends at once.”

“And to a new one also, my trusty Trojan,” said Oldbuck. “Mr. Lovel,
this is my nephew, Captain M’Intyre--Hector, I recommend Mr. Lovel to
your acquaintance.”

The young soldier fixed his keen eye upon Lovel, and paid his compliment
with more reserve than cordiality and as our acquaintance thought his
coldness almost supercilious, he was equally frigid and haughty in
making the necessary return to it; and thus a prejudice seemed to arise
between them at the very commencement of their acquaintance. The observations which Lovel made during the remainder of this pleasure
party did not tend to reconcile him with this addition to their society. Captain M’Intyre, with the gallantry to be expected from his age and
profession, attached himself to the service of Miss Wardour, and offered
her, on every possible opportunity, those marks of attention which Lovel
would have given the world to have rendered, and was only deterred from
offering by the fear of her displeasure. With forlorn dejection at
one moment, and with irritated susceptibility at another, he saw this
handsome young soldier assume and exercise all the privileges of a
cavaliere servente. He handed Miss Wardour’s gloves, he assisted her
in putting on her shawl, he attached himself to her in the walks, had a
hand ready to remove every impediment in her path, and an arm to support
her where it was rugged or difficult; his conversation was addressed
chiefly to her, and, where circumstances permitted, it was exclusively
so. All this, Lovel well knew, might be only that sort of egotistical
gallantry which induces some young men of the present day to give
themselves the air of engrossing the attention of the prettiest women in
company, as if the others were unworthy of their notice. But he thought
he observed in the conduct of Captain M’Intyre something of marked and
peculiar tenderness, which was calculated to alarm the jealousy of
a lover. Miss Wardour also received his attentions; and although his
candour allowed they were of a kind which could not be repelled without
some strain of affectation, yet it galled him to the heart to witness
that she did so. The heart-burning which these reflections occasioned proved very
indifferent seasoning to the dry antiquarian discussions with which
Oldbuck, who continued to demand his particular attention, was
unremittingly persecuting him; and he underwent, with fits of impatience
that amounted almost to loathing, a course of lectures upon monastic
architecture, in all its styles, from the massive Saxon to the florid
Gothic, and from that to the mixed and composite architecture of
James the First’s time, when, according to Oldbuck, all orders were
confounded, and columns of various descriptions arose side by side, or
were piled above each other, as if symmetry had been forgotten, and the
elemental principles of art resolved into their primitive confusion. “What can be more cutting to the heart than the sight of evils,” said
Oldbuck, in rapturous enthusiasm, “which we are compelled to behold,
while we do not possess the power of remedying them?” Lovel answered by
an involulatary groan. “I see, my dear young friend, and most congenial
spirit, that you feel these enormities almost as much as I do. Have you
ever approached them, or met them, without longing to tear, to deface,
what is so dishonourable?”

“Dishonourable!” echoed Lovel--“in what respect dishonourable?”

“I mean, disgraceful to the arts.”

“Where? how?”

“Upon the portico, for example, of the schools of Oxford, where, at
immense expense, the barbarous, fantastic, and ignorant architect has
chosen to represent the whole five orders of architecture on the front
of one building.”

By such attacks as these, Oldbuck, unconscious of the torture he was
giving, compelled Lovel to give him a share of his attention,--as a
skilful angler, by means of his line, maintains an influence over the
most frantic movements of his agonized prey. They were now on their return to the spot where they had left the
carriages; and it is inconceivable how often, in the course of that
short walk, Lovel, exhausted by the unceasing prosing of his worthy
companion, mentally bestowed on the devil, or any one else that would
have rid him of hearing more of them, all the orders and disorders of
architecture which had been invented or combined from the building of
Solomon’s temple downwards. A slight incident occurred, however, which
sprinkled a little patience on the heat of his distemperature. Miss Wardour, and her self-elected knight companion, rather preceded
the others in the narrow path, when the young lady apparently became
desirous to unite herself with the rest of the party, and, to break off
her tete-a-tete with the young officer, fairly made a pause until
Mr. Oldbuck came up. “I wished to ask you a question, Mr. Oldbuck,
concerning the date of these interesting ruins.”

It would be doing injustice to Miss Wardour’s savoir faire, to suppose
she was not aware that such a question would lead to an answer of no
limited length. The Antiquary, starting like a war-horse at the trumpet
sound, plunged at once into the various arguments for and against the
date of 1273, which had been assigned to the priory of St. Ruth by a
late publication on Scottish architectural antiquities. He raked up the
names of all the priors who had ruled the institution, of the nobles who
had bestowed lands upon it, and of the monarchs who had slept their last
sleep among its roofless courts. As a train which takes fire is sure to
light another, if there be such in the vicinity, the Baronet, catching
at the name of one of his ancestors which occurred in Oldbuck’s
disquisition, entered upon an account of his wars, his conquests, and
his trophies; and worthy Dr. Blattergowl was induced, from the mention
of a grant of lands, cum decimis inclusis tam vicariis quam garbalibus,
et nunquan antea separatis, to enter into a long explanation concerning
the interpretation given by the Teind Court in the consideration of
such a clause, which had occurred in a process for localling his last
augmentation of stipend. The orators, like three racers, each pressed
forward to the goal, without much regarding how each crossed and jostled
his competitors. Mr. Oldbuck harangued, the Baronet declaimed, Mr.
Blattergowl prosed and laid down the law, while the Latin forms of
feudal grants were mingled with the jargon of blazonry, and the yet
more barbarous phraseology of the Teind Court of Scotland. “He was,”
 exclaimed Oldbuck, speaking of the Prior Adhemar, “indeed an exemplary
prelate; and, from his strictness of morals, rigid execution of penance,
joined to the charitable disposition of his mind, and the infirmities
endured by his great age and ascetic habits”--

Here he chanced to cough, and Sir Arthur burst in, or rather
continued--“was called popularly Hell-in-Harness; he carried a shield,
gules with a sable fess, which we have since disused, and was slain at
the battle of Vernoil, in France, after killing six of the English with
his own”--

“Decreet of certification,” proceeded the clergyman, in that prolonged,
steady, prosing tone, which, however overpowered at first by the
vehemence of competition, promised, in the long run, to obtain the
ascendancy in this strife of narrators;--“Decreet of certification having
gone out, and parties being held as confessed, the proof seemed to be
held as concluded, when their lawyer moved to have it opened up, on the
allegation that they had witnesses to bring forward, that they had been
in the habit of carrying the ewes to lamb on the teind-free land; which
was a mere evasion, for”--

But here the Baronet and Mr. Oldbuck having recovered their wind,
and continued their respective harangues, the three strands of the
conversation, to speak the language of a rope-work, were again twined
together into one undistinguishable string of confusion. Yet, howsoever uninteresting this piebald jargon might seem, it was
obviously Miss Wardour’s purpose to give it her attention, in preference
to yielding Captain M’Intyre an opportunity of renewing their private
conversation. So that, after waiting for a little time with displeasure,
ill concealed by his haughty features, he left her to enjoy her bad
taste, and taking his sister by the arm, detained her a little behind
the rest of the party. “So I find, Mary, that your neighbour has neither become more lively nor
less learned during my absence.”

“We lacked your patience and wisdom to instruct us, Hector.”

“Thank you, my dear sister. But you have got a wiser, if not so lively
an addition to your society, than your unworthy brother--Pray, who is
this Mr. Lovel, whom our old uncle has at once placed so high in his
good graces?--he does not use to be so accessible to strangers.”

“Mr. Lovel, Hector, is a very gentleman-like young man.”

“Ay,--that is to say, he bows when he comes into a room, and wears a coat
that is whole at the elbows.”

“No, brother; it says a great deal more. It says that his manners and
discourse express the feelings and education of the higher class.”

“But I desire to know what is his birth and his rank in society, and
what is his title to be in the circle in which I find him domesticated?”

“If you mean, how he comes to visit at Monkbarns, you must ask my uncle,
who will probably reply, that he invites to his own house such company
as he pleases; and if you mean to ask Sir Arthur, you must know that
Mr. Lovel rendered Miss Wardour and him a service of the most important
kind.”

“What! that romantic story is true, then?--And pray, does the valorous
knight aspire, as is befitting on such occasions, to the hand of the
young lady whom he redeemed from peril? It is quite in the rule of
romance, I am aware; and I did think that she was uncommonly dry to me
as we walked together, and seemed from time to time as if she watched
whether she was not giving offence to her gallant cavalier.”

“Dear Hector,” said his sister, “if you really continue to nourish any
affection for Miss Wardour”--

“If, Mary?--what an if was there!”

“--I own I consider your perseverance as hopeless.”

“And why hopeless, my sage sister?” asked Captain M’Intyre: “Miss
Wardour, in the state of her father’s affairs, cannot pretend to much
fortune;--and, as to family, I trust that of Mlntyre is not inferior.”

“But, Hector,” continued his sister, “Sir Arthur always considers us as
members of the Monkbarns family.”

“Sir Arthur may consider what he pleases,” answered the Highlander
scornfully; “but any one with common sense will consider that the wife
takes rank from the husband, and that my father’s pedigree of fifteen
unblemished descents must have ennobled my mother, if her veins had been
filled with printer’s ink.”

“For God’s sake, Hector,” replied his anxious sister, “take care of
yourself! a single expression of that kind, repeated to my uncle by an
indiscreet or interested eavesdropper, would lose you his favour for
ever, and destroy all chance of your succeeding to his estate.”

“Be it so,” answered the heedless young man; “I am one of a profession
which the world has never been able to do without, and will far less
endure to want for half a century to come; and my good old uncle may
tack his good estate and his plebeian name to your apron-string if he
pleases, Mary, and you may wed this new favourite of his if you please,
and you may both of you live quiet, peaceable, well-regulated lives,
if it pleases Heaven. My part is taken--I’ll fawn on no man for an
inheritance which should be mine by birth.”

Miss M’Intyre laid her hand on her brother’s arm, and entreated him to
suppress his vehemence. “Who,” she said, “injures or seeks to injure
you, but your own hasty temper?--what dangers are you defying, but those
you have yourself conjured up?--Our uncle has hitherto been all that is
kind and paternal in his conduct to us, and why should you suppose he
will in future be otherwise than what he has ever been, since we were
left as orphans to his care?”

“He is an excellent old gentleman, I must own,” replied M’Intyre, “and
I am enraged at myself when I chance to offend him; but then his eternal
harangues upon topics not worth the spark of a flint--his investigations
about invalided pots and pans and tobacco-stoppers past service--all
these things put me out of patience. I have something of Hotspur in me,
sister, I must confess.”

“Too much, too much, my dear brother! Into how many risks, and, forgive
me for saying, some of them little creditable, has this absolute and
violent temper led you! Do not let such clouds darken the time you are
now to pass in our neighbourhood, but let our old benefactor see
his kinsman as he is--generous, kind, and lively, without being rude,
headstrong, and impetuous.”

“Well,” answered Captain M’Intyre, “I am schooled--good-manners be my
speed! I’ll do the civil thing by your new friend--I’ll have some talk
with this Mr. Lovel.”

With this determination, in which he was for the time perfectly
sincere, he joined the party who were walking before them. The treble
disquisition was by this time ended; and Sir Arthur was speaking on the
subject of foreign news, and the political and military situation of the
country, themes upon which every man thinks himself qualified to give
an opinion. An action of the preceding year having come upon the tapis,
Lovel, accidentally mingling in the conversation, made some assertion
concerning it, of the accuracy of which Captain M’Intyre seemed not to
be convinced, although his doubts were politely expressed. “You must confess yourself in the wrong here, Hector,” said his uncle,
“although I know no man less willing to give up an argument; but you
were in England at the time, and Mr. Lovel was probably concerned in the
affair.”

“I am speaking to a military man, then?” said M’Intyre; “may I inquire
to what regiment Mr. Lovel belongs?”--Mr. Lovel gave him the number
of the regiment. “It happens strangely that we should never have met
before, Mr. Lovel. I know your regiment very well, and have served along
with them at different times.”

A blush crossed Lovel’s countenance. “I have not lately been with my
regiment,” he replied; “I served the last campaign upon the staff of
General Sir----.”

“Indeed! that is more wonderful than the other circumstance!--for
although I did not serve with General Sir----, yet I had an opportunity of
knowing the names of the officers who held situations in his family, and
I cannot recollect that of Lovel.”

At this observation Lovel again blushed so deeply as to attract the
attention of the whole company, while, a scornful laugh seemed to
indicate Captain M’Intyre’s triumph. “There is something strange in
this,” said Oldbuck to himself; “but I will not readily give up my
phoenix of post-chaise companions--all his actions, language, and
bearing, are those of a gentleman.”

Lovel in the meanwhile had taken out his pocket-book, and selecting a
letter, from which he took off the envelope, he handed it to Mlntyre. “You know the General’s hand, in all probability--I own I ought not to
show these exaggerated expressions of his regard and esteem for me.” The
letter contained a very handsome compliment from the officer in question
for some military service lately performed. Captain M’Intyre, as he
glanced his eye over it, could not deny that it was written in the
General’s hand, but drily observed, as he returned it, that the address
was wanting. “The address, Captain M’Intyre,” answered Lovel, in the
same tone, “shall be at your service whenever you choose to inquire
after it!”

“I certainly shall not fail to do so,” rejoined the soldier. “Come, come,” exclaimed Oldbuck, “what is the meaning of all this? Have
we got Hiren here?--We’ll have no swaggering youngsters. Are you come
from the wars abroad, to stir up domestic strife in our peaceful land? Are you like bull-dog puppies, forsooth, that when the bull, poor
fellow, is removed from the ring, fall to brawl among themselves, worry
each other, and bite honest folk’s shins that are standing by?”

Sir Arthur trusted, he said, the young gentlemen would not so far forget
themselves as to grow warm upon such a trifling subject as the back of a
letter. Both the disputants disclaimed any such intention, and, with high colour
and flashing eyes, protested they were never so cool in their lives. But
an obvious damp was cast over the party;--they talked in future too much
by the rule to be sociable, and Lovel, conceiving himself the object
of cold and suspicious looks from the rest of the company, and sensible
that his indirect replies had given them permission to entertain strange
opinions respecting him, made a gallant determination to sacrifice the
pleasure he had proposed in spending the day at Knockwinnock. He affected, therefore, to complain of a violent headache, occasioned by
the heat of the day, to which he had not been exposed since his illness,
and made a formal apology to Sir Arthur, who, listening more to recent
suspicion than to the gratitude due for former services, did not press
him to keep his engagement more than good-breeding exactly demanded. When Lovel took leave of the ladies, Miss Wardour’s manner seemed more
anxious than he had hitherto remarked it. She indicated by a glance of
her eye towards Captain M’Intyre, perceptible only by Lovel, the subject
of her alarm, and hoped, in a voice greatly under her usual tone, it was
not a less pleasant engagement which deprived them of the pleasure of
Mr. Lovel’s company. “No engagement had intervened,” he assured her; “it
was only the return of a complaint by which he had been for some time
occasionally attacked.”

“The best remedy in such a case is prudence, and I--every friend of Mr.
Lovel’s will expect him to employ it.”

Lovel bowed low and coloured deeply, and Miss Wardour, as if she felt
that she had said too much, turned and got into the carriage. Lovel had
next to part with Oldbuck, who, during this interval, had, with Caxon’s
assistance, been arranging his disordered periwig, and brushing his
coat, which exhibited some marks of the rude path they had traversed. “What, man!” said Oldbuck, “you are not going to leave us on account of
that foolish Hector’s indiscreet curiosity and vehemence? Why, he is
a thoughtless boy--a spoiled child from the time he was in the nurse’s
arms--he threw his coral and bells at my head for refusing him a bit of
sugar; and you have too much sense to mind such a shrewish boy: aequam
servare mentem is the motto of our friend Horace. I’ll school Hector by
and by, and put it all to rights.” But Lovel persisted in his design of
returning to Fairport. The Antiquary then assumed a graver tone.--“Take heed, young man, to your
present feelings. Your life has been given you for useful and valuable
purposes, and should be reserved to illustrate the literature of your
country, when you are not called upon to expose it in her defence, or
in the rescue of the innocent. Private war, a practice unknown to the
civilised ancients, is, of all the absurdities introduced by the Gothic
tribes, the most gross, impious, and cruel. Let me hear no more of these
absurd quarrels, and I will show you the treatise upon the duello, which
I composed when the town-clerk and provost Mucklewhame chose to assume
the privileges of gentlemen, and challenged each other. I thought of
printing my Essay, which is signed Pacificator; but there was no need,
as the matter was taken up by the town-council of the borough.”

“But I assure you, my dear sir, there is nothing between Captain
M’Intyre and me that can render such respectable interference
necessary.”

“See it be so; for otherwise, I will stand second to both parties.”

So saying, the old gentleman got into the chaise, close to which Miss
M’Intyre had detained her brother, upon the same principle that
the owner of a quarrelsome dog keeps him by his side to prevent his
fastening upon another. But Hector contrived to give her precaution
the slip, for, as he was on horseback, he lingered behind the carriages
until they had fairly turned the corner in the road to Knockwinnock, and
then, wheeling his horse’s head round, gave him the spur in the opposite
direction. A very few minutes brought him up with Lovel, who, perhaps anticipating
his intention, had not put his horse beyond a slow walk, when the
clatter of hoofs behind him announced Captain Mlntyre. The young
soldier, his natural heat of temper exasperated by the rapidity of
motion, reined his horse up suddenly and violently by Lovel’s side, and
touching his hat slightly, inquired, in a very haughty tone of voice,
“What am I to understand, sir, by your telling me that your address was
at my service?”

“Simply, sir,” replied Lovel, “that my name is Lovel, and that my
residence is, for the present, Fairport, as you will see by this card.”

“And is this all the information you are disposed to give me?”

“I see no right you have to require more.”

“I find you, sir, in company with my sister,” said the young soldier,
“and I have a right to know who is admitted into Miss M’Intyre’s
society.”

“I shall take the liberty of disputing that right,” replied Lovel,
with a manner as haughty as that of the young soldier;--“you find me in
society who are satisfied with the degree of information on my affairs
which I have thought proper to communicate, and you, a mere stranger,
have no right to inquire further.”

“Mr. Lovel, if you served as you say you have”--

“If!” interrupted Lovel,--“if I have served as I say I have?”

“Yes, sir, such is my expression--if you have so served, you must know
that you owe me satisfaction either in one way or other.”

“If that be your opinion, I shall be proud to give it to you, Captain
M’Intyre, in the way in which the word is generally used among
gentlemen.”

“Very well, sir,” rejoined Hector, and, turning his horse round,
galloped off to overtake his party. His absence had already alarmed them, and his sister, having stopped the
carriage, had her neck stretched out of the window to see where he was. “What is the matter with you now?” said the Antiquary, “riding to and
fro as your neck were upon the wager--why do you not keep up with the
carriage?”

“I forgot my glove, sir,” said Hector. “Forgot your glove!--I presume you meant to say you went to throw it
down--But I will take order with you, my young gentleman--you shall return
with me this night to Monkbarns.” So saying, he bid the postilion go on. --If you fail Honour here,
                 Never presume to serve her any more;
                 Bid farewell to the integrity of armes;
                    And the honourable name of soldier
            Fall from you, like a shivered wreath of laurel
            By thunder struck from a desertlesse forehead. A Faire Quarrell. Early the next morning, a gentleman came to wait upon Mr. Lovel, who was
up and ready to receive him. He was a military gentleman, a friend of
Captain M’Intyre’s, at present in Fairport on the recruiting service. Lovel and he were slightly known to each other. “I presume, sir,” said
Mr. Lesley (such was the name of the visitor), “that you guess the
occasion of my troubling you so early?”

“A message from Captain M’Intyre, I presume?”

“The same. He holds himself injured by the manner in which you declined
yesterday to answer certain inquiries which he conceived himself
entitled to make respecting a gentleman whom he found in intimate
society with his family.”

“May I ask, if you, Mr. Lesley, would have inclined to satisfy
interrogatories so haughtily and unceremoniously put to you?”

“Perhaps not;--and therefore, as I know the warmth of my friend M’Intyre
on such occasions, I feel very desirous of acting as peacemaker. From
Mr. Lovel’s very gentleman-like manners, every one must strongly wish to
see him repel all that sort of dubious calumny which will attach itself
to one whose situation is not fully explained. If he will permit me, in
friendly conciliation, to inform Captain M’Intyre of his real name, for
we are led to conclude that of Lovel is assumed”--

“I beg your pardon, sir, but I cannot admit that inference.”

“--Or at least,” said Lesley, proceeding, “that it is not the name by
which Mr. Lovel has been at all times distinguished--if Mr. Lovel will
have the goodness to explain this circumstance, which, in my opinion,
he should do in justice to his own character, I will answer for the
amicable arrangement of this unpleasant business.”

“Which is to say, Mr. Lesley, that if I condescend to answer questions
which no man has a right to ask, and which are now put to me under
penalty of Captain M’Intyre’s resentment, Captain MIntyre will
condescend to rest satisfied? Mr. Lesley, I have just one word to say
on this subject--I have no doubt my secret, if I had one, might be safely
entrusted to your honour, but I do not feel called upon to satisfy the
curiosity of any one. Captain M’Intyre met me in society which of itself
was a warrant to all the world, and particularly ought to be such to
him, that I was a gentleman. He has, in my opinion, no right to go
any further, or to inquire the pedigree, rank, or circumstances, of a
stranger, who, without seeking any intimate connection with him, or his,
chances to dine with his uncle, or walk in company with his sister.”

“In that case, Captain M’Intyre requests you to be informed, that your
farther visits at Monkbarns, and all connection with Miss M’Intyre, must
be dropt, as disagreeable to him.”

“I shall certainly,” said Lovel, “visit Mr. Oldbuck when it suits me,
without paying the least respect to his nephew’s threats or irritable
feelings. I respect the young lady’s name too much (though nothing
can be slighter than our acquaintance) to introduce it into such a
discussion.”

“Since that is your resolution, sir,” answered Lesley, “Captain M’Intyre
requests that Mr. Lovel, unless he wishes to be announced as a very
dubious character, will favour him with a meeting this evening, at
seven, at the thorn-tree in the little valley close by the ruins of St.
Ruth.”

“Most unquestionably, I will wait upon him. There is only one
difficulty--I must find a friend to accompany me, and where to seek one
on this short notice, as I have no acquaintance in Fairport--I will be on
the spot, however--Captain M’Intyre may be assured of that.”

Lesley had taken his hat, and was as far as the door of the apartment,
when, as if moved by the peculiarity of Lovel’s situation, he returned,
and thus addressed him: “Mr. Lovel, there is something so singular in
all this, that I cannot help again resuming the argument. You must be
yourself aware at this moment of the inconvenience of your preserving
an incognito, for which, I am convinced, there can be no dishonourable
reason. Still, this mystery renders it difficult for you to procure the
assistance of a friend in a crisis so delicate--nay, let me add, that
many persons will even consider it as a piece of Quixotry in M’Intyre to
give you a meeting, while your character and circumstances are involved
in such obscurity.”

“I understand your innuendo, Mr. Lesley,” rejoined Lovel; and though
I might be offended at its severity, I am not so, because it is meant
kindly. But, in my opinion, he is entitled to all the privileges of a
gentleman, to whose charge, during the time he has been known in the
society where he happens to move, nothing can be laid that is unhandsome
or unbecoming. For a friend, I dare say I shall find some one or other
who will do me that good turn; and if his experience be less than I
could wish, I am certain not to suffer through that circumstance when
you are in the field for my antagonist.”

“I trust you will not,” said Lesley; “but as I must, for my own sake,
be anxious to divide so heavy a responsibility with a capable assistant,
allow me to say, that Lieutenant Taffril’s gun-brig is come into the
roadstead, and he himself is now at old Caxon’s, where he lodges. I
think you have the same degree of acquaintance with him as with me, and,
as I am sure I should willingly have rendered you such a service were
I not engaged on the other side, I am convinced he will do so at your
first request.”

“At the thorn-tree, then, Mr. Lesley, at seven this evening--the arms, I
presume, are pistols?”

“Exactly. M’Intyre has chosen the hour at which he can best escape from
Monkbarns--he was with me this morning by five, in order to return
and present himself before his uncle was up. Good-morning to you, Mr.
Lovel.” And Lesley left the apartment. Lovel was as brave as most men; but none can internally regard such a
crisis as now approached, without deep feelings of awe and uncertainty. In a few hours he might be in another world to answer for an action
which his calmer thought told him was unjustifiable in a religious point
of view, or he might be wandering about in the present like Cain, with
the blood of his brother on his head. And all this might be saved by
speaking a single word. Yet pride whispered, that to speak that word
now, would be ascribed to a motive which would degrade him more low than
even the most injurious reasons that could be assigned for his silence. Every one, Miss Wardour included, must then, he thought, account him
a mean dishonoured poltroon, who gave to the fear of meeting Captain
M’Intyre the explanation he had refused to the calm and handsome
expostulations of Mr. Lesley. M’Intyre’s insolent behaviour to himself
personally, the air of pretension which he assumed towards Miss Wardour,
and the extreme injustice, arrogance, and incivility of his demands
upon a perfect stranger, seemed to justify him in repelling his rude
investigation. In short, he formed the resolution which might have been
expected from so young a man,--to shut the eyes, namely, of his calmer
reason, and follow the dictates of his offended pride. With this purpose
he sought Lieutenant Taffril. The lieutenant received him with the good breeding of a gentleman and
the frankness of a sailor, and listened with no small surprise to the
detail which preceded his request that he might be favoured with his
company at his meeting with Captain M’Intyre. When he had finished,
Taffril rose up and walked through his apartment once or twice. “This is
a most singular circumstance,” he said, “and really”--

“I am conscious, Mr. Taffril, how little I am entitled to make my
present request, but the urgency of circumstances hardly leaves me an
alternative.”

“Permit me to ask you one question,” asked the sailor;--“is there
anything of which you are ashamed in the circumstances which you have
declined to communicate.”

“Upon my honour, no; there is nothing but what, in a very short time, I
trust I may publish to the whole world.”

“I hope the mystery arises from no false shame at the lowness of your
friends perhaps, or connections?”

“No, on my word,” replied Lovel. “I have little sympathy for that folly,” said Taffril--“indeed I cannot
be supposed to have any; for, speaking of my relations, I may be said to
have come myself from before the mast, and I believe I shall very soon
form a connection, which the world will think low enough, with a very
amiable girl, to whom I have been attached since we were next-door
neighbours, at a time when I little thought of the good fortune which
has brought me forward in the service.”

“I assure you, Mr. Taffril,” replied Lovel, “whatever were the rank of
my parents, I should never think of concealing it from a spirit of
petty pride. But I am so situated at present, that I cannot enter on the
subject of my family with any propriety.”

“It is quite enough,” said the honest sailor--“give me your hand; I’ll
see you as well through this business as I can, though it is but an
unpleasant one after all--But what of that? our own honour has the next
call on us after our country;--you are a lad of spirit, and I own I think
Mr. Hector M’Intyre, with his long pedigree and his airs of family,
very much of a jackanapes. His father was a soldier of fortune as I am a
sailor--he himself, I suppose, is little better, unless just as his uncle
pleases; and whether one pursues fortune by land, or sea, makes no great
difference, I should fancy.”

“None in the universe, certainly,” answered Lovel. “Well,” said his new ally, “we will dine together and arrange matters
for this rencounter. I hope you understand the use of the weapon?”

“Not particularly,” Lovel replied. “I am sorry for that--M’Intyre is said to be a marksman.”

“I am sorry for it also,” said Lovel, “both for his sake and my own: I
must then, in self-defence, take my aim as well as I can.”

“Well,” added Taffril, “I will have our surgeon’s mate on the field--a
good clever young fellow at caulking a shot-hole. I will let Lesley, who
is an honest fellow for a landsman, know that he attends for the benefit
of either party. Is there anything I can do for you in case of an
accident?”

“I have but little occasion to trouble you,” said Lovel. “This small
billet contains the key of my escritoir, and my very brief secret. There
is one letter in the escritoir” (digesting a temporary swelling of the
heart as he spoke), “which I beg the favour of you to deliver with your
own hand.”

“I understand,” said the sailor. “Nay, my friend, never be ashamed for
the matter--an affectionate heart may overflow for an instant at the
eyes, if the ship were clearing for action; and, depend on it, whatever
your injunctions are, Dan Taffril will regard them like the bequest of a
dying brother. But this is all stuff;--we must get our things in fighting
order, and you will dine with me and my little surgeon’s mate, at the
Graeme’s-Arms over the way, at four o’clock.”

“Agreed,” said Lovel. “Agreed,” said Taffril; and the whole affair was arranged. It was a beautiful summer evening, and the shadow of the solitary
thorn-tree was lengthening upon the short greensward of the narrow
valley, which was skirted by the woods that closed around the ruins of
St. Ruth. <Supposed to have been suggested by the old Abbey of Arbroath in 



Lovel and Lieutenant Taffril, with the surgeon, came upon the ground
with a purpose of a nature very uncongenial to the soft, mild, and
pacific character of the hour and scene. The sheep, which during the
ardent heat of the day had sheltered in the breaches and hollows of the
gravelly bank, or under the roots of the aged and stunted trees, had
now spread themselves upon the face of the hill to enjoy their evening’s
pasture, and bleated, to each other with that melancholy sound which
at once gives life to a landscape, and marks its solitude.--Taffril and
Lovel came on in deep conference, having, for fear of discovery, sent
their horses back to the town by the Lieutenant’s servant. The opposite
party had not yet appeared on the field. But when they came upon the
ground, there sat upon the roots of the old thorn a figure as vigorous
in his decay as the moss-grown but strong and contorted boughs which
served him for a canopy. It was old Ochiltree. “This is embarrassing
enough,” said Lovel:--“How shall we get rid of this old fellow?”

“Here, father Adam,” cried Taffril, who knew the mendicant of
yore--“here’s half-a-crown for you. You must go to the Four Horse-shoes
yonder--the little inn, you know, and inquire for a servant with blue and
yellow livery. If he is not come, you’ll wait for him, and tell him
we shall be with his master in about an hour’s time. At any rate, wait
there till we come back,--and--Get off with you--Come, come, weigh anchor.”

“I thank ye for your awmous,” said Ochiltree, pocketing the piece of
money; “but I beg your pardon, Mr. Taffril--I canna gang your errand e’en
now.”

“Why not, man? what can hinder you?”

“I wad speak a word wi’ young Mr. Lovel.”

“With me?” answered Lovel: “what would you say with me? Come, say on,
and be brief.”

The mendicant led him a few paces aside. “Are ye indebted onything to
the Laird o’ Monkbarns?”

“Indebted!--no, not I--what of that?--what makes you think so?”

“Ye maun ken I was at the shirra’s the day; for, God help me, I gang
about a’ gates like the troubled spirit; and wha suld come whirling
there in a post-chaise, but Monkbarns in an unco carfuffle--now, it’s no
a little thing that will make his honour take a chaise and post-horse
twa days rinnin’.”

“Well, well; but what is all this to me?”

“Ou, ye’se hear, ye’se hear. Weel, Monkbarns is closeted wi’ the
shirra whatever puir folk may be left thereout--ye needna doubt that--the
gentlemen are aye unco civil amang themsells.”

“For heaven’s sake, my old friend”--

“Canna ye bid me gang to the deevil at ance, Mr. Lovel? it wad be mair
purpose fa’ard than to speak o’ heaven in that impatient gate.”

“But I have private business with Lieutenant Taffril here.”

“Weel, weel, a’ in gude time,” said the beggar--“I can use a little
wee bit freedom wi’ Mr. Daniel Taffril;--mony’s the peery and the tap
I worked for him langsyne, for I was a worker in wood as weel as a
tinkler.”

“You are either mad, Adam, or have a mind to drive me mad.”

“Nane o’ the twa,” said Edie, suddenly changing his manner from the
protracted drawl of the mendicant to a brief and decided tone. “The
shirra sent for his clerk, and as the lad is rather light o’ the tongue,
I fand it was for drawing a warrant to apprehend you--I thought it had
been on a fugie warrant for debt; for a’ body kens the laird likes
naebody to pit his hand in his pouch--But now I may haud my tongue, for
I see the M’Intyre lad and Mr. Lesley coming up, and I guess that
Monkbarns’s purpose was very kind, and that yours is muckle waur than it
should be.”

The antagonist now approached, and saluted with the stern civility
which befitted the occasion. “What has this old fellow to do here?” said
M’Intyre. “I am an auld fallow,” said Edie, “but I am also an auld soldier o’ your
father’s, for I served wi’ him in the 42d.”

“Serve where you please, you have no title to intrude on us,” said
M’Intyre, “or”--and he lifted his cane in terrorem, though without the
idea of touching the old man. But Ochiltree’s courage was roused by the insult. “Haud down your
switch, Captain M’Intyre! I am an auld soldier, as I said before, and
I’ll take muckle frae your father’s son; but no a touch o’ the wand
while my pike-staff will haud thegither.”

“Well, well, I was wrong--I was wrong,” said M’Intyre; “here’s a crown
for you--go your ways--what’s the matter now?”

The old man drew himself up to the full advantage of his uncommon
height, and in despite of his dress, which indeed had more of the
pilgrim than the ordinary beggar, looked from height, manner, and
emphasis of voice and gesture, rather like a grey palmer or eremite
preacher, the ghostly counsellor of the young men who were around him,
than the object of their charity. His speech, indeed, was as homely
as his habit, but as bold and unceremonious as his erect and dignified
demeanour. “What are ye come here for, young men?” he said, addressing
himself to the surprised audience; “are ye come amongst the most lovely
works of God to break his laws? Have ye left the works of man, the
houses and the cities that are but clay and dust, like those that built
them--and are ye come here among the peaceful hills, and by the quiet
waters, that will last whiles aught earthly shall endure, to destroy
each other’s lives, that will have but an unco short time, by the course
of nature, to make up a lang account at the close o’t? O sirs! hae ye
brothers, sisters, fathers, that hae tended ye, and mothers that hae
travailed for ye, friends that hae ca’d ye like a piece o’ their ain
heart? and is this the way ye tak to make them childless and brotherless
and friendless? Ohon! it’s an ill feight whar he that wins has the warst
o’t. Think on’t, bairns. I’m a puir man--but I’m an auld man too--and what
my poverty takes awa frae the weight o’ my counsel, grey hairs and a
truthfu’ heart should add it twenty times. Gang hame, gang hame, like
gude lads--the French will be ower to harry us ane o’ thae days, and
ye’ll hae feighting eneugh, and maybe auld Edie will hirple out himsell
if he can get a feal-dyke to lay his gun ower, and may live to tell you
whilk o’ ye does the best where there’s a good cause afore ye.”

There was something in the undaunted and independent manner, hardy
sentiment, and manly rude elocution of the old man, that had its
effect upon the party, and particularly on the seconds, whose pride was
uninterested in bringing the dispute to a bloody arbitrament, and
who, on the contrary, eagerly watched for an opportunity to recommend
reconciliation. “Upon my word, Mr. Lesley,” said Taffril, “old Adam speaks like an
oracle. Our friends here were very angry yesterday, and of course very
foolish;--today they should be cool, or at least we must be so in
their behalf. I think the word should be forget and forgive on both
sides,--that we should all shake hands, fire these foolish crackers in
the air, and go home to sup in a body at the Graeme’s-Arms.”

“I would heartily recommend it,” said Lesley; “for, amidst a great
deal of heat and irritation on both sides, I confess myself unable to
discover any rational ground of quarrel.”

“Gentlemen,” said M’Intyre, very coldly, “all this should have been
thought of before. In my opinion, persons that have carried this matter
so far as we have done, and who should part without carrying it any
farther, might go to supper at the Graeme’s-Arms very joyously, but
would rise the next morning with reputations as ragged as our friend
here, who has obliged us with a rather unnecessary display of his
oratory. I speak for myself, that I find myself bound to call upon you
to proceed without more delay.”

“And I,” said Lovel, “as I never desired any, have also to request these
gentlemen to arrange preliminaries as fast as possible.”

“Bairns! bairns!” cried old Ochiltree; but perceiving he was no longer
attended to--“Madmen, I should say--but your blood be on your heads!” And
the old man drew off from the ground, which was now measured out by
the seconds, and continued muttering and talking to himself in sullen
indignation, mixed with anxiety, and with a strong feeling of painful
curiosity. Without paying farther attention to his presence or
remonstrances, Mr. Lesley and the Lieutenant made the necessary
arrangements for the duel, and it was agreed that both parties should
fire when Mr. Lesley dropped his handkerchief. The fatal sign was given, and both fired almost in the same moment. Captain M’Intyre’s ball grazed the side of his opponent, but did not
draw blood. That of Lovel was more true to the aim; M’Intyre reeled
and fell. Raising himself on his arm, his first exclamation was, “It is
nothing--it is nothing--give us the other pistols.” But in an instant he
said, in a lower tone, “I believe I have enough--and what’s worse, I
fear I deserve it. Mr. Lovel, or whatever your name is, fly and save
yourself--Bear all witness, I provoked this matter.” Then raising himself
again on his arm, he added, “Shake hands, Lovel--I believe you to be
a gentleman--forgive my rudeness, and I forgive you my death--My poor
sister!”

The surgeon came up to perform his part of the tragedy, and Lovel stood
gazing on the evil of which he had been the active, though unwilling
cause, with a dizzy and bewildered eye. He was roused from his trance by
the grasp of the mendicant. “Why stand you gazing on your deed?--What’s
doomed is doomed--what’s done is past recalling. But awa, awa, if ye wad
save your young blood from a shamefu’ death--I see the men out by yonder
that are come ower late to part ye--but, out and alack! sune eneugh, and
ower sune, to drag ye to prison.”

“He is right--he is right,” exclaimed Taffril; “you must not attempt to
get on the high-road--get into the wood till night.