At one time he resolved to pursue her; but the next, piqued at not
having received from her even a note of farewell, he determined to
endeavour to forget her: and this was certainly the wiser plan of the
two: but the succeeding moment he determined to let a week pass, in
hopes of receiving a letter from her, and, in case he did not, to set
off in search of her, being assured of succeeding in his search of her,
because the singularity of Savanna's appearance, and the traces of the
small-pox visible in the face of Adeline, made them liable to be
observed, and easy for him to describe. But before the week elapsed, from agitation of mind, and from having
exposed himself unnecessarily to cold, by lying on damp grass at
midnight, after having heated himself by immoderate walking, Colonel
Mordaunt became ill of a fever; and when, after a confinement of several
weeks, he was restored to health, he despaired of being able to learn
tidings of the fugitives; and disappointed and dejected, he sought
in the gayest scenes of the metropolis and its environs to drown the
remembrances, from which in solitude he had vainly endeavoured to fly. At this time a faded but attractive woman of quality, with whom he had
formerly been intimate, returned from abroad, and, meeting Colonel
Mordaunt at the house of a mutual friend, endeavoured to revive in him
his former attachment: but it was a difficult task for a woman, who had
never been able to touch the heart, to excite an attachment in a man
already sentimentally devoted to another. Her advances, however, flattered Colonel Mordaunt, and her society
amused him, till, at length, their intimacy was renewed on its former
footing: but soon tired of his mistress, and displeased with himself, he
took an abrupt leave of her, and throwing himself into his post-chaise,
retired to the seat of a relation in Herefordshire. Near this gentleman's house lived Mr Maynard and his two sisters,
who had taken up their abode there immediately on their return from
Portugal. Major Douglas, his wife, and Emma Douglas, were then on a
visit to them. Mordaunt had known Major Douglas in early life; and as
soon as he found that he was in the neighbourhood, he rode over to renew
his acquaintance with him; and received so cordial a welcome, not only
from the major, but the master of the house and his sisters, that he was
strongly induced to repeat his visits, and not a day passed in which he
was not, during some part of it, a guest at Mr Maynard's. Mrs Wallington and Miss Maynard, indeed, received him with such pointed
marks of distinction and preference, as to make it visible to every
observer that it was not as a friend only they were desirous of
considering Colonel Mordaunt; while, by spiteful looks and acrimonious
remarks directed to each other, the sisters expressed the jealousy which
rankled in their hearts, whenever he seemed by design or inadvertency to
make one of them the particular object of his attention. Of Emma Douglas's chance for his favour, they were not at all
fearful:--they thought her too plain, and too unattractive, to be
capable of rivalling them; especially in the favour of an officer, a man
of fashion; and therefore they beheld without emotion the attention
which Colonel Mordaunt paid to her whenever she spoke, and the deference
which he evidently felt for her opinion, as her remarks on whatever
subject she conversed were formed always to interest, and often to
instruct. One evening, while Major Douglas was amusing himself in looking over
some magazines which had lately been bound up together, and had not yet
been deposited in Mr Maynard's library, he suddenly started, laid down
the book, and turning to the window, with an exclamation of--'Poor
fellow!' --passed his hand across his eyes, as if meaning to disperse an
involuntary tear. 'What makes you exclaim "Poor fellow?"' asked his lovely wife: 'have you
met with an affecting story in those magazines?' 'No, Louisa,' replied he, 'but I met in the obituary with a confirmation
of the death of an old friend, which I suspected must have happened by
this time, though I never knew it before; I see by this magazine that
poor Glenmurray died a very few months after we saw him at Perpignan.' 'Poor fellow!' exclaimed Mrs Douglas. 'I wish I knew what is become of his interesting companion, Miss
Mowbray,' said Emma Douglas. 'I wish I did too,' secretly sighed Colonel Mordaunt: but his heart
palpitated so violently at this unexpected mention of the woman for whom
he still pined in secret, that he had not resolution to say that he knew
her. 'Become of her!' cried Miss Maynard sneeringly: 'you need not wonder,
I think, what her fate is: no doubt Mr Glenmurray's _interesting
companion_ has not lost her companionable qualities, and is a companion
still.' 'Yes,' observed Mrs Wallington; 'or, rather, I dare say that angel of
purity is gone upon the town.' It was the dark hour, else Colonel Mordaunt's agitation, on hearing
these gross and unjust remarks, must have betrayed his secret to every
eye; while indignation now impeded his utterance as much as confusion
had done before. 'Surely, surely,' cried the kind and candid Emma Douglas, 'I must
grossly have mistaken Miss Mowbray's character, if she was capable of
the conduct which you attribute to her!' 'My dear creature!' replied Mrs Wallington, 'how should you know
any thing of her character, when it was gone long before you knew
her?--_Character_, indeed! you remind me of my brother--Mr Davenport,'
continued she to a gentleman present, 'did you ever hear the story of
my brother and an angel of purity whom he met with abroad?' 'No--never.' 'Be quiet,' said Maynard; 'I will not be laughed at.' However, Mrs Wallington and Miss Maynard, who had not yet forgiven
the deep impression which Adeline's graces had made on their brother,
insisted on telling the story; to which Colonel Mordaunt listened with
eager and anxious curiosity. It received all the embellishments which
female malice could give it; and if it amused any one, certainly that
person was neither Mordaunt, nor Emma Douglas, nor her gentle sister. 'But how fortunate it was,' added Miss Maynard, 'that we were not with
my brother! as we should unavoidably have walked and talked with this
angel.' Mordaunt longed to say, 'I think the good fortune was all on Miss
Mowbray's side.' But Adeline and her cause were in good hands: Emma Douglas stood forth
as her champion.--'We feel very differently on that subject,' she
replied. 'I shall ever regret, not that I saw and conversed with Miss
Mowbray, but that I did not see and converse with her again and again.' At this moment Emma was standing by Colonel Mordaunt, who involuntarily
caught her hand and pressed it eagerly; but tried to disguise his
motives by suddenly seating her in a chair behind her, saying, 'You had
better sit down; I am sure you must be tired with standing so long.' 'No; really, Emma,' cried Major Douglas, 'you go too far there; though
to be sure, if by seeing and conversing with Miss Mowbray you could have
convinced her of her errors, I should not have objected to your seeing
her once more or so.' 'Surely,' said Mrs Douglas timidly, 'we ought, my love, to have repeated
our visits till we had made a convert of her.' 'A _convert_ of her!' exclaimed Mr Maynard's sisters, 'a convert of a
kept mistress!' bursting into a violent laugh, which had a most painful
effect on the irritable nerves of Colonel Mordaunt, whose tongue,
parched with emotion, cleaved to the roof of his mouth whenever he
attempted to speak. 'Pray, to what other circumstance, yet untold, do you allude?' said Mr
Davenport. 'Oh, we too had a rencontre with the philosopher and his charming
friend,' said Major Douglas, 'and--but, Emma, do you tell the
story.--'Sdeath!--Poor fellow!--Well, but we parted good friends,' added
the kind-hearted Caledonian, dispersing a tear; while Emma, in simple
but impressive language, related all that passed at Perpignan between
themselves, Adeline, and Glenmurray; and concluded with saying, that,
'from the almost idolatrous respect with which Glenmurray spoke and
apparently thought of Adeline, and from the account of her conduct and
its motives, which he so fully detailed, she was convinced that, so
far from being influenced by depravity in connecting herself with
Glenmurray, Adeline was the victim of a romantic, absurd, and false
conception of virtue; and she should have thought it her duty to have
endeavoured, assisted by her sister, to have prevailed on her to
renounce her opinions, and, by becoming the wife of Glenmurray, to
restore to the society of her own sex, a woman formed to be its ornament
and its example. 'Poor thing!' she added in a faltering voice, 'would
that I knew her fate!' 'I can guess it, I tell you,' said Mrs Wallington. 'We had better drop the subject, madam,' replied Emma Douglas
indignantly, 'as it is one that we shall never agree upon. If I supposed
Miss Mowbray happy, I should feel for her, and feel interest sufficient
in her fate to make me combat your prejudices concerning her; but now
that she is perhaps afflicted, poor, friendless, and scorned, though
unjustly, by every "virtuous she that knows her story," I cannot command
my feelings when she is named with sarcastic respect, nor can I bear to
hear an unhappy woman supposed to be plunged in the lowest depths of
vice, whom I, on the contrary, believe to be at this moment atoning for
the error of her judgment by a life of lonely penitence, or sunk perhaps
already in the grave, the victim of a broken heart.' Colonel Mordaunt, affected and delighted, hung on Emma Douglas's words
with breathless attention, resolving when she had ended her narration to
begin his, and clear Adeline from the calumnies of Mrs Wallington and
Miss Maynard: but after articulating with some difficulty--'Ladies,--I
--Miss Douglas,--I--' he found that his feelings would not allow him to
proceed: therefore, suddenly raising Emma's hand to his lips, imprinted
on it a kiss, at once fervent and respectful, and, making a hasty bow,
ran out of the house. Every one was astonished; but none so much as Emma Douglas. 'Why, Emma!' cried the major, 'who should have thought it? I verily
believe you have turned Mordaunt's head;--I protest that he kissed your
hand:--I suppose he will be here to-morrow, making proposals in form.' 'I wish he may!' exclaimed Mrs Douglas. 'It is not very likely, I think,' cried Miss Maynard. Mrs Wallington said nothing; but she fanned herself violently. 'How do you know that?' said Maynard. 'He kissed your hand very
tenderly--did he not, Miss Douglas? and took advantage of the dark hour:
that looks very lover-like.' Emma Douglas, who, in spite of her reason, was both embarrassed and
flattered by Colonel Mordaunt's unexpected mode of taking leave, said
not a word; but Mrs Wallington, in a voice hoarse with angry emotion,
cried:

'It was very free in him, I think, and very unlike Colonel Mordaunt; for
he was not a sort of man to take liberties but where he met with
encouragement.' 'Then I am sure he would be free with you, sister, sometimes,'
sarcastically observed Miss Maynard. 'Nay, with both of you, I think,' replied Maynard, who had not forgiven
the laugh at his expense which they had tried to excite; on which an
angry dialogue took place between the brother and sisters: and the
Douglases, disgusted and provoked, retired to their apartment. 'There was something very strange and uncommon,' said Mrs Douglas,
detaining Emma in her dressing-room, 'in Colonel Mordaunt's behaviour--Do
you not think so, Emma?--If it should have any meaning!' 'Meaning!' cried the major: 'what meaning should it have? Why, my dear,
do you think Mordaunt never kissed a woman's hand before?' 'But it was so _particular_.--Well, Emma, if it should lead to
consequences!' 'Consequences!' cried the major: 'my dear girl, what can you mean?' 'Why, if he should _really love_ our Emma?' 'Why then I hope our Emma will love him.--What say you, Emma?' 'I say?--I--' she replied: 'really I never thought it possible that
Colonel Mordaunt should have any thoughts of me, nor do I now;--but it
is very strange that he should kiss my hand!' The major could not help laughing at the _naiveté_ of this reply, and in
a mutual whisper they agreed how much they wished to see their sister
so happily disposed of; while Emma paced up and down her own apartment
some time before she undressed herself; and after seeming to convince
herself, by recollecting all Colonel Mordaunt's conduct towards her,
that he could not possibly _mean_ any thing by his unusual adieu, she
went to sleep, exclaiming, 'But it is very strange that he should kiss
my hand!' The next morning explained the mystery: for breakfast was scarcely over,
when Colonel Mordaunt appeared; and his presence occasioned a blush,
from different causes, on the cheeks of all the ladies, and a smile on
the countenances of both the gentlemen. 'You left us very abruptly last night,' said Major Douglas. 'I did so,' replied Mordaunt with a sort of grave smile. 'Were you taken ill?' asked Maynard. 'I--I was not quite easy,' answered he: 'but, Miss Douglas, may I
request the honour of seeing you alone for a few minutes?' Again the ladies blushed, and the gentlemen smiled. But Emma's weakness
had been temporary: she had convinced herself that Colonel Mordaunt's
action had been nothing more than a tribute to what he fancied her
generous defence of an unfortunate woman: and with an air of embarrassed
dignity she gave him her hand to lead her into an adjoining apartment. 'This is very good of you,' cried Colonel Mordaunt: 'but you are all
goodness!--My dear Miss Douglas, had I not gone away as I did last
night, I believe I should have fallen down and worshipped you, or
committed some other extravagance.' 'Indeed!--What could I say to excite such enthusiasm!' replied Emma
deeply blushing. 'What!--Oh, Miss Douglas!' --Then after a few more ohs, and other
exclamations, he related to her the whole progress of his acquaintance
with an attachment to Adeline, adding as he concluded, 'Now then judge
what feelings you must have excited in my bosom:--yes, Miss Douglas, I
reverenced you before for your own sake, I now adore you for that of my
lost Adeline.' 'So!' thought Emma, 'the kiss of the hand is explained,'--and she
sighed as she thought it; nor did she much like the word _reverenced_:
but she had ample amends for her mortification by what followed. 'Really,' cried Colonel Mordaunt, gazing very earnestly at her, 'I do
not mean to flatter you, but there is something in your countenance that
reminds me very strongly of Adeline.' 'Is it possible?' said Emma, her cheeks glowing and her eyes sparkling
as she spoke: 'you may not mean to flatter me, but I assure you I am
flattered; for I never saw any woman whom in appearance I so much wished
to resemble.' 'You do resemble her indeed,' cried Colonel Mordaunt, 'and the likeness
grows stronger and stronger.' Emma blushed deeper and deeper. 'But come,' exclaimed he, 'let us go; and I will--no, _you_ shall--relate
to the party in the next room what I have been telling you, for I long
to shame those d--'

'Fye!' said Emma smiling, and holding up her hand as if to stop the
coming word. And she did stop it; for Colonel Mordaunt conveyed the
reproving hand to his lips; and Emma said to herself, as she half
frowning withdrew it, 'I am glad my brother was not present.' Their return to the breakfast-room was welcome to every one, from
different causes, as Colonel Mordaunt's motives for requesting a
tête-à-tête had given rise to various conjectures. But all conjecture
was soon lost in certainty: for Emma Douglas, with more than usual
animation of voice and countenance, related what Colonel Mordaunt had
authorized her to relate; and the envious sisters heard, with increased
resentment, that Adeline, were she unmarried, would be the choice of the
man whose affections they were eagerly endeavouring to captivate. 'You can't think,' said Colonel Mordaunt, when Emma had concluded,
leaving him charmed with the manner in which she had told his story, and
with the generous triumph which sparkled in her eyes at being able to
exhibit Adeline's character in so favourable a point of view, 'you can't
think how much Miss Douglas reminds me of Mrs Berrendale!' 'Lord!' said Miss Maynard with a toss of the head, 'my brother told us
that she was handsome!' 'And so she is,' replied the colonel, provoked at this brutal speech:
'she has one of the finest countenances that I ever saw,--a countenance
never distorted by those feelings of envy, and expressions of spite,
which so often disfigure some women,--converting even a beauty into a
fiend; and in this respect no one will doubt that Miss Douglas resembles
her:

  'What's female beauty--but an air divine,
  Thro' which the mind's all gentle graces shine?' says one of our first poets: therefore, in Dr Young's opinion, madam,'
continued Mordaunt, turning to Emma, 'you would have been a perfect
beauty.' This speech, so truly gratifying to the amiable girl to whom it was
addressed, was a dagger in the heart of both the sisters. Nor was Emma's
pleasure unalloyed by pain; for she feared that Mordaunt's attentions
might become dangerous to her peace of mind, as she could not disguise
to herself, that his visits at Mr Maynard's had been the chief cause of
her reluctance to return to Scotland whenever their journey home was
mentioned. For, always humble in her ideas of her own charms, Emma
Douglas could not believe that Mordaunt would ever entertain any feeling
for her at all resembling love, except when he fancied that she looked
like Adeline. But however unlikely it seemed that Mordaunt should become attached to
her, and however resolved she was to avoid his society, certain it is
that he soon found he could be happy in the society of no other woman,
since to no other could he talk on the subject nearest his heart; and
Emma, though blaming herself daily for her temerity, could not refuse to
receive Mordaunt's visits: and her patient attention to his conversation,
of which Adeline was commonly the theme, seemed to have a salutary
effect on his wounded feelings. But the time for their departure arrived, much to the joy of Mrs
Wallington and her sister, who hoped when Emma was gone to have a chance
of being noticed by Mordaunt. What then must have been their confusion and disappointment, when
Colonel Mordaunt begged to be allowed to attend the Douglases on their
journey home, as he had never seen the Highlands, and wished to see them
in such good company! Major Douglas and his charming wife gave a glad
consent to this proposal: but Emma Douglas heard it with more alarm than
pleasure; for, though her heart rejoiced at it, her reason condemned it. A few days, however, convinced her apprehensive delicacy, that, if she
loved Colonel Mordaunt, it was not without hope of a return. Colonel Mordaunt declared that every day seemed to increase her
resemblance to Adeline in expression and manner; and in conduct his
reason told him that she was her superior; nor could he for a moment
hesitate to prefer as a wife, Emma Douglas who had never erred, to
Adeline who had. Colonel Mordaunt felt, to borrow the words of a celebrated female
writer,[1] that 'though it is possible to love and esteem a woman who
has expiated the faults of her youth by a sincere repentance; and though
before God and man her errors may be obliterated; still there exists one
being in whose eyes she can never hope to efface them, and that is her
lover or her husband.' He felt that no man of acute sensibility can
be happy with a woman whose recollections are not pure: she must
necessarily be jealous of the opinion which he entertains of her; and he
must be often afraid of speaking, lest he utter a sentiment that may
wound and mortify her. Besides, he was, on just grounds, more desirous
of marrying a woman whom he 'admired, than one whom he forgave;' and
therefore, while he addressed Emma, he no longer regretted Adeline. 1: Madame de Stael, _Recueil de Morceaux détachés_, page 208. In short, he at length ceased to talk of Emma's resemblance to Adeline,
but seemed to admire her wholly for her own sake; and having avowed his
attachment, and been assured of Emma's in return, by Major Douglas, he
came back to England in the ensuing autumn, the happy husband of one of
the best of women. We left Adeline preparing to address Mrs Mowbray and recommend her child
to her protection:--but being deeply impressed with the importance of
the task which she was about to undertake, she timidly put it off
from day to day; and having convinced herself that it was her duty to
endeavour to excite her husband to repentance, and make him acknowledge
Editha as his legitimate child, she determined to write to him before
she addressed her mother, and also to bid a last farewell to Colonel
Mordaunt, whose respectful attachment had soothed some of the pangs
which consciousness of her past follies had inflicted, and whose active
friendship deserved her warmest acknowledgment. Little did she think the
fatal effect which one instance of his friendly zeal in her cause had
had on Berrendale; unconscious was she that the husband, whose neglect
she believed to be intentional, great as were his crimes against her,
was not guilty of the additional crime of suffering her to pine in
poverty without making a single inquiry concerning her, but was
convinced that both she and her child were no longer in existence. In her letter to him, she conjured him by the love which he _always_
bore Glenmurray, by the love he _once_ bore her, and by the remorse
which he would sooner or later feel for his conduct towards her and her
child, to acknowledge Editha to be his lawful heir, but to suffer her to
remain under that protection to which she meant to bequeath her; and on
these conditions she left him her blessing and her pardon. The letter to Colonel Mordaunt was long, and perhaps diffuse: but
Adeline was jealous of his esteem, though regardless of his love; and as
he had known her while acting under the influence of a fatal error of
opinion, she wished to show him that on conviction she had abandoned
her former way of thinking, and was candid enough to own that she had
been wrong. 'You, no doubt,' she said, 'are well acquainted with the arguments urged
by different writers in favour of marriage. I shall therefore only
mention the argument which carried at length full conviction to _my_
mind, and conquered even my deep and heartfelt reverence for the
opinions of one who long was, and ever will be, the dearest object of my
love and regret. But _he_, had he lived, would I am sure have altered
his sentiments; and had he been a parent, the argument I allude to, as
it is founded on a consideration of the interest of children, would have
found its way to his reason, through his affections. 'It is evident that on the education given to children must depend the
welfare of the community; and, consequently, that whatever is likely
to induce parents to neglect the education of their children must be
_hurtful_ to the welfare of the community. It is also certain, that
though the agency of the _passions_ be necessary to the existence of all
society, it is on the cultivation and influence of the _affections_ that
the happiness and improvement of social life depend. 'Hence it follows that marriage must be more beneficial to society
in its consequences, than connexions capable of being dissolved at
pleasure; because it has a tendency to call forth and exercise the
affections, and control the passions. It has been said, that, were we
free to dissolve at will a connexion formed by love, we should not wish
to do it, as constancy is natural to us, and there is in all of us a
tendency to form an exclusive attachment. But though I believe, from my
own experience, that the few are capable of unforced constancy, and
could love for life one dear and honoured object, still I believe that
the many are given to the love of change;--that, in men especially, a
new object can excite new passion; and, judging from the increasing
depravity of both sexes, in spite of existing laws, and in defiance of
shame,--I am convinced, that if the ties of marriage were dissolved, or
it were no longer to be judged infamous to act in contempt of them,
unbridled licentiousness would soon be in general practice. What, then,
in such a state of society, would be the fate of the children born in
it?--What would their education be? Parents continually engrossed in
the enervating but delightful egotism of a new and happy love, lost in
selfish indulgence, the passions awake, but the affections slumbering,
and the sacred ties of parental feeling not having time nor opportunity
to fasten on the heart,--their offspring would either die the victims
of neglect, and the very existence of the human race be threatened; or,
without morals or instruction, they would grow up to scourge the world
by their vices, till the whole fabric of civilized society was gradually
destroyed. 'On this ground, therefore, this strong ground, I venture to build
my present opinion, that marriage is a wise and ought to be a sacred
institution; and I bitterly regret the hour when, with the hasty and
immature judgment of eighteen, and with a degree of presumption scarcely
pardonable at any time of life, I dared to think and act contrary to
this opinion and the reverend experience of ages, and became in the eyes
of the world an example of vice, when I believed myself the champion of
virtue.' She then went on to express the following sentiments. 'You will think,
perhaps, that I ought to struggle against the weakness which is hurrying
me to the grave, and live for the sake of my child.--Alas! it is for her
sake that I most wish to die. 'There are two ways in which a mother can be of use to her daughter: the
one is by instilling into her mind virtuous principles, and by setting
her a virtuous example: the other is, by being to her in her own person
an awful warning, a melancholy proof of the dangers which attend a
deviation from the path of virtue. But, oh! how jealous must a mother be
of her child's esteem and veneration! and how could she bear to humble
herself in the eyes of the beloved object, by avowing that she had
committed crimes against society, however atoned for by penitence and
sorrow! I can never, now, be a correct example for my Editha, nor could
I endure to live to be a warning to her.--Nay, if I lived, I should
be most probably a dangerous example to her; for I should be (on my
death-bed I think I may be allowed the boast) respected and esteemed;
while the society around me would forget my past errors, in the
sincerity of my repentance. 'If then a strong temptation should assail my child, might she not yield
to it from an idea that "one false step may be retrieved," and cite her
mother as an example of this truth? while, unconscious of the many
secret heart-aches of that repentant mother, unconscious of the sorrows
and degradations she had experienced, she regarded nothing but the
present respectability of her mother's life, and contented herself with
hoping one day to resemble her. 'Believe me, that were it possible for me to choose between life and
death, for my child's sake, the choice would be the latter. Now, when
she shall see in my mournful and eventful history, written as it has
been by me in moments of melancholy leisure, that all my sorrows were
consequent on one presumptuous error of judgment in early youth, and
shall see a long and minute detail of the secret agonies which I have
endured, those agonies wearing away my existence, and ultimately
hurrying me to an untimely grave; she will learn that the woman who
feels justly, yet has been led even into the practice of vice, however
she may be forgiven by others, can never forgive herself; and though she
may dare to lift an eye of hope to that Being who promises pardon on
repentance, she will still recollect with anguish the fair and glorious
course which she might have run: and that, instead of humbly imploring
forbearance and forgiveness, she might have demanded universal respect
and esteem. 'True it is, that I did not act in defiance of the world's opinion, from
any depraved feeling, or vicious inclinations: but the world could not
be expected to believe this, since motives are known only to our own
hearts, and the great Searcher of hearts: therefore, as far as example
goes, I was as great a stumbling-block to others as if the life I led
had been owing to the influence of lawless desires; and society was
right in making, and in seeing, no distinction between me and any other
woman living in an unsanctioned connexion. 'But methinks I hear you say, that Editha might never be informed of
my past errors. Alas! wretched must that woman be whose happiness and
respectability depend on the secrecy of others! Besides, did I not think
the concealment of crime in itself a crime, how could I know an hour
of peace while I reflected that a moment's malice, or inadvertency, in
one of Editha's companions might cause her to blush at her mother's
disgrace?--that, while her young cheek was flushed perhaps with the
artless triumphs of beauty, talent, and virtue, the parent who envied
me, or the daughter who envied her might suddenly convert her joy into
anguish and mortification, by artfully informing her, with feigned pity
for my sorrows and admiration of my penitence, that I had once been a
_disgrace_ to that family of which I was now the pride?--No--even if I
were not for ever separated in this world from the only man whom I ever
loved with passionate and well-founded affection, united for life to
the object of my just aversion, and were I not conscious (horrible and
overwhelming thought!) of having by my example led another into the path
of sin,--still, I repeat it, for my child's sake I should wish to die,
and should consider, not early death, but lengthened existence, as a
curse.' So Adeline reasoned and felt in her moments of reflection: but the heart
had sometimes dominion over her; and as she gazed on Editha, and thought
that Mrs Mowbray might be induced to receive her again to her favour,
she wished even on any terms to have her life prolonged. Having finished her letter to Colonel Mordaunt and Berrendale, she again
prepared to write to her mother; a few transient fears overcoming every
now and then those hopes of success in her application, which, till she
took up her pen, she had so warmly encouraged. Alas! little did she know how erroneously for years she had judged of
Mrs Mowbray. Little did she suspect that her mother had long forgiven
her; had pined after her; had sought, though in vain, to procure
intelligence of her; and was then wearing away her existence in solitary
woe, a prey to self-reproach, and to the corroding fear that her
daughter, made desperate by her renunciation of her, had, on the death
of Glenmurray, plunged into a life of shame, or sunk, broken-hearted,
into the grave! for not one of Adeline's letters had ever reached Mrs
Mowbray; and the mother and daughter had both been the victims of female
treachery and jealousy. Mrs Mowbray, as soon as she had parted with Adeline for the last time,
had dismissed all her old servants, the witnesses of her sorrows and
disgrace, and retired to her estate in Cumberland,--an estate where
Adeline had first seen the light, and where Mrs Mowbray had first
experienced the transport of a mother. This spot was therefore ill
calculated to banish Adeline from her mother's thoughts, and to continue
her seclusion from her affections. On the contrary, her image haunted Mrs Mowbray:--whithersoever she went,
she still saw her in an attitude of supplication; she still heard the
plaintive accents of her voice;--and often did she exclaim, 'My child,
my child! wretch that I am! must I never see thee more!' These ideas increased to so painful a degree, that, finding her solitude
insupportable, she invited an orphan relation in narrow circumstances
to take up her abode with her. This young woman, whose ruling passion was avarice, and whose greatest
talent was cunning, resolved to spare no pains to keep the situation
which she had gained, even to the exclusion of Adeline, should Mrs
Mowbray be weak enough to receive her again. She therefore intercepted
all the letters which were in or like Adeline's hand-writing; and having
learnt to imitate Mrs Mowbray's, she enclosed them in a blank cover to
Adeline, who, thinking the direction was written in her mother's hand,
desisted, as the artful girl expected she would do, from what appeared
to her a hopeless application. And she exulted in her contrivance;--when Mrs Mowbray, on seeing in a
magazine that Glenmurray was dead, (full a year after his decease,)
bursting into a passion of tears, protested that she would instantly
invite Adeline to her house. 'Yes,' cried she, 'I can do so without infringement of my oath.--She is
disgraced in the eye of the world by her connexion with Glenmurray, and
she is wretched in love; nay, more so, perhaps, than I have been; and I
can, I will invite her to lose the remembrance of her misfortunes in my
love!' Thus did her ardent wish to be re-united to Adeline deceive her
conscience; for by the phrase 'wretched in love,' she meant, forsaken by
the object of her attachment,--and that Adeline had not been: therefore
her oath remained in full force against her. But where could she seek
Adeline? Dr Norberry could, perhaps, give her this information; and to
him she resolved to write--though he had cast her from his acquaintance:
'but her pride,' as she said, 'fell with her fortunes;' and she scrupled
not to humble herself before the zealous friend of her daughter. But
this letter would never have reached him, had not her treacherous
relation been ill at the time when it was written. Dr Norberry had recovered the illness of which Adeline supposed him to
have died: but as her letter to him, to which she received no answer,
alluded to the money transaction between her and Mrs Norberry; and as
she commented on the insulting expressions in Mrs Norberry's note, that
lady thought proper to suppress the second letter as well as the first;
and when the doctor, on his recovery, earnestly demanded to know whether
any intelligence had been received of Miss Mowbray, Mrs Norberry, with
pretended reluctance, told him that she had written to him in great
distress, while he was delirious, to borrow money; that she had sent
her ten pounds, which Adeline had returned, reproaching her for her
parsimony, and saying that she had found a friend who would not suffer
her to want. 'But did you tell her that you thought me in great danger?' 'I did.' 'Why, what, woman! did she not, after that, write to know how I was?' 'Never.' 'I could not have thought it of her!' answered the doctor--who could not
but believe this story for the sake of his own peace, as it was less
destructive to his happiness to think Adeline in fault, than his wife or
children guilty of profligate falsehood: he therefore, with a deep sigh,
begged Adeline's name might never be mentioned to him again; and though
he secretly wished to hear of her welfare, he no longer made her the
subject of conversation. But Mrs Mowbray's letter recalled her powerfully both to his memory and
affections, while, with many a deep-drawn sigh, he regretted that he had
no possible means of discovering where she was;--and with a heavy heart
he wrote the following letter, which Miss Woodville, Mrs Mowbray's
relation, having first contrived to open and read it, ventured to give
into her hands, as it contained no satisfactory information concerning
Adeline. 'I look on the separation of my mother and me in this world to
     be eternal,' said the poor dear lost Adeline to me, the last
     time we met. 'You do!' replied I: 'then, poor devil! how
     miserable will your mother be when her resentment
     subsides!--Well, when that time comes, I may, perhaps see her
     again,' added I, with a queer something rising in my throat
     as I said it, and your poor girl blessed me for the kind
     intention.--(Pshaw! I have blotted the paper: at my years it is
     a shame to be so watery-eyed.) Well,--the time above-mentioned
     is come--you are miserable, you are repentant--and you ask me
     to forget and forgive.--I do forget, I do forgive: some time or
     other, too, I will tell you so in person; and were the lost
     Adeline to know that I did so, she would bless me for the act,
     as she did before for the intention. But, alas! where she is,
     what she is, I know not, and have not any means of knowing.