On his way from Bath he went a few miles out of his road,
in order, as he said, and perhaps as he thought, to pay a visit to an
old servant of his mother's, who was married to a respectable farmer;
but, fortunately, the farm commanded a view of the Pavilion, and
Glenmurray could from his window gaze on the house that contained the
woman of his affections. But to return to Adeline, who, while hastily tearing open the letter,
asked Arthur where his master was, and heard with indescribable emotion
that he was in the neighbourhood. 'Here! so providentially!' she exclaimed, and proceeded to read the
letter; but her emotion forbade her to read it entirely. She only saw
that it contained banknotes; that Glenmurray was going abroad for his
health; and, in case he should die there, had sent her the money which
he had meant to leave her in his will,--lest she should be, in the
meanwhile, any way dependent on Sir Patrick. Numberless conflicting emotions took possession of Adeline's heart while
the new proof of her lover's attentive tenderness met her view: and, as
she contrasted his generous and delicate attachment with the licentious
passion of her mother's libertine husband, a burst of uncontrollable
affection for Glenmurray agitated her bosom; and, rendered superstitious
by her fears, she looked on him as sent by Providence to save her from
the dangers of her home. 'This is the second time,' cried she, 'that Glenmurray, as my guardian
angel, has appeared at the moment when I was exposed to danger from the
same guilty quarter! Ah! surely there is more than accident in this! and
he is ordained to be my guide and my protector!' When once a woman has associated with an amiable man the idea of
protection, he can never again be indifferent to her: and when the
protector happens to be the chosen object of her love, his power becomes
fixed on a basis never to be shaken. 'It is enough,' said Adeline in a faltering voice, pressing the letter
to her lips, and bursting into tears of grateful tenderness as she
spoke: 'Lead me to your master directly.' 'Bless my heart! will you see him then, miss?' cried Arthur. 'See him?' replied Adeline--'see the only friend I now can boast?--But
let us be gone this moment, lest I should be seen and pursued.' Instantly, guided by Arthur, Adeline set off full speed for the
farm-house, nor stopped till she found herself in the presence of
Glenmurray! 'O! I am safe now!' exclaimed Adeline, throwing herself into his arms;
while he was so overcome with surprise and joy that he could not speak
the welcome which his heart gave her: and Adeline, happy to behold him
again, was as silent as her lover. At length Glenmurray exclaimed:--

'Do we then meet again, Adeline!' 'Yes,' replied she; 'and we meet to part no more.' 'Do not mock me,' cried Glenmurray starting from his seat, and seizing
her extended hand; 'my feelings must not be trifled with.' 'Nor am I a woman to trifle with them. Glenmurray, I come to you for
safety and protection;--I come to seek shelter in your arms from misery
and dishonour. You are ill, you are going into a foreign country: and
from this moment look on me as your nurse, your companion;--your home
shall be my home, your country my country!' Glenmurray, too much agitated, too happy to speak, could only press the
agitated girl to his bosom, and fold his arms round her, as if to assure
her of the protection which she claimed. 'But there is not a moment to be lost,' cried Adeline: 'I may be missed
and pursued: let us be gone directly.' The first word was enough for Glenmurray: eager to secure the recovered
treasure which he had thought for ever lost, his orders were given, and
executed by the faithful Arthur with the utmost dispatch; and even
before Adeline had explained to him the cause of her resolution to elope
with him they were on their road to Cornwall, meaning to embark at
Falmouth for Lisbon. But Arthur, who was going to marry, and leave Glenmurray's service,
received orders to stay at the farm till he had learned how Sir Patrick
was: and having obtained the necessary information, he was to send it
to Glenmurray at Falmouth. The next morning he saw Sir Patrick himself
driving full speed past the farm; and having written immediately to
his master, Adeline had the satisfaction of knowing that she had not
purchased her own safety by the sufferings or danger of her persecutor,
and the consequent misery of her mother. But Glenmurray's heart needed no explanation of the cause of Adeline's
elopement. She was with him--with him, as she said, for ever. True, she
had talked of flying from misery and dishonour; but he knew they could
not reach her in his arms,--not even dishonour according to the ideas of
society,--for he meant to make Adeline legally his as soon as they were
safe from pursuit, and his illness was forgotten in the fond transport
of the present moment. Adeline's joy was of a much shorter duration. Recollections of a most
painful nature were continually recurring. True it was that it was no
longer possible for her to reside under the roof of her mother: but was
it necessary for her to elope with Glenmurray? the man whom she had
solemnly promised her mother to renounce! Then, on the other side,
she argued that the appearance of love for Glenmurray was an excuse
sufficient to conceal from her deluded parent the real cause of her
elopement. 'It was my sole alternative,' said she mentally:--'my mother must either
suppose me an unworthy child, or know Sir Patrick to be an unworthy
husband; and it will be easier for her to support the knowledge of the
one than the other: then, when she forgives me, as no doubt she will in
time, I shall be happy: but that I could never be, while convinced that
I had made her miserable by revealing to her the wickedness of Sir
Patrick.' While this was passing in her mind, her countenance was full of such
anxious and mournful expression, that Glenmurray, unable to keep silence
any longer, conjured her to tell him what so evidently weighed upon her
spirits. 'The difficulty that oppressed me is past,' she replied, wiping from
her eyes the tears which the thought of having left her mother so
unexpectedly, and for the first time, produced. 'I have convinced
myself, that to leave home and commit myself to your protection was the
most proper and virtuous step that I could take: I have not obeyed the
dictates of love, but of reason.' 'I am very sorry to hear it,' said Glenmurray mournfully. 'It seems to me so very rational to love you,' returned Adeline tenderly,
shocked at the sad expression of his countenance, 'that what seems to be
the dictates of reason may be those of love only.' To a reply like this, Glenmurray could only answer by close involvement
not intelligible expressions of fondness to the object of them, which
are so delightful to lovers themselves, and so uninteresting to other
people: nay, so entirely was Glenmurray again engrossed by the sense of
present happiness, that his curiosity was still suspended, and Adeline's
story remained untold. But Adeline's pleasure was damped by painful
recollections, and still more by her not being able to hide from herself
the mournful consciousness that the ravages of sickness were but
too visible in Glenmurray's face and figure, and that the flush of
unexpected delight could but ill conceal the hollow paleness of his
cheek, and the sunk appearance of his eyes. Meanwhile the chaise rolled on,--post succeeded to post; and though
night was far advanced, Adeline, fearful of being pursued, would not
consent to stop, and they travelled till morning. But Glenmurray,
feeling himself exhausted, prevailed on her, for his sake, to alight at
a small inn on the road side near Marlborough. There Adeline narrated the occurrences of the past day; but with
difficulty could she prevail on herself to own to Glenmurray that she
had been the object of such an outrage as she had experienced from Sir
Patrick. A truly delicate woman feels degraded, not flattered, by being the
object of libertine attempts; and, situated as Adeline and Glenmurray
now were, to disclose the insult which had been offered to her was a
still more difficult task: but to conceal it was impossible. She felt
that, even to him, some justification of her precipitate and unsolicited
flight was necessary; and nothing but Sir Patrick's attempt could
justify it. She, therefore, blushing and hesitating, revealed the
disgraceful secret; but such was its effect on the weak spirits and
delicate health of Glenmurray, that the violent emotions which he
underwent brought on a return of his most alarming symptoms; and in a
few hours Adeline, bending over the sick bed of her lover, experienced
for the first time that most dreadful of feelings, fear for the life of
the object of her affections. Two days, however, restored him to comparative safety, and they reached
a small and obscure village within a short distance from Falmouth, most
conveniently situated. There they took up their abode, and resolved to
remain till the wind should change, and enable them to sail for Lisbon. In this retreat, situated in air as salubrious as that of the south of
France, Glenmurray was soon restored to health, especially as happy love
was now his, and brought back the health of which hopeless love had
contributed to deprive him. The woman whom he loved was his companion
and his nurse; and so dear had the quiet scene of their happiness
become to them, that, forgetful there was still a danger of their being
discovered, it was with considerable regret that they received a summons
to embark, and saw themselves on their voyage to Portugal. But before she left England Adeline wrote to her mother. After a pleasant and short voyage the lovers found themselves at Lisbon;
and Glenmurray, pursuant to his resolution, immediately proposed to
Adeline, to unite himself to her by the indissoluble ties of marriage. Nothing could exceed Adeline's surprise at this proposal: at first she
could not believe Glenmurray was in earnest; but seeing that he looked
not only grave but anxious, and as if earnestly expecting an answer, she
asked him whether he had convinced himself that what he had written
against marriage was a tissue of mischievous absurdity. Glenmurray, blushing, with the conceit of an author replied 'that he
still thought his arguments unanswerable.' 'Then, if you still are convinced your theory is good, why let your
practice be bad? It is incumbent on you to act up to the principles that
you profess, in order to give them their proper weight in society--else
you give the lie to your own declarations.' 'But it is better for me to do that, than for you to be the sacrifice to
my reputation.' 'I,' replied Adeline, 'am entirely out of the question: you are to be
governed by no other law but your desire to promote general utility, and
are not to think at all of the interest of an individual.' 'How can I do so, when that individual is dearer to me than all the
world beside?' cried Glenmurray passionately. 'And if you but once recollect that you are dearer to me than all
the world beside, you will cease to suppose that my happiness can be
affected by the opinion entertained of my conduct by others.' As Adeline
said this, she twisted both her hands in his arms so affectionately, and
looked up in his face with so satisfied and tender an expression, that
Glenmurray could not bear to go on with a subject which evidently drew a
cloud across her brow; and hours, days, weeks, and months passed rapidly
over their heads before he had resolution to renew it. Hours, days, weeks, and months spent in a manner most dear to the heart
and most salutary to the mind of Adeline!--Her taste for books, which
had hitherto been cultivated in a partial manner, and had led her to one
range of study only, was now directed by Glenmurray to the perusal of
general literature; and the historian, the biographer, the poet, and the
novelist, obtained alternately her attention and her praises. In her knowledge of the French and Italian languages, too, she was now
considerably improved by the instructions of her lover; and while his
occasional illnesses were alleviated by her ever watchful attentions,
their attachment was cemented by one of the strongest of all ties--the
consciousness of mutual benefit and assistance. One evening, as they were sitting on a bench in one of the public walks,
a gentleman approached them, whose appearance bespoke him to be an
Englishman, though his sun-burnt complexion showed that he had been for
years exposed to a more ardent climate than that of Britain. As he came nearer, Glenmurray thought his features were familiar to him;
and the stranger, starting with joyful surprise, seized his hand, and
welcomed him as an old friend. Glenmurray returned his salutation with
great cordiality, and recognized in the stranger, a Mr Maynard, an
amiable man, who had gone to seek his fortune in India, and was returned
a nabob, but with an irreproachable character. 'So, then,' cried Mr Maynard gaily, 'this is the elegant young English
couple that my servant, and even the inn-keeper himself, was so loud in
praise of! Little did I think the happy man was my old friend,--though
no man is more deserving of being happy: but I beg you will introduce me
to your lady.' Glenmurray, though conscious of the mistake he was under, had not
resolution enough to avow that he was not married; and Adeline, unaware
of the difficulty of Glenmurray's situation, received Mr Maynard's
salutation with the utmost ease, though the tremor of her lover's voice,
and the blush on his cheek, as he said--'Adeline, give me leave to
introduce to you Mr Maynard, an old friend of mine,'--were sufficient
indications that the rencontre disturbed him. In a few minutes Adeline and Mr Maynard were no longer strangers. Mr
Maynard, who had not lived much in the society of well-informed women,
and not at all in that of women accustomed to original thinking, was
at once astonished and delighted at the variety of Adeline's remarks,
at the playfulness of her imagination, and the eloquence of her
expressions. But it was very evident, at length, to Mr Maynard, that in
proportion as Adeline and he became more acquainted and more satisfied
with each other, Glenmurray grew more silent and more uneasy. The
consequence was unavoidable: as most men would have done on a like
occasion, Mr Maynard thought Glenmurray was jealous of him. But no thought so vexatious to himself, and so degrading to Adeline, had
entered the confiding and discriminating mind of Glenmurray. The truth
was, he knew that Mr Maynard, whom he had seen in the walks, though he
had not known him again, had ladies of his party; and he expected that
the more Mr Maynard admired his supposed wife, the more would he be
eager to introduce her to his companions. Nor was Glenmurray wrong in his conjectures. 'I have two sisters with me, madam,' said Mr Maynard, 'whom I shall be
happy and proud to introduce to you. One of them is a widow, and has
lived several years in India, but returned with me in delicate health,
and was ordered hither: she is not a woman of great reading, but has an
excellent understanding, and will admire you. The other is several years
younger; and I am sure she would be happy in an opportunity of profiting
by the conversation of a lady, who, though not older than herself, seems
to have had so many more opportunities of improvement.' Adeline bowed, and expressed her impatience to form this new acquaintance;
and looked triumphantly at Glenmurray, meaning to express--'See, spite
of the supposed prejudices of the world, here is a man who wants to
introduce me to his sisters.' Little did she know that Maynard concluded
she was a wife: his absence from England had made him ignorant of the
nature of Glenmurray's works, or even that he was an author; so that he
was not at all likely to suppose that the moral, pious youth, whom he
had always respected, was become a visionary philosopher, and, in
defiance of the laws of society, was living openly with a mistress. 'But my sister will wonder what is become of me;' suddenly cried
Maynard; 'and as Emily is so unwell as to keep her room to-day, I must
not make her anxious. But for her illness, I should have requested your
company to supper.' 'And I should have liked to accept the invitation,' replied Adeline;
'but I will hope to see the ladies soon.' 'Oh! without fail, to-morrow,' cried Maynard: 'if Emily be not well
enough to call on you, perhaps you will come to her apartments.' 'Undoubtedly: expect me at twelve o'clock.' Maynard then shook his grave and silent friend by the hand and,
departed,--his vanity not a little flattered by the supposed jealousy of
Glenmurray. 'There now,' said Adeline, when he was out of hearing. 'I hope some
of your tender fears are done away. You see there are liberal and
unprejudiced persons in the world; and Mr Maynard, instead of shunning
me, courts my acquaintance for his sisters.' Glenmurray shook his head, and remained silent; and Adeline was
distressed to feel by his burning hand that he was seriously uneasy. 'I shall certainly call on these ladies to-morrow,' continued
Adeline:--'I really pine for the society of amiable women.' Glenmurray sighed deeply: he dreaded to tell her that he could not allow
her to call on them, and yet he knew that this painful task awaited him. Besides, she wished, she said, to know some amiable women; and, eager as
he was to indulge all her wishes, he felt but too certainly that in this
wish she could never be indulged. Even had he been capable of doing so
dishonourable an action as introducing his mistress as his wife, he
was sure that Adeline would have spurned at the deception; and silent
and sad he grasped Adeline's hand as her arm rested within his, and
complaining of indisposition, slowly returned to the inn. The next morning at breakfast, Adeline again expressed her eagerness to
form an acquaintance with the sisters of Mr Maynard; when Glenmurray,
starting from his seat, paced the room in considerable agitation. 'What is the matter!' cried Adeline, hastily rising and laying her hand
on his arm. Glenmurray grasped her hand, and replied with assumed firmness:
'Adeline, it is impossible for you to form an acquaintance with Mr
Maynard's sisters: propriety and honour both forbid me to allow it.' 'Indeed!' exclaimed Adeline, 'are they not as amiable, then, as he
described them? are they improper acquaintances for me? Well then--I am
disappointed: but you are the best judge of what is right, and I am
contented to obey you.' The simple, ingenuous and acquiescent sweetness with which she said
this, was a new pang to her lover:--had she repined, had she looked
ill-humoured, his task would not have been so difficult. 'But what reason can you give for declining this acquaintance?' resumed
Adeline. 'Aye! there's the difficulty,' replied Glenmurray: 'pure-minded and
amiable as I know you to be, how can I bear to tell these children of
prejudice that you are not my wife, but my mistress?' Adeline started; and, turning pale, exclaimed, 'Are you sure, then, that
they do not know it already?' 'Quite sure--else Maynard would not have thought you a fit companion for
his sisters.' 'But surely--he must know your principles;--he must have read your
works?' 'I am certain he is ignorant of both, and does not even know that I am
an author.' 'Is it possible?' cried Adeline: 'is there any one so unfortunate to be
unacquainted with your writings?' Glenmurray at another time would have been elated at a compliment like
this from the woman whom he idolized; but at this moment he heard it
with a feeling of pain which he would not have liked to define to
himself, and casting his eyes to the ground he said nothing. 'So then,' said Adeline mournfully, 'I am an improper companion for
them, not they for me!' and spite of herself her eyes filled with
tears.--At this moment a waiter brought in a note for Glenmurray;--it
was from Maynard, and as follows:--


       MY DEAR FRIEND,

     Emily is better to-day; and both my sisters are so impatient to
     see, and know, your charming wife, that they beg me to present
     their compliments to Mrs Glenmurray and you; and request the
     honour of your company to a late breakfast:--at eleven o'clock
     we hope to see you. Ever yours,
                                                             G. M.

'We will send an answer,' said Glenmurray: but the waiter had been
gone some minutes before either Adeline or Glenmurray spoke. At length
Adeline, struggling with her feelings, observed, 'Mr Maynard seems so
amiable a man, that I should think it would not be difficult to convince
him of his errors: surely, therefore, it is your duty to call on him,
state our real situation, and our reasons for it, and endeavour to
convince him that our attachment is sanctioned both by reason and
virtue.' 'But not by the church,' replied Glenmurray, 'and Maynard is of the old
school: besides, a man of forty-eight is not likely to be convinced by
the arguments of a young man of twenty-eight, and the example of a girl
of nineteen.' 'If age be necessary to give weight to arguments,' returned Adeline, 'I
wonder that you thought proper to publish four years ago.' 'Would to God I never had published!' exclaimed Glenmurray, almost
pettishly. 'If you had not, I probably should never have been yours,' replied
Adeline, fondly leaning her head on his shoulder, and then looking up in
his face. Glenmurray clasped her to his bosom; but again the pleasure
was mixed with pain. 'All this time,' rejoined Adeline, 'your friends
are expecting an answer: you had better carry it in person.' 'I cannot,' replied Glenmurray, 'and there is only one way of getting
out of this business to my satisfaction.' 'Name it; and rest assured that I shall approve it.' 'Then I wish to order horses immediately, and set off on our road to
France.' 'So soon,--though the air agrees with you so well?' 'O yes;--for when the mind is uneasy no air can be of use to the body.' 'But why is your mind uneasy?' 'Here I should be exposed to see Maynard, and--and--he would see you
too.' 'And what then?' 'What then?--Why, I could not bear to see him look on you with an eye of
disrespect.' 'And wherefore should he?' 'O Adeline, the name of wife imposes restraint even on a libertine; but
that of mistress--'

'Is Mr Maynard a libertine?' said Adeline gravely: and Glenmurray,
afraid of wounding her feelings by entering into a further explanation,
changed the subject, and again requested her consent to leave Lisbon. 'I have often told you,' said Adeline sighing, 'that my will is yours;
and if you will give strict orders to have letters sent after us to the
towns that we shall stop at, I am ready to set off immediately.' Glenmurray then gave his orders; wrote a letter explaining his situation
to Maynard, and in an hour they were on their journey to France. In the meanwhile Mr Maynard, Miss Maynard, and Mrs Wallington his
widowed sister, were impatiently expecting Glenmurray's answer, and
earnestly hoping to see him and his lovely companion,--but from
different motives. Maynard was impatient to see Adeline because he
really admired her; his sisters, because they hoped to find her unworthy
of such violent admiration. Their vanity had been piqued, and their envy excited, by the extravagant
praises of their brother; and they had interrupted him by the first
questions which all women ask on such occasions,--'Is she pretty?' And he answered, 'Very pretty.' 'Is she tall?' 'Very tall, taller than I am.' 'I hate tall women,' replied Miss Maynard (a little round girl of
nineteen). 'Is she fair?' 'Exquisitely fair.' 'I like brown women,' cried the widow: 'fair people always look silly.' 'But Mrs Glenmurray's eyes are hazel, and her eyelashes long and dark.' 'Hazel eyes are always bold-looking,' cried Miss Maynard. 'Not Mrs Glenmurray's; for her expression is the most pure and ingenuous
that I ever saw. Some girls, indecent in their dress, and very licentious
in their manner, passed us as we sat on the walk; and the comments
which I made on them provoked from Mrs Glenmurray some remarks on the
behaviour and dress of women; and, as she commented on the disgusting
expression of vice in women, and the charm of modest dignity both in
dress and manners, her own dress, manners, and expression, were such an
admirable comment on her words, and she shone so brightly, if I may use
the expression, in the graceful awfulness of virtue, that I gazed with
delight, and somewhat of apprehension lest this fair perfection should
suddenly take flight to her native skies, toward which her fine eyes
were occasionally turned.' 'Bless me! if our brother is not quite poetical! This prodigy has
inspired him,' replied the widow with a sneer. 'For my part, I hate prodigies,' said Miss Maynard: 'I feel myself
unworthy to associate with them.' When one woman calls another a prodigy, and expresses herself as
unworthy to associate with her, it is very certain that she means
to insult rather than compliment her; and in this sense Mr Maynard
understood his sister's words: therefore after having listened with
tolerable patience to a few more sneers at the unconscious Adeline, he
was provoked to say that, ill-disposed as he found they were toward his
new acquaintance, he hoped that when they became acquainted with her
they would still give him reason to say, as he always had done, that he
was proud of his sisters; for, in his opinion, no woman ever looked so
lovely as when she was doing justice to the merits and extenuating the
faults of a rival. 'A rival!' exclaimed the sisters at once:--'And, pray, what rivalship
could there be in this case?' 'My remark was a general one: but since you choose to make it a
particular one, I will answer to it as such,' continued Mr Maynard. 'All
women are rivals in one sense--rivals for general esteem and admiration;
and she only shall have my suffrage in her favour, who can point out a
beauty or a merit in another woman without insinuating at the same time
a counterbalancing effect.' 'But Mrs Glenmurray, it seems, has no defects!' 'At least I have not known her long enough to find them out; but you, no
doubt, will, when you know her, very readily spare me that trouble.' How injudiciously had Maynard prepared the minds of his sisters to
admire Adeline. It was a preparation to make them hate her; and they
were very impatient to begin the task of depreciating both her _morale_
and her _physique_, when Glenmurray's note arrived. 'It is not Glenmurray's hand,' said Maynard--(indeed, from agitation
of mind the writing was not recognizable). 'It must be hers then,'
continued he, affecting to kiss the address with rapture. 'It is the hand of a sloven,' observed Mrs Wallington, studying the
writing. 'But in dress she is as neat as a Quaker,' retorted the brother, eagerly
snatching the letter back, 'and her mind seems as pure as her dress.' He then broke the seal, and read out what follows:--


        'DEAR MAYNARD,

     'When you receive this, Adeline and I shall be on our road to
     France, and you,--start not!--are the occasion of our abrupt
     departure.' 'So, so, jealous indeed,' said Maynard to himself, and more impressed
than ever with the charms of Adeline; for he concluded that Glenmurray
had discovered in her an answering prepossession. 'You the occasion, brother!' cried both sisters. 'Have patience.' 'You saw Adeline; you admired her; and wished to introduce her
     to your sisters--this, honour forbad me to allow'--(the sisters
     started from their seats) 'for Adeline is not my wife, but my
     companion.' Here Maynard made a full pause--at once surprised and confounded. His
sisters, pleased as well as astonished, looked triumphantly at each
other; and Mrs Wallington exclaimed.