Still I felt that I was
not half fervent or tender enough; something was still wanting, and I
had just asked myself if that something could be love, when I heard a
sudden disturbance below; his lordship crying out, 'Oh, what shall I
do?' and Jerry bidding him 'grin and bear it.' Down I hastened, and beheld Jerry belabouring him without mercy. 'Wretch,' cried I, rushing between them: 'forbear.' 'Not till I beat him to a paste,' cried Jerry. 'The villain, to go and
offer me a bribe if I would help him in forcing you to marry him.' ''Tis false as hell!' cried his lordship. 'I would stake my life that it is,' said I. 'So now, Mr. Sullivan, down
on your knees this moment, and ask pardon, or quit my service.' 'But can that restore the teeth he has knocked out?' exclaimed his
lordship, with a finger in his mouth. 'Teeth!' cried I, shuddering. 'Two teeth,' said he. 'Two teeth!' exclaimed I, faintly. 'Two front teeth,' said he. 'Then all is over!' muttered I. 'Matters have taken a dreadful turn.' 'What do you mean?' cried he. 'My lord,' said I, 'are you quite, quite certain that you have lost
them?' 'See yourself,' cried he, lifting his lip. 'They are gone, gone for
ever!' 'They are indeed,' said I. 'And now you may be gone too.' 'Ha! what mean you?' cried he. 'My lord,' said I, 'of this you must be conscious, that a complete set
of teeth are absolutely indispensible to a hero.' 'Well?' cried he, starting. 'Well,' said I, 'having lost two of your's, you must be conscious that
you are no longer a hero.' 'You stretch my heart-strings!' cried he. 'Speak! what hideous whim is
this?' 'No whim, my lord,' answered I; 'but principle, and founded on law
heroic; founded on that law, which rejects as heroes, the maimed, the
blind, the deformed, and the crippled. Trust me, my good lord, teeth
are just as necessary in the formation of a hero as a comb.' 'By Heaven!' cried he; 'I can get other teeth at a dentist's; a
composition of paste that would amaze you. I can by all that is just.' 'That you may, my lord,' said I, 'and be happy with them; for never can
you be happy with me.' 'I am wilder than madness itself!' cried he; 'I am more desperate than
despair! I will fly to the ends of the earth, hide in a cavern, and
throw my ideas into a sonnet. On a fine summer's evening, when you walk
towards the mountains, sometimes think of me.' 'Never as a lover, my lord,' said I: 'so put that out of your head at
once. Oh! it shocks me to think I should ever have received you as
one!' He began a tremendous imprecation; but was interrupted by the sudden
arrival of a gentleman on horseback with a servant after him. The
gentleman stopped, alighted, approached. 'Mr. Betterton!' cried I; 'can it be possible?' 'Nothing is impossible,' said he, with his obsequious bow and confirmed
smile, 'when the charming Cherubina prompts our efforts. You remember
you left me in a ridiculous dilemma, which your friend Stuart
contrived;--masterpiece of ingenuity, faith, and for which I freely
forgive him: he's an excellent young fellow; excellent, 'pon my soul;
and I have made my friends so merry with an account of that affair. Well, I remained in limbo till the sessions, when none appearing to
prosecute, the judge discharged me; so the first use I made of my
liberty was to visit Lady Gwyn, who told me that I should find you
here; here therefore I am to pay you my devoirs.' I thanked him, and then bade Jerry run towards the village, and hurry
my vassals; as the castle lost much of its pomp without them. Jerry went: my visitors recognized each other; and already their
hostile feelings and opposite interests had began to manifest
themselves, when, to my great surprise, three men turned short round
the western tower, and stood before me. 'That is she!' cried one of them. I looked at the speaker, and recognized in him the postilion who had
brought down the barouche. 'Your name is Cherry Wilkinson,' said another of them to me. 'Sir,' said I, haughtily: 'my name is Lady Cherubina de Willoughby.' 'That is your _travelling_ name,' rejoined he: 'but your real name
I discovered at your lodgings in Drury-Lane; which lodgings I found out
from the wife of one Jerry Sullivan, the man that conspired with you to
swindle Mr. Perrot, the coach-maker, out of the barouche yonder. You
see, I have the whole story; so you need not deny it; and now, Miss,
look at this warrant. I arrest you, in the king's name, for the most
audacious piece of swindling that ever came in my way to know.' With these words he seized me, and was dragging me from the castle,
while I screamed for help. 'A rescue! a rescue!' cried Betterton, and collared the man who held
me. Montmorenci laid hold of the other, and the servant felled the
postilion to the ground. And now a furious fight began. The man whom
Betterton had seized drew a pistol and fired it: at this moment, down
came the minstrel from the turret; I got loose and ran into the castle,
nor ventured to look again, till, after much uproar, I heard a shout of
victory from my friends: then venturing to the gateway, I saw the three
wretches limping from the place, in piteous plight. It now appeared that the ball aimed at Betterton had just grazed the
fleshy part of his servant's arm, which was bleeding a good deal. I
felt much shocked, and assisted him in binding the wound. This matter
employed some minutes, and during that time, I could perceive Betterton
and Montmorenci whispering earnestly together. At last Betterton addressed me thus:

'Now, Lady Cherubina, should we remain here much longer, we shall
certainly be seized and imprisoned for having assaulted his majesty's
officers in the discharge of their duty. We have, therefore, nothing
for it but flight. My house is but a few miles distant, and as these
officers could not have known me, we shall be perfectly safe there. What says your ladyship? Shall we repair thither?' 'Sir,' answered I; 'as I was not concerned in that assault, and as I am
innocent of the crime for which they came to take me, nothing shall
induce me to quit my castle: if they chuse to make another attempt, I
shall go with them, establish my innocence, and return triumphant. But
if I am to act on the skulking system, how can I reside here at all?' Montmorenci now joined his entreaties, but I remained immoveable. Again
they retired to consult, and again came forward. 'Lady Cherubina,' said Betterton, 'you must excuse me when I say that
both Lord Montmorenci (for his lordship has just disclosed to me his
noble lineage) and myself conceive ourselves fully warranted in
compelling, if we cannot persuade your ladyship, to leave this castle
(where we cannot remain to protect you), and in conveying you to my
mansion, where you will be safe.' 'Compel me?' cried I. 'Compel me? But I disdain to hold farther parley
with you. Farewell for ever. Minstrel, follow me to the Black Chamber.' 'Stop them!' cried Betterton. His lordship placed himself between us and the gateway: the minstrel,
brandishing his collected knuckles, struck him to the ground. Betterton
assailed my brave defender behind, the servant before; but he fought
with desperation, and his blow was like the kick of a horse. Still
numbers appeared about to prevail; and now his breathing grew shorter,
and his blow slower, when, transport to my sight! I beheld Jerry, with
several of my vassals, come running towards us. They reached us: the
tide of battle turns, and his lordship and the servant are well beaten
with bludgeons; while Jerry himself does the honours to Betterton, in a
kicking. Nobody could bear it more gently than he did; and after it was over, he
mounted his horse and vociferated:

'Now, by all that is sacred, I will go this moment, raise the
neighbourhood, and have you driven from your nest, you set of
vipers;--you common nuisances, you! Lady Gwyn's castle shall no longer
be made the receptacle of ragged and marauding Irishmen.' So saying, off he gallopped on one horse, and his lordship on another;
while the servant trudged on foot. We now held a grand council of war, for affairs began to wear an
alarming aspect. If Betterton should put his threat of raising the
neighbourhood into execution, a most formidable force might be
collected against us. After much deliberation, therefore, it was
decided, that some of the vassals should be dispatched to collect more
of their countrymen, who, they said, slept in several adjoining
villages. I too wrote a note to Susan, begging that she would raise a
counterposse in my favour, and rescue me from an implacable enemy, as I
had rescued her from a criminal and fatal attachment. This note I sent
to her cottage by one of my vassals. During this awful interval, the remainder of those who had been with me
yesterday arrived. I planted sentinels and outposts, and employed the
rest in filling up the windows with stones, repairing the breaches, and
searching amidst the rubbish for the mouth of some subterranean cavern,
where I might conceal myself in the last emergency. As I had not a white and azure standard, like Beatrice, I directed
Jerry to stain a large piece of muslin with the blood of the wounded
servant, which still besprinkled the grass; then to fasten it on a long
pole, and hoist it, as my banner, at an angle of the eastern turret. Susan's cottage being only half a mile from the castle, the messenger
soon returned with an answer, that she would certainly assemble her
friends, and come to me. Just as he had announced these happy tidings,
another came back, with a fresh accession of ten Irishmen; and in a
short time more arrived; till at length we mustered to the amount of
fifty. I stood, and gloried in my strength. Already I beheld the foundation of
a feudal settlement. Already I considered myself the restorer of that
chivalric age, when neighbouring barons were deadly foes, and their
sons and daughters clandestine lovers. Ah! what times for a heroine! it
was then that the Lady Buccleugh and the Duchess of Cleves flourished. 'And these,' cried I, in an ecstasy of enthusiasm, 'these shall again
revive in the person of Lady Cherubina De Willoughby!' As I spoke, Jerry came to tell me that one of the scouts had just
returned with information of his having seen a large party of Lady
Gwyn's tenants assembling about a quarter of a mile off; in order, as
he found on inquiry, to drive us from the castle. Now then was approaching the most important moment of my life, and I
resolved to support my part with dignity. As the first step, I dressed
myself in a style of magnificence suited to the occasion. Having flung
the drapery of embroidered gauze over my white muslin, I next (in
imitation of ancient heroines, who wore armour in the day of battle),
put Montmorenci's helmet on my head; then, with his shield in the one
hand, and his spear in the other, never did I look so lovely. I now called up the warden, and constituted him commander of the
forces; then ordered him to send six picked men, and the minstrel, as
my body-guards, up to the Black Chamber. They came; I equipped them in black cloaks and feathers, and made them
mount to the top of the tower. In a few minutes afterwards I myself
ascended with a beating heart. There I found the preparations for
battle almost completed. The bloody standard was streaming to the gale;
the body-guards were collecting a heap of stones from the broken
parapet; while beneath the turret I beheld the whole of my troops, with
oaken staffs, marshalled in awful array. The spectacle was grand and
imposing. Lightly I leaned on my spear; and while my feathered casque
pressed my ringlets, and my purfled drapery floated and glistened in
the sun, I stood on the battlements, mildly sublime, sweetly stern,
amiable in arms, and adorned with all the terrible graces of beauty
belligerent. I now resolved to harangue my men for the purpose of encouraging them,
and of attaching them to my person; but as I knew nothing of political
orations, I had nothing for it but to copy the speech of Beatrice in
the Knights of the Swan; and those that I had read in the daily prints. A profound silence prevailed; I waved my spear, and thus began. 'My brave associates, partners of my toil, my feelings and my fame! Two
days have I now been sovereign of this castle, and I hope I may flatter
myself that I have added to its prosperity. Young, and without
experience, I merely claim the merit of blameless sentiments and
intentions. 'Threatened with a barbarous incursion from my deadliest enemies, I
have deemed it indispensible to collect a faithful band of vassals for
my defence. They have come at my call, and I thank them. 'I promise to them all such laws and institutions as shall secure
their happiness. I will acknowledge the majesty of the people. (_Applause._) I will give to them a full, fair, and free
representation. (_Applause._) And I will grant to them a radical
reform; or in other words, a revival of the feudal system. (_Shouts of
applause._) I will assume no monarchial prerogatives that are unjust;
if I should, do not forget that the people have always the power and
the right to depose a tyrant. 'I promise that there shall be no dilapidated hopes and resources; no
army of mercenaries, no army of spies, no inquisition of private
property, no degraded aristocracy, no oppressed people, no confiding
parliament, no irresponsible minister. (_Acclamation._) In short, I
promise every thing. (_Thunders of acclamation._)

'Each man shall have an acre of ground, a cottage, and an annual
salary. (_Long life to you! cried the troops. That is the best thing
you have said!_) Such is the constitution, such are the privileges
that I propound to you. Now then, my brave fellows, will you consent on
these conditions to rally round my standard, to live in my service, and
to die in my defence? (_We will! we will! cried they._)

'Thank you, my generous followers; and the crisis is just approaching
when I shall have occasion for your most strenuous exertions. Already
my mortal foe prepares to storm my castle, and drive me from my
hereditary domain. Already he has excited my own tenantry to sedition
against me. Should he succeed in his atrocious object, I must return
to my tears, and you to your sickles. But should we repel him, my
government will be secured, my territory perhaps enlarged, my castle
rebuilt; and the cause of liberty will triumph. What heart but throbs,
what voice but shouts, at the name of liberty? (_Huzza!_) Is there a
man amongst you who would refuse to lay down his life for liberty? (_Huzza!_) And if, on an important occasion like the present, I might
take the liberty--(_Huzza!_) to dictate, I would demand of you this
day to sacrifice every earthly consideration in her sacred cause. I do
demand it of you, my friends. I call upon your feelings, your
principles, and your policy, to discard family, property, and life, in
a cause so just, so wise, and so glorious. Let eye, foot, heart, hand,
be firm, be stern, be valiant, be invincible!' I ceased, the soldiery tore the blue air with acclamations, and the
ravens overhead flew swifter at the sound. I now found that it was not difficult to make a popular speech; and I
judged that the same qualities which have made me so good a heroine,
would, if I were a man, have made me just as illustrious a patriot. After much entreaty, I persuaded the minstrel to deliver an address; as
he, being learned, might expound constitutions and political economy
better than I. He therefore leaned over the battlements, and began. 'Gentlemen,

    'Unaccustomed as I am to public speaking, I feel that words are
    inadequate to express my high sense of the honour you have
    conferred upon us. Gentlemen, I will institute an apt comparison
    between the foundation of this little settlement, and that of the
    ancient Romans; in order to prove, that this, though small at
    present, may, like that, terminate in an extensive empire. Gentlemen, Rome took its rise from a set of the greatest beggars
    and reprobates that ever crawled upon earth----'

'Throw him over, throw him over!' burst from the troops. The minstrel shrunk back in consternation. 'Silence, lads,' cried Jerry, 'and I will make a bit of a speech for
you; but instead of sending you to Rome, I will send you no farther
than Ballinasloe. (_Laughter and bravo!_) Eh, my boys, don't you
remember the good old fun at the fair there? To be sure, how we used to
break each other's heads, without the least anger or mercy; and to be
sure, 'tis the finest feel in the world, when one gives a fellow a
neat, clean, bothering blow over the skull, and down he drops like a
sack; then rises, and shakes himself like a wet dog, and begins again. (_Much laughter._) Ay, my boys, fighting may be an Englishman's or
a Frenchman's business, but by the Lord Harry, 'tis an Irishman's
amusement! (_Shouts._) So now, hearties, all you have to do is to
club your sticks, and fancy yourselves at Ballinasloe; and never heed
me if we havn't a nice comfortable fight of it.' Rude as was this rhetoric, it touched the domestic spring of their
hearts, and my patriotic promises did not produce half such a roar of
delight as followed it. Silence was but just restored, when I beheld, from my turret, our
enemies advancing in vast numbers across the common. I confess my heart
sank at the sight; but I soon called to mind the courage of the feudal
heroines, and recollected that I was in no personal danger myself. Then, the greatness of the cause animating me with ardour, I exclaimed:

'Lo! yonder come our enemies. To arms, to arms! Sound the tocsin; blow,
blow the horn!' A vassal blew the horn. The warden then stationed his men in front of the gate-way, which was
the only vulnerable entrance into the castle; and my body-guards,
holding huge stones, stood forward on the battlements. All was ready. I
trembled with agitation. And now the foe, having approached within fifty paces, halted to
reconnoitre. The traitor Montmorenci, divested of his armour, commanded
them in person. Betterton was seen on horseback at a distance; and the
troops themselves, about sixty in number, stood brandishing stakes,
bludgeons, and poles. As my men were not more than fifty in all, I
looked round, with anxious expectation, for the succours promised by
Susan; but no sign of them appeared. Montmorenci now began to form his troops into a compact phalanx, with
the poles and stakes in front; evidently for the purpose of piercing
our line, and forcing the gateway. Jerry, therefore, called in his
wings, and strengthened the centre. He then desired those in the turret
to direct all their stones against the foremost rank of the foe. 'Soldiers,' cried I, 'listen to my last commands. The moment you shall
hear the horn sound again, whether in the midst of conquest, or of
defeat, hurry back to the gateway, and draw up just as you stand at
present; for while you are fighting at a distance, my castle may be
taken by surprise, unless I secure prompt assistance. And now, my brave
fellows, success attend your arms!' As I spoke, the foe began advancing at a rapid rate: my troops awaited
them with firmness; and when they had approached within fifteen paces
of the castle, I gave the word to my body-guards, who hurled several
vollies of stones in quick succession. Some of the foremost rank were
staggered by them; two behind fell, and amidst the confusion, in rushed
my troops with a tremendous shout. Thick pressed the throng of waving
heads, and loud grew the clamour of voices, and the clatter of staffs;
while the wielded weapons appeared and disappeared, like fragments of a
wreck on the tossing surges. For some moments both armies fought in one
unbroken mass; those struggling to gain the gateway, these to prevent
them. But soon, as two streams rushing from opposite mountains, and
meeting in the valley, broaden into a lake, and run off in little
rivulets; so the contending ranks, after the first encounter, began to
spread by degrees, and scatter over the plain. And now they were seen
intermingled with each other, and fighting man to man. Here a small
wing of my brave troops, hemmed in on all sides, were defending
themselves with incredible fury. There a larger division of them were
maintaining a doubtful contest: while a few straggling vassals, engaged
in single combat, at a distance, were driving their antagonists before
them. At this juncture, Montmorenci, with a chosen band that he kept round
his person, had attacked the warden, and a few who fought by his side. These performed prodigies of valour; but at last, overpowered by
numbers, they were beginning to retire, covered with glory, when I
dispatched four of my body-guards, as a corps of reserve, to their
assistance. They rushed upon the chosen band, and checked its career. It soon received reinforcements, and again pressed forward. I sent out
the minstrel and another vassal; and again its progress was checked. But now my castle had but a single defender: our foes were drawing
frightfully near; and if they could once turn our flank, they would
gain the turret, and make me their prisoner. This was the great crisis. A moment more, and all might be lost. 'Blow, blow the horn!' cried I. The vassal blew the horn. At the signal, I see my dispersed troops come pouring from all quarters
towards the castle. They reach the gateway, halt, and form a front
before it. The foe, who had followed them in a confused manner, seeing
them on a sudden so formidable, stop short. 'Let the body-guards come into the castle!' cried I. The body-guards obeyed. 'Now, soldiers,' cried I to the rest, 'if you rush upon the foe before
they can collect again, and keep in a body with your captain, the day
is our own.' 'Spring on them like lions! Away, away!' The whole army shouted, and burst forward in a mass. Jerry led the van. Montmorenci with his sacred squadron fled before them. They pursued,
overtook the fugitives, and after a short skirmish, made the whole
detachment prisoners; while the remainder, scattered in all directions,
stood at a distance, and dared not advance. Never was a more decisive
victory. My brave veterans marched back in triumph with eight captives;
and then halting at the gateway, gave three cheers. Palpitating with transport, I commanded that the prisoners' hands
should be tied behind their backs, and that they should be confined in
the northern tower, with sentinels over them. As for Lord Montmorenci, his rank entitled him to more respect; so I
ordered the warden to conduct him up to the Black Chamber. I stood in the midst of my guards to receive him; and if ever grandeur
and suavity were blended in one countenance, it was in mine, at that
glorious moment. 'My lord,' said I, 'victory, which so long hovered over the field with
doubtful wing, has at last descended on my legions, and crowned the
scale of justice with the laurel of triumph. But though it has also put
the person and the fate of the hostile chieftain in my hands, think not
I mean to use my power with harshness. Within these walls your lordship
shall experience the kindest treatment; but beyond them you must not be
permitted to go, till my rights are re-established and my rebellious
vassals restored to their allegiance.' 'Fal lal la, lal lal la,' said his lordship, stepping a minuet. 'Pinion him hand and foot!' cried I, quite disgusted and enraged. 'I
will have no minuets in this castle.' 'That I will do,' cried Jerry, 'for his feet are nimble enough at
making off. Though he talks big, he runs fast. The creature is all
voice and legs, like a grasshopper.' Just as the minstrel and warden had secured his wrists and ankles with
a handkerchief, a vassal came to tell me that a number of men, and a
girl at their head, were running towards the castle. 'I thought she would not disappoint me!' cried I, as I hastened down to
meet her. It was, indeed, Susan herself, and a train of youths. I stood
at the gateway ready to receive her, and trembling with terror, lest
Betterton and the routed remains of his army, who were now consulting
together at some distance, should intercept her. These fears were not at all lessened when I saw her stop, as she
arrived amongst them, and converse with them some time. I made my men
hold themselves in readiness to support her, and we shouted to her with
all our might. But just judge of my consternation, when I beheld her
and her party enrolling themselves in the hostile ranks, and the whole
allied force preparing to pour down upon us! I stood horror-struck. Her
ingratitude, her perfidy, were incredible. But I had no time for moral reflection. My own glory and the interests
of my people demanded all my thoughts. What was I to do? We had taken
but eight prisoners, and these too would require a strong guard; while
the traiterous Susan had brought a reinforcement of twenty men to the
foe; so that to contend against such superior numbers in the field
would be madness. I determined therefore to draw all my troops and all my prisoners into
the eastern turret, and to stand a regular siege; for, as we had a
large stock of provisions, we might hold out several days. In the mean
time our enemies, tired of such a protracted mode of warfare, and
having other occupations of more importance, would probably retire and
leave us in quiet possession. This plan was put into instant execution. I had the prisoners placed in
the Black Chamber, with a numerous guard; and I made the remainder of
my soldiery man the battlements. These arrangements were but just completed, when I beheld our
formidable opponents advancing in line, with Betterton, on horseback,
at their head. Again my men armed themselves with stones; again the
horn was sounded; again three cheers were given. When the besiegers had arrived within forty paces of us, they halted. Then Betterton, waving a white handkerchief, advanced under the walls,
and spoke thus:

'Lady Cherubina De Willoughby, I demand of you to surrender at
discretion. Refuse, and I pledge myself that in five minutes I will
drive the leopard into the sea, and plant my standard on the towers of
Monkton.' 'Sir, I both refuse, and defy you. My castle is impregnable.' 'Not to hunger, at least,' cried Betterton; 'for we will turn the siege
into a blockade.' 'Yes, to hunger!' exclaimed the minstrel, flinging down half a loaf of
bread, that had remained since breakfast. 'There, Sir, is a proof of
it, deduced from the Roman history!' 'As I perceive that war is inevitable,' said Betterton, 'I shall stand
acquitted both here and hereafter for all its consequences by my now
just going through the form of proposing a GENERAL PACIFICATION.' 'Pacific Ocean!' cried Jerry. 'No, thank you; I have got a surfeit of
that word already.' 'Nay, my honest fellow----'

'Never honest-fellow me,' cried Jerry: 'it won't take, old boy. So bad
manners to you, and that is worse than bad luck, go boil your tongue
hard, like a calve's, and then it won't wag so glib and smooth;--ay,
and go boil your nose white like veal too. But this I can tell you,
that you will neither beat us out, nor starve us out; for we have
sticks and stones, and meat and good liquor; and we will eat together,
and drink together, and----'

'And sleep together, I suppose,' cried Betterton: 'for of course, her
ladyship will think nothing of sleeping in the same apartment with
twenty or thirty men.' The fatal words fell upon me like a thunderbolt! It was, indeed, too
true, that a large portion of my troops must remain all night in the
Black Chamber, as there would be no room for them elsewhere: so how in
the name of wonder could I contrive to sleep? Certain it is, that
Ellena Di Rosalba travelled a whole day and night in a carriage with
two ruffians, who never left her for a moment; and it was not till
after Luxima and the missionary had journeyed together several entire
days, that (to quote the very words) _for the first time since the
commencement of their pilgrimage she was hidden from his view_. How
these heroines managed I know not; but this I know, that I could not
abide the idea of sleeping in the presence of men. And yet, to
surrender my sweet, my beloved, my venerable castle, the hereditary
seat of my proud progenitors, at the moment of an immortal victory, ere
the laurel was yet warmed on the throbbings of my forehead;--and all
for what? For the most pitiful and unclassical reason that ever
disgraced a human creature. Why, I should be pointed at, scouted at. 'Look, look, there is the heroine who surrendered her castle,
because----' and then a whisper and a titter, and a ''Tis fact 'pon my
honour.' Oh, my friend, my friend, the thought was madness! I considered, and reconsidered, but every moment only strengthened me
more and more in the conviction that there was no remedy. 'Jerry,' said I, 'dear Jerry, we must surrender.' 'Surrender!' exclaimed Jerry, 'Why then, death alive, for what?' 'Because,' answered I, 'my modesty would prevent me from sleeping
before so many men.' 'Poo,' cried he, 'do as I do. Have too much modesty to shew your
modesty. Sleep? By my soul you shall sleep, and snore too, if you have
a mind. Sleep? Sure, can't you pin the curtains round, so that we
shan't see you? Sleep? Sure, how did the ladies manage on board the
packet that I came over in? Sleep--sleep--sleep? O murder. I believe we
must surrender, sure enough. O murder, murder, 'tis all over with us? For now that I think of it, we shan't have even room to lie down you
know.' 'This is a sad affair,' said I to the minstrel.