“Ye’re auld, cummer, and sae am I mysell; but we maun abide His will--
we’ll no be forgotten in His good time.”

“Nor our deeds neither,” said the crone: “what’s dune in the body maun
be answered in the spirit.”

“I wot that’s true; and I may weel tak the tale hame to mysell, that hae
led a misruled and roving life. But ye were aye a canny wife. We’re a’
frail--but ye canna hae sae muckle to bow ye down.”

“Less than I might have had--but mair, O far mair, than wad sink the
stoutest brig e’er sailed out o’ Fairport harbour!--Didna somebody say
yestreen--at least sae it is borne in on my mind, but auld folk hae weak
fancies--did not somebody say that Joscelind, Countess of Glenallan, was
departed frae life?”

“They said the truth whaever said it,” answered old Edie; “she was
buried yestreen by torch-light at St. Ruth’s, and I, like a fule, gat a
gliff wi’ seeing the lights and the riders.”

“It was their fashion since the days of the Great Earl that was killed
at Harlaw;--they did it to show scorn that they should die and be buried
like other mortals; the wives o’ the house of Glenallan wailed nae wail
for the husband, nor the sister for the brother.--But is she e’en ca’d to
the lang account?”

“As sure,” answered Edie, “as we maun a’ abide it.”

“Then I’ll unlade my mind, come o’t what will.”

This she spoke with more alacrity than usually attended her expressions,
and accompanied her words with an attitude of the hand, as if throwing
something from her. She then raised up her form, once tall, and still
retaining the appearance of having been so, though bent with age and
rheumatism, and stood before the beggar like a mummy animated by some
wandering spirit into a temporary resurrection. Her light-blue eyes
wandered to and fro, as if she occasionally forgot and again remembered
the purpose for which her long and withered hand was searching among the
miscellaneous contents of an ample old-fashioned pocket. At length she
pulled out a small chip-box, and opening it, took out a handsome ring,
in which was set a braid of hair, composed of two different colours,
black and light brown, twined together, encircled with brilliants of
considerable value. “Gudeman,” she said to Ochiltree, “as ye wad e’er deserve mercy, ye maun
gang my errand to the house of Glenallan, and ask for the Earl.”

“The Earl of Glenallan, cummer! ou, he winna see ony o’ the gentles o’
the country, and what likelihood is there that he wad see the like o’ an
auld gaberlunzie?”

“Gang your ways and try;--and tell him that Elspeth o’ the
Craigburnfoot--he’ll mind me best by that name--maun see him or she be
relieved frae her lang pilgrimage, and that she sends him that ring in
token of the business she wad speak o’.”

Ochiltree looked on the ring with some admiration of its apparent value,
and then carefully replacing it in the box, and wrapping it in an old
ragged handkerchief, he deposited the token in his bosom. “Weel, gudewife,” he said, “I’se do your bidding, or it’s no be my
fault. But surely there was never sic a braw propine as this sent to
a yerl by an auld fishwife, and through the hands of a gaberlunzie
beggar.”

With this reflection, Edie took up his pike-staff, put on his
broad-brimmed bonnet, and set forth upon his pilgrimage. The old woman
remained for some time standing in a fixed posture, her eyes directed
to the door through which her ambassador had departed. The appearance
of excitation, which the conversation had occasioned, gradually left
her features; she sank down upon her accustomed seat, and resumed her
mechanical labour of the distaff and spindle, with her wonted air of
apathy. Edie Ochiltree meanwhile advanced on his journey. The distance to
Glenallan was ten miles, a march which the old soldier accomplished in
about four hours. With the curiosity belonging to his idle trade and
animated character, he tortured himself the whole way to consider
what could be the meaning of this mysterious errand with which he was
entrusted, or what connection the proud, wealthy, and powerful Earl
of Glenallan could have with the crimes or penitence of an old doting
woman, whose rank in life did not greatly exceed that of her messenger. He endeavoured to call to memory all that he had ever known or heard of
the Glenallan family, yet, having done so, remained altogether unable
to form a conjecture on the subject. He knew that the whole extensive
estate of this ancient and powerful family had descended to the
Countess, lately deceased, who inherited, in a most remarkable degree,
the stern, fierce, and unbending character which had distinguished the
house of Glenallan since they first figured in Scottish annals. Like
the rest of her ancestors, she adhered zealously to the Roman Catholic
faith, and was married to an English gentleman of the same communion,
and of large fortune, who did not survive their union two years. The
Countess was, therefore, left an early widow, with the uncontrolled
management of the large estates of her two sons. The elder, Lord
Geraldin, who was to succeed to the title and fortune of Glenallan, was
totally dependent on his mother during her life. The second, when
he came of age, assumed the name and arms of his father, and took
possession of his estate, according to the provisions of the Countess’s
marriage-settlement. After this period, he chiefly resided in England,
and paid very few and brief visits to his mother and brother; and these
at length were altogether dispensed with, in consequence of his becoming
a convert to the reformed religion. But even before this mortal offence was given to its mistress, his
residence at Glenallan offered few inducements to a gay young man like
Edward Geraldin Neville, though its gloom and seclusion seemed to suit
the retired and melancholy habits of his elder brother. Lord Geraldin,
in the outset of life, had been a young man of accomplishment and hopes. Those who knew him upon his travels entertained the highest expectations
of his future career. But such fair dawns are often strangely overcast. The young nobleman returned to Scotland, and after living about a year
in his mother’s society at Glenallan House, he seemed to have adopted
all the stern gloom and melancholy of her character. Excluded from
politics by the incapacities attached to those of his religion, and
from all lighter avocationas by choice, Lord Geraldin led a life of the
strictest retirement. His ordinary society was composed of the clergyman
of his communion, who occasionally visited his mansion; and very rarely,
upon stated occasions of high festival, one or two families who still
professed the Catholic religion were formally entertained at Glenallan
House. But this was all; their heretic neighbours knew nothing of
the family whatever; and even the Catholics saw little more than the
sumptuous entertainment and solemn parade which was exhibited on those
formal occasions, from which all returned without knowing whether most
to wonder at the stern and stately demeanour of the Countess, or the
deep and gloomy dejection which never ceased for a moment to cloud the
features of her son. The late event had put him in possession of his
fortune and title, and the neighbourhood had already begun to conjecture
whether gaiety would revive with independence, when those who had some
occasional acquaintance with the interior of the family spread abroad
a report, that the Earl’s constitution was undermined by religious
austerities, and that in all probability he would soon follow his mother
to the grave. This event was the more probable, as his brother had died
of a lingering complaint, which, in the latter years of his life,
had affected at once his frame and his spirits; so that heralds and
genealogists were already looking back into their records to discover
the heir of this ill-fated family, and lawyers were talking with
gleesome anticipation, of the probability of a “great Glenallan cause.”

As Edie Ochiltree approached the front of Glenallan House, an ancient
building of great extent, the most modern part of which had been
designed by the celebrated Inigo Jones, he began to consider in what
way he should be most likely to gain access for delivery of his message;
and, after much consideration, resolved to send the token to the Earl by
one of the domestics. With this purpose he stopped at a cottage, where he obtained the means
of making up the ring in a sealed packet like a petition, addressed,
Forr his hounor the Yerl of Glenllan--These. But being aware that
missives delivered at the doors of great houses by such persons as
himself, do not always make their way according to address, Edie
determined, like an old soldier, to reconnoitre the ground before
he made his final attack. As he approached the porter’s lodge, he
discovered, by the number of poor ranked before it, some of them being
indigent persons in the vicinity, and others itinerants of his own
begging profession,--that there was about to be a general dole or
distribution of charity. “A good turn,” said Edie to himself, “never goes unrewarded--I’ll maybe
get a good awmous that I wad hae missed but for trotting on this auld
wife’s errand.”

Accordingly, he ranked up with the rest of this ragged regiment,
assuming a station as near the front as possible,--a distinction due, as
he conceived, to his blue gown and badge, no less than to his years and
experience; but he soon found there was another principle of precedence
in this assembly, to which he had not adverted. “Are ye a triple man, friend, that ye press forward sae bauldly?--I’m
thinking no, for there’s nae Catholics wear that badge.”

“Na, na, I am no a Roman,” said Edie. “Then shank yoursell awa to the double folk, or single folk, that’s the
Episcopals or Presbyterians yonder: it’s a shame to see a heretic hae
sic a lang white beard, that would do credit to a hermit.”

Ochiltree, thus rejected from the society of the Catholic mendicants,
or those who called themselves such, went to station himself with the
paupers of the communion of the church of England, to whom the noble
donor allotted a double portion of his charity. But never was a
poor occasional conformist more roughly rejected by a High-church
congregation, even when that matter was furiously agitated in the days
of good Queen Anne. “See to him wi’ his badge!” they said;--“he hears ane o’ the king’s
Presbyterian chaplains sough out a sermon on the morning of every
birth-day, and now he would pass himsell for ane o’ the Episcopal
church! Na, na!--we’ll take care o’ that.”

Edie, thus rejected by Rome and Prelacy, was fain to shelter himself
from the laughter of his brethren among the thin group of Presbyterians,
who had either disdained to disguise their religious opinions for the
sake of an augmented dole, or perhaps knew they could not attempt the
imposition without a certainty of detection. The same degree of precedence was observed in the mode of distributing
the charity, which consisted in bread, beef, and a piece of money, to
each individual of all the three classes. The almoner, an ecclesiastic
of grave appearance and demeanour, superintended in person the
accommodation of the Catholic mendicants, asking a question or two of
each as he delivered the charity, and recommending to their prayers
the soul of Joscelind, late Countess of Glenallan, mother of their
benefactor. The porter, distinguished by his long staff headed with
silver, and by the black gown tufted with lace of the same colour, which
he had assumed upon the general mourning in the family, overlooked
the distribution of the dole among the prelatists. The less-favoured
kirk-folk were committed to the charge of an aged domestic. As this last discussed some disputed point with the porter, his name, as
it chanced to be occasionally mentioned, and then his features, struck
Ochiltree, and awakened recollections of former times. The rest of the
assembly were now retiring, when the domestic, again approaching the
place where Edie still lingered, said, in a strong Aberdeenshire accent,
“Fat is the auld feel-body deeing, that he canna gang avay, now that
he’s gotten baith meat and siller?”

“Francis Macraw,” answered Edie Ochiltree, “d’ye no mind Fontenoy, and
keep thegither front and rear?’”

“Ohon! ohon!” cried Francie, with a true north-country yell of
recognition, “naebody could hae said that word but my auld front-rank
man, Edie Ochiltree! But I’m sorry to see ye in sic a peer state, man.”

“No sae ill aff as ye may think, Francis. But I’m laith to leave this
place without a crack wi’ you, and I kenna when I may see you again, for
your folk dinna mak Protestants welcome, and that’s ae reason that I hae
never been here before.”

“Fusht, fusht,” said Francie, “let that flee stick i’ the wa’--when the
dirt’s dry it will rub out;--and come you awa wi’ me, and I’ll gie ye
something better thau that beef bane, man.”

Having then spoke a confidential word with the porter (probably to
request his connivance), and having waited until the almoner had
returned into the house with slow and solemn steps, Francie Macraw
introduced his old comrade into the court of Glenallan House, the gloomy
gateway of which was surmounted by a huge scutcheon, in which the herald
and undertaker had mingled, as usual, the emblems of human pride and of
human nothingness,--the Countess’s hereditary coat-of-arms, with all
its numerous quarterings, disposed in a lozenge, and surrounded by the
separate shields of her paternal and maternal ancestry, intermingled
with scythes, hour glasses, skulls, and other symbols of that mortality
which levels all distinctions. Conducting his friend as speedily as
possible along the large paved court, Macraw led the way through a
side-door to a small apartment near the servants’ hall, which, in virtue
of his personal attendance upon the Earl of Glenallan, he was entitled
to call his own. To produce cold meat of various kinds, strong beer,
and even a glass of spirits, was no difficulty to a person of Francis’s
importance, who had not lost, in his sense of conscious dignity, the
keen northern prudence which recommended a good understanding with the
butler. Our mendicant envoy drank ale, and talked over old stories
with his comrade, until, no other topic of conversation occurring, he
resolved to take up the theme of his embassy, which had for some time
escaped his memory. “He had a petition to present to the Earl,” he said;--for he judged
it prudent to say nothing of the ring, not knowing, as he afterwards
observed, how far the manners of a single soldier might have been
corrupted by service in a great house. A single soldier means, in Scotch, a private soldier. “Hout, tout, man,” said Francie, “the Earl will look at nae petitions--
but I can gie’t to the almoner.”

“But it relates to some secret, that maybe my lord wad like best to
see’t himsell.”

“I’m jeedging that’s the very reason that the almoner will be for seeing
it the first and foremost.”

“But I hae come a’ this way on purpose to deliver it, Francis, and ye
really maun help me at a pinch.”

“Neer speed then if I dinna,” answered the Aberdeenshire man: “let them
be as cankered as they like, they can but turn me awa, and I was
just thinking to ask my discharge, and gang down to end my days at
Inverurie.”

With this doughty resolution of serving his friend at all ventures,
since none was to be encountered which could much inconvenience himself,
Francie Macraw left the apartment. It was long before he returned, and
when he did, his manner indicated wonder and agitation. “I am nae seer gin ye be Edie Ochiltree o’ Carrick’s company in the
Forty-twa, or gin ye be the deil in his likeness!”

“And what makes ye speak in that gait?” demanded the astonished
mendicant. “Because my lord has been in sic a distress and surpreese as I neer saw
a man in my life. But he’ll see you--I got that job cookit. He was like a
man awa frae himsell for mony minutes, and I thought he wad hae swarv’t
a’thegither,--and fan he cam to himsell, he asked fae brought the
packet--and fat trow ye I said?”

“An auld soger,” says Edie--“that does likeliest at a gentle’s door; at
a farmer’s it’s best to say ye’re an auld tinkler, if ye need ony
quarters, for maybe the gudewife will hae something to souther.”

“But I said neer ane o’ the twa,” answered Francis; “my lord cares
as little about the tane as the tother--for he’s best to them that can
souther up our sins. Sae I e’en said the bit paper was brought by an
auld man wi’ a long fite beard--he might be a capeechin freer for fat I
ken’d, for he was dressed like an auld palmer. Sae ye’ll be sent up for
fanever he can find mettle to face ye.”

“I wish I was weel through this business,” thought Edie to himself;
“mony folk surmise that the Earl’s no very right in the judgment, and
wha can say how far he may be offended wi’ me for taking upon me sae
muckle?”

But there was now no room for retreat--a bell sounded from a distant part
of the mansion, and Macraw said, with a smothered accent, as if already
in his master’s presence, “That’s my lord’s bell!--follow me, and step
lightly and cannily, Edie.”

Edie followed his guide, who seemed to tread as if afraid of being
overheard, through a long passage, and up a back stair, which admitted
them into the family apartments. They were ample and extensive,
furnished at such cost as showed the ancient importance and splendour
of the family. But all the ornaments were in the taste of a former and
distant period, and one would have almost supposed himself traversing
the halls of a Scottish nobleman before the union of the crowns. The
late Countess, partly from a haughty contempt of the times in which
she lived, partly from her sense of family pride, had not permitted the
furniture to be altered or modernized during her residence at Glenallan
House. The most magnificent part of the decorations was a valuable
collection of pictures by the best masters, whose massive frames were
somewhat tarnished by time. In this particular also the gloomy taste of
the family seemed to predominate. There were some fine family portraits
by Vandyke and other masters of eminence; but the collection was richest
in the Saints and Martyrdoms of Domenichino, Velasquez, and Murillo, and
other subjects of the same kind, which had been selected in preference
to landscapes or historical pieces. The manner in which these awful,
and sometimes disgusting, subjects were represented, harmonized with the
gloomy state of the apartments,--a circumstance which was not altogether
lost on the old man, as he traversed them under the guidance of his
quondam fellow-soldier. He was about to express some sentiment of this
kind, but Francie imposed silence on him by signs, and opening a door
at the end of the long picture-gallery, ushered him into a small
antechamber hung with black. Here they found the almoner, with his ear
turned to a door opposite that by which they entered, in the attitude of
one who listens with attention, but is at the same time afraid of being
detected in the act. The old domestic and churchman started when they perceived each other. But the almoner first recovered his recollection, and advancing towards
Macraw, said, under his breath, but with an authoritative tone, “How
dare you approach the Earl’s apartment without knocking? and who is this
stranger, or what has he to do here?--Retire to the gallery, and wait for
me there.”

“It’s impossible just now to attend your reverence,” answered Macraw,
raising his voice so as to be heard in the next room, being conscious
that the priest would not maintain the altercation within hearing of his
patron,--“the Earl’s bell has rung.”

He had scarce uttered the words, when it was rung again with greater
violence than before; and the ecclesiastic, perceiving further
expostulation impossible, lifted his finger at Macraw, with a menacing
attitude, as he left the apartment. “I tell’d ye sae,” said the Aberdeen man in a whisper to Edie, and then
proceeded to open the door near which they had observed the chaplain
stationed. --This ring.--
               This little ring, with necromantic force,
               Has raised the ghost of pleasure to my fears,
               Conjured the sense of honour and of love
               Into such shapes, they fright me from myself. The Fatal Marriage. The ancient forms of mourning were observed in Glenallan House,
notwithstanding the obduracy with which the members of the family
were popularly supposed to refuse to the dead the usual tribute of
lamentation. It was remarked, that when she received the fatal letter
announcing the death of her second, and, as was once believed, her
favourite son, the hand of the Countess did not shake, nor her eyelid
twinkle, any more than upon perusal of a letter of ordinary business. Heaven only knows whether the suppression of maternal sorrow, which her
pride commanded, might not have some effect in hastening her own death. It was at least generally supposed that the apoplectic stroke, which so
soon afterwards terminated her existence, was, as it were, the vengeance
of outraged Nature for the restraint to which her feelings had been
subjected. But although Lady Glenallan forebore the usual external signs
of grief, she had caused many of the apartments, amongst others her own
and that of the Earl, to be hung with the exterior trappings of woe. The Earl of Glenallan was therefore seated in an apartment hung with
black cloth, which waved in dusky folds along its lofty walls. A screen,
also covered with black baize, placed towards the high and narrow
window, intercepted much of the broken light which found its way through
the stained glass, that represented, with such skill as the fourteenth
century possessed, the life and sorrows of the prophet Jeremiah. The
table at which the Earl was seated was lighted with two lamps wrought
in silver, shedding that unpleasant and doubtful light which arises from
the mingling of artificial lustre with that of general daylight. The
same table displayed a silver crucifix, and one or two clasped parchment
books. A large picture, exquisitely painted by Spagnoletto, represented
the martyrdom of St. Stephen, and was the only ornament of the
apartment. The inhabitant and lord of this disconsolate chamber was a man not past
the prime of life, yet so broken down with disease and mental misery, so
gaunt and ghastly, that he appeared but a wreck of manhood; and when
he hastily arose and advanced towards his visitor, the exertion seemed
almost to overpower his emaciated frame. As they met in the midst of
the apartment, the contrast they exhibited was very striking. The hale
cheek, firm step, erect stature, and undaunted presence and bearing of
the old mendicant, indicated patience and content in the extremity of
age, and in the lowest condition to which humanity can sink; while the
sunken eye, pallid cheek, and tottering form of the nobleman with
whom he was confronted, showed how little wealth, power, and even the
advantages of youth, have to do with that which gives repose to the
mind, and firmness to the frame. The Earl met the old man in the middle of the room, and having commanded
his attendant to withdraw into the gallery, and suffer no one to enter
the antechamber till he rung the bell, awaited, with hurried yet fearful
impatience, until he heard first the door of his apartment, and then
that of the antechamber, shut and fastened by the spring-bolt. When he
was satisfied with this security against being overheard, Lord Glenallan
came close up to the mendicant, whom he probably mistook for some person
of a religious order in disguise, and said, in a hasty yet faltering
tone, “In the name of all our religion holds most holy, tell me,
reverend father, what am I to expect from a communication opened by a
token connected with such horrible recollections?”

The old man, appalled by a manner so different from what he had expected
from the proud and powerful nobleman, was at a loss how to answer, and
in what manner to undeceive him. “Tell me,” continued the Earl, in a
tone of increasing trepidation and agony--“tell me, do you come to say
that all that has been done to expiate guilt so horrible, has been too
little and too trivial for the offence, and to point out new and
more efficacious modes of severe penance?--I will not blench from it,
father--let me suffer the pains of my crime here in the body, rather than
hereafter in the spirit!”

Edie had now recollection enough to perceive, that if he did not
interrupt the frankness of Lord Glenallan’s admissions, he was likely
to become the confidant of more than might be safe for him to know. He therefore uttered with a hasty and trembling voice--“Your lordship’s
honour is mistaken--I am not of your persuasion, nor a clergyman, but,
with all reverence, only puir Edie Ochiltree, the king’s bedesman and
your honour’s.”

This explanation he accompanied by a profound bow after his manner, and
then, drawing himself up erect, rested his arm on his staff, threw back
his long white hair, and fixed his eyes upon the Earl, as he waited for
an answer. “And you are not then,” said Lord Glenallan, after a pause of surprise--
“You are not then a Catholic priest?”

“God forbid!” said Edie, forgetting in his confusion to whom he was
speaking; “I am only the king’s bedesman and your honour’s, as I said
before.”

The Earl turned hastily away, and paced the room twice or thrice, as if
to recover the effects of his mistake, and then, coming close up to the
mendicant, he demanded, in a stern and commanding tone, what he meant
by intruding himself on his privacy, and from whence he had got the ring
which he had thought proper to send him. Edie, a man of much spirit, was
less daunted at this mode of interrogation than he had been confused by
the tone of confidence in which the Earl had opened their conversation. To the reiterated question from whom he had obtained the ring, he
answered composedly, “From one who was better known to the Earl than to
him.”

“Better known to me, fellow?” said Lord Glenallan: “what is your
meaning?--explain yourself instantly, or you shall experience the
consequence of breaking in upon the hours of family distress.”

“It was auld Elspeth Mucklebackit that sent me here,” said the beggar,
“in order to say”--

“You dote, old man!” said the Earl; “I never heard the name--but this
dreadful token reminds me”--

“I mind now, my lord,” said Ochiltree, “she tauld me your lordship would
be mair familiar wi’ her, if I ca’d her Elspeth o’ the Craigburnfoot--she
had that name when she lived on your honour’s land, that is, your
honour’s worshipful mother’s that was then--Grace be wi’ her!”

“Ay,” said the appalled nobleman, as his countenance sunk, and his cheek
assumed a hue yet more cadaverous; “that name is indeed written in the
most tragic page of a deplorable history. But what can she desire of me? Is she dead or living?”

“Living, my lord; and entreats to see your lordship before she dies, for
she has something to communicate that hangs upon her very soul, and she
says she canna flit in peace until she sees you.”

“Not until she sees me!--what can that mean? But she is doting with age
and infirmity. I tell thee, friend, I called at her cottage myself, not
a twelvemonth since, from a report that she was in distress, and she did
not even know my face or voice.”

“If your honour wad permit me,” said Edie, to whom the length of the
conference restored a part of his professional audacity and native
talkativeness--“if your honour wad but permit me, I wad say, under
correction of your lordship’s better judgment, that auld Elspeth’s like
some of the ancient ruined strengths and castles that ane sees amang the
hills. There are mony parts of her mind that appear, as I may say, laid
waste and decayed, but then there’s parts that look the steever, and
the stronger, and the grander, because they are rising just like to
fragments amaong the ruins o’ the rest. She’s an awful woman.”

“She always was so,” said the Earl, almost unconsciously echoing the
observation of the mendicant; “she always was different from other
women--likest perhaps to her who is now no more, in her temper and turn
of mind.--She wishes to see me, then?”

“Before she dies,” said Edie, “she earnestly entreats that pleasure.”

“It will be a pleasure to neither of us,” said the Earl, sternly, “yet
she shall be gratified. She lives, I think, on the sea-shore to the
southward of Fairport?”

“Just between Monkbarns and Knockwinnock Castle, but nearer to
Monkbarns. Your lordship’s honour will ken the laird and Sir Arthur,
doubtless?”

A stare, as if he did not comprehend the question, was Lord Glenallan’s
answer. Edie saw his mind was elsewhere, and did not venture to repeat a
query which was so little germain to the matter. “Are you a Catholic, old man?” demanded the Earl. “No, my lord,” said Ochiltree stoutly; for the remembrance of the
unequal division of the dole rose in his mind at the moment; “I thank
Heaven I am a good Protestant.”

“He who can conscientiously call himself good, has indeed reason to
thank Heaven, be his form of Christianity what it will--But who is he
that shall dare to do so!”

“Not I,” said Edie; “I trust to beware of the sin of presumption.”

“What was your trade in your youth?” continued the Earl. “A soldier, my lord; and mony a sair day’s kemping I’ve seen. I was to
have been made a sergeant, but”--

“A soldier! then you have slain and burnt, and sacked and spoiled?”

“I winna say,” replied Edie, “that I have been better than my
neighbours;--it’s a rough trade--war’s sweet to them that never tried it.”

“And you are now old and miserable, asking from precarious charity the
food which in your youth you tore from the hand of the poor peasant?”

“I am a beggar, it is true, my lord; but I am nae just sae miserable
neither. For my sins, I hae had grace to repent of them, if I might say
sae, and to lay them where they may be better borne than by me; and for
my food, naebody grudges an auld man a bit and a drink--Sae I live as I
can, and am contented to die when I am ca’d upon.”

“And thus, then, with little to look back upon that is pleasant or
praiseworthy in your past life--with less to look forward to on this side
of eternity, you are contented to drag out the rest of your existence? Go, begone! and in your age and poverty and weariness, never envy
the lord of such a mansion as this, either in his sleeping or waking
moments--Here is something for thee.”

The Earl put into the old man’s hand five or six guineas. Edie would
perhaps have stated his scruples, as upon other occasions, to the amount
of the benefaction, but the tone of Lord Glenallan was too absolute to
admit of either answer or dispute. The Earl then called his servant--“See
this old man safe from the castle--let no one ask him any questions--and
you, friend, begone, and forget the road that leads to my house.”

“That would be difficult for me,” said Edie, looking at the gold which
he still held in his hand, “that would be e’en difficult, since your
honour has gien me such gade cause to remember it.”

Lord Glenallan stared, as hardly comprehending the old man’s boldness
in daring to bandy words with him, and, with his hand, made him another
signal of departure, which the mendicant instantly obeyed. For he was one in all their idle sport,
               And like a monarch, ruled their little court
               The pliant bow he formed, the flying ball,
               The bat, the wicket, were his labours all. Crabbe’s Village. Francis Macraw, agreeably to the commands of his master, attended
the mendicant, in order to see him fairly out of the estate, without
permitting him to have conversation, or intercourse, with any of the
Earl’s dependents or domestics. But, judiciously considering that the
restriction did not extend to himself, who was the person entrusted with
the convoy, he used every measure in his power to extort from Edie the
nature of his confidential and secret interview with Lord Glenallan. But
Edie had been in his time accustomed to cross-examination, and easily
evaded those of his quondam comrade. “The secrets of grit folk,” said
Ochiltree within himself, “are just like the wild beasts that are shut
up in cages. Keep them hard and fast sneaked up, and it’s a’ very weel
or better--but ance let them out, they will turn and rend you. I mind how
ill Dugald Gunn cam aff for letting loose his tongue about the Major’s
leddy and Captain Bandilier.”

Francis was therefore foiled in his assaults upon the fidelity of the
mendicant, and, like an indifferent chess-player, became, at every
unsuccessful movement, more liable to the counter-checks of his
opponent. “Sae ye uphauld ye had nae particulars to say to my lord but about yer
ain matters?”

“Ay, and about the wee bits o’ things I had brought frae abroad,” said
Edie. “I ken’d you popist folk are unco set on the relics that are
fetched frae far-kirks and sae forth.”

“Troth, my Lord maun be turned feel outright,” said the domestic, “an
he puts himsell into sic a carfuffle, for onything ye could bring him,
Edie.”

“I doubtna ye may say true in the main, neighbour,” replied the beggar;
“but maybe he’s had some hard play in his younger days, Francis, and
that whiles unsettles folk sair.”

“Troth, Edie, and ye may say that--and since it’s like yell neer come
back to the estate, or, if ye dee, that ye’ll no find me there, I’se
e’en tell you he had a heart in his young time sae wrecked and rent,
that it’s a wonder it hasna broken outright lang afore this day.”

“Ay, say ye sae?” said Ochiltree; “that maun hae been about a woman, I
reckon?”

“Troth, and ye hae guessed it,” said Francie--“jeest a cusin o’ his
nain--Miss Eveline Neville, as they suld hae ca’d her;--there was a sough
in the country about it, but it was hushed up, as the grandees
were concerned;--it’s mair than twenty years syne--ay, it will be
three-and-twenty.”

“Ay, I was in America then,” said the mendicant, “and no in the way to
hear the country clashes.”

“There was little clash about it, man,” replied Macraw; “he liked this
young leddy, ana suld hae married her, but his mother fand it out, and
then the deil gaed o’er Jock Webster. At last, the peer lass clodded
hersell o’er the scaur at the Craigburnfoot into the sea, and there was
an end o’t.”

“An end o’t wi’ the puir leddy,” said the mendicant, “but, as I reckon,
nae end o’t wi’ the yerl.”

“Nae end o’t till his life makes an end,” answered the Aberdonian. “But what for did the auld Countess forbid the marriage?” continued the
persevering querist. “Fat for!--she maybe didna weel ken for fat hersell, for she gar’d a’
bow to her bidding, right or wrang--But it was ken’d the young leddy was
inclined to some o’ the heresies of the country--mair by token, she was
sib to him nearer than our Church’s rule admits of. Sae the leddy was
driven to the desperate act, and the yerl has never since held his head
up like a man.”

“Weel away!” replied Ochiltree:--“it’s e’en queer I neer heard this tale
afore.”

“It’s e’en queer that ye heard it now, for deil ane o’ the servants
durst hae spoken o’t had the auld Countess been living. Eh, man, Edie! but she was a trimmer--it wad hae taen a skeely man to hae squared wi’
her!--But she’s in her grave, and we may loose our tongues a bit fan
we meet a friend.--But fare ye weel, Edie--I maun be back to the
evening-service. An’ ye come to Inverurie maybe sax months awa, dinna
forget to ask after Francie Macraw.”

What one kindly pressed, the other as firmly promised; and the friends
having thus parted, with every testimony of mutual regard, the domestic
of Lord Glenallan took his road back to the seat of his master, leaving
Ochiltree to trace onward his habitual pilgrimage. It was a fine summer evening, and the world--that is, the little circle
which was all in all to the individual by whom it was trodden, lay
before Edie Ochiltree, for the choosing of his night’s quarters. When
he had passed the less hospitable domains of Glenallan, he had in his
option so many places of refuge for the evening, that he was nice, and
even fastidious in the choice. Ailie Sim’s public was on the road-side
about a mile before him, but there would be a parcel of young fellows
there on the Saturday night, and that was a bar to civil conversation. Other “gudemen and gudewives,” as the farmers and their dames are termed
in Scotland, successively presented themselves to his imagination. But
one was deaf, and could not hear him; another toothless, and could not
make him hear; a third had a cross temper; and a fourth an ill-natured
house-dog. At Monkbarns or Knockwinnock he was sure of a favourable
and hospitable reception; but they lay too distant to be conveniently
reached that night. “I dinna ken how it is,” said the old man, “but I am nicer about my
quarters this night than ever I mind having been in my life. I think,
having seen a’ the braws yonder, and finding out ane may be happier
without them, has made me proud o’ my ain lot--But I wuss it bode me
gude, for pride goeth before destruction. At ony rate, the warst barn
e’er man lay in wad be a pleasanter abode than Glenallan House, wi’ a’
the pictures and black velvet, and silver bonny-wawlies belonging to it--
Sae I’ll e’en settle at ance, and put in for Ailie Sims.”

As the old man descended the hill above the little hamlet to which he
was bending his course, the setting sun had relieved its inmates
from their labour, and the young men, availing themselves of the fine
evening, were engaged in the sport of long-bowls on a patch of common,
while the women and elders looked on. The shout, the laugh, the
exclamations of winners and losers, came in blended chorus up the path
which Ochiltree was descending, and awakened in his recollection the
days when he himself had been a keen competitor, and frequently victor,
in games of strength and agility. These remembrances seldom fail to
excite a sigh, even when the evening of life is cheered by brighter
prospects than those of our poor mendicant. “At that time of day,” was
his natural reflection, “I would have thought as little about ony auld
palmering body that was coming down the edge of Kinblythemont, as ony o’
thae stalwart young chiels does e’enow about auld Edie Ochiltree.”

He was, however, presently cheered, by finding that more importance was
attached to his arrival than his modesty had anticipated. A disputed
cast had occurred between the bands of players, and as the gauger
favoured the one party, and the schoolmaster the other, the matter might
be said to be taken up by the higher powers. The miller and smith, also,
had espoused different sides, and, considering the vivacity of two
such disputants, there was reason to doubt whether the strife might
be amicably terminated. But the first person who caught a sight of the
mendicant exclaimed, “Ah! here comes auld Edie, that kens the rules of
a’ country games better than ony man that ever drave a bowl, or threw
an axle-tree, or putted a stane either;--let’s hae nae quarrelling,
callants--we’ll stand by auld Edie’s judgment.”

Edie was accordingly welcomed, and installed as umpire, with a general
shout of gratulation. With all the modesty of a Bishop to whom the
mitre is proffered, or of a new Speaker called to the chair, the old man
declined the high trust and responsibility with which it was proposed to
invest him, and, in requital for his self-denial and humility, had
the pleasure of receiving the reiterated assurances of young, old, and
middle-aged, that he was simply the best qualified person for the office
of arbiter “in the haill country-side.” Thus encouraged, he proceeded
gravely to the execution of his duty, and, strictly forbidding all
aggravating expressions on either side, he heard the smith and gauger on
one side, the miller and schoolmaster on the other, as junior and senior
counsel. Edie’s mind, however, was fully made up on the subject before
the pleading began; like that of many a judge, who must nevertheless go
through all the forms, and endure in its full extent the eloquence and
argumentation of the Bar. For when all had been said on both sides,
and much of it said over oftener than once, our senior, being well and
ripely advised, pronounced the moderate and healing judgment, that the
disputed cast was a drawn one, and should therefore count to neither
party. This judicious decision restored concord to the field of
players; they began anew to arrange their match and their bets, with the
clamorous mirth usual on such occasions of village sport, and the more
eager were already stripping their jackets, and committing them,
with their coloured handkerchiefs, to the care of wives, sisters, and
mistresses. But their mirth was singularly interrupted. On the outside of the group of players began to arise sounds of a
description very different from those of sport--that sort of suppressed
sigh and exclamation, with which the first news of calamity is received
by the hearers, began to be heard indistinctly. A buzz went about among
the women of “Eh, sirs! sae young and sae suddenly summoned!”--It then
extended itself among the men, and silenced the sounds of sportive
mirth. All understood at once that some disaster had happened in the country,
and each inquired the cause at his neighbour, who knew as little as the
querist. At length the rumour reached, in a distinct shape, the ears of
Edie Ochiltree, who was in the very centre of the assembly. The boat of
Mucklebackit, the fisherman whom we have so often mentioned, had been
swamped at sea, and four men had perished, it was affirmed, including
Mucklebackit and his son. Rumour had in this, however, as in other
cases, gone beyond the truth. The boat had indeed been overset; but
Stephen, or, as he was called, Steenie Mucklebackit, was the only man
who had been drowned. Although the place of his residence and his mode
of life removed the young man from the society of the country folks, yet
they failed not to pause in their rustic mirth to pay that tribute to
sudden calamity which it seldom fails to receive in cases of infrequent
occurrence. To Ochiltree, in particular, the news came like a knell, the
rather that he had so lately engaged this young man’s assistance in
an affair of sportive mischief; and though neither loss nor injury was
designed to the German adept, yet the work was not precisely one in
which the latter hours of life ought to be occupied. Misfortunes never come alone. While Ochiltree, pensively leaning upon
his staff, added his regrets to those of the hamlet which bewailed
the young man’s sudden death, and internally blamed himself for the
transaction in which he had so lately engaged him, the old man’s collar
was seized by a peace-officer, who displayed his baton in his right
hand, and exclaimed, “In the king’s name.”

The gauger and schoolmaster united their rhetoric, to prove to the
constable and his assistant that he had no right to arrest the king’s
bedesman as a vagrant; and the mute eloquence of the miller and smith,
which was vested in their clenched fists, was prepared to give Highland
bail for their arbiter; his blue gown, they said, was his warrant for
travelling the country. “But his blue gown,” answered the officer, “is nae protection for
assault, robbery, and murder; and my warrant is against him for these
crimes.”

“Murder!” said Edie, “murder! wha did I e’er murder?”

“Mr. German Doustercivil, the agent at Glen-Withershins mining-works.”

“Murder Doustersnivel?--hout, he’s living, and life-like, man.”

“Nae thanks to you if he be; he had a sair struggle for his life, if a’
be true he tells, and ye maun answer for’t at the bidding of the law.”

The defenders of the mendicant shrunk back at hearing the atrocity of
the charges against him, but more than one kind hand thrust meat and
bread and pence upon Edie, to maintain him in the prison, to which the
officers were about to conduct him. “Thanks to ye! God bless ye a’, bairns!--I’ve gotten out o’ mony a snare
when I was waur deserving o’ deliverance--I shall escape like a bird from
the fowler. Play out your play, and never mind me--I am mair grieved for
the puir lad that’s gane, than for aught they can do to me.”

Accordingly, the unresisting prisoner was led off, while he mechanically
accepted and stored in his wallets the alms which poured in on every
hand, and ere he left the hamlet, was as deep-laden as a government
victualler. The labour of bearing this accumulating burden was, however,
abridged, by the officer procuring a cart and horse to convey the old
man to a magistrate, in order to his examination and committal. The disaster of Steenie, and the arrest of Edie, put a stop to the
sports of the village, the pensive inhabitants of which began to
speculate upon the vicissitudes of human affairs, which had so suddenly
consigned one of their comrades to the grave, and placed their master
of the revels in some danger of being hanged. The character of
Dousterswivel being pretty generally known, which was in his case
equivalent to being pretty generally detested, there were many
speculations upon the probability of the accusation being malicious. But
all agreed, that if Edie Ochiltree behoved in all events to suffer upon
this occasion, it was a great pity he had not better merited his fate by
killing Dousterswivel outright. Who is he?--One that for the lack of land
              Shall fight upon the water--he hath challenged
              Formerly the grand whale; and by his titles
                 Of Leviathan, Behemoth, and so forth. He tilted with a sword-fish--Marry, sir,
                 Th’ aquatic had the best--the argument
                      Still galls our champion’s breech. Old Play. “And the poor young fellow, Steenie Mucklebackit, is to be buried this
morning,” said our old friend the Antiquary, as he exchanged his quilted
night-gown for an old-fashioned black coat in lieu of the snuff-coloured
vestment which he ordinarily wore, “and, I presume, it is expected that
I should attend the funeral?”

“Ou, ay,” answered the faithful Caxon, officiously brushing the white
threads and specks from his patron’s habit. “The body, God help us! was
sae broken against the rocks that they’re fain to hurry the burial. The
sea’s a kittle cast, as I tell my daughter, puir thing, when I want
her to get up her spirits; the sea, says I, Jenny, is as uncertain a
calling”--

“As the calling of an old periwig-maker, that’s robbed of his business
by crops and the powder-tax. Caxon, thy topics of consolation are as ill
chosen as they are foreign to the present purpose. _Quid mihi cum faemina?_
What have I to do with thy womankind, who have enough and to spare of
mine own?--I pray of you again, am I expected by these poor people to
attend the funeral of their son?”

“Ou, doubtless, your honour is expected,” answered Caxon; “weel I wot ye
are expected. Ye ken, in this country ilka gentleman is wussed to be sae
civil as to see the corpse aff his grounds; ye needna gang higher than
the loan-head--it’s no expected your honour suld leave the land; it’s
just a Kelso convoy, a step and a half ower the doorstane.”

“A Kelso convoy!” echoed the inquisitive Antiquary; “and why a Kelso
convoy more than any other?”

“Dear sir,” answered Caxon, “how should I ken? it’s just a by-word.”

“Caxon,” answered Oldbuck, “thou art a mere periwig-maker--Had I asked
Ochiltree the question, he would have had a legend ready made to my
hand.”

“My business,” replied Caxon, with more animation than he commonly
displayed, “is with the outside of your honour’s head, as ye are
accustomed to say.”

“True, Caxon, true; and it is no reproach to a thatcher that he is not
an upholsterer.”

He then took out his memorandum-book and wrote down “Kelso convoy--said
to be a step and a half over the threshold. Authority--Caxon.--Quaere--
Whence derived? Mem.