She had read nothing like them in Corinna!-but the vanity of Miss
Moreton's heart yet reigned triumphant, and could not easily be shaken from its throne. She was
yet a greater heroine than Madam de Stael's. Her haranguing, and finally dispersing the
assembled mob, without yielding up the object of their fury, was surely a matchless piece of
heroism! Yes, Montgomery must hear it! Her magnanimous conduct would reach his ears, and
how would his whole soul dissolve in rapturous admiration! "E'en so we glad forsook these sinful bowers." THOMSON. THE sun shone in upon Miss Moreton's bed, whilst indulging in these delusive and visionary
reflections; and it required that she should be fully persuaded of them, to make her amends for
the devastating wreck which surrounded her. The mischief done to the Villa and to its internal
decorations was very serious; but the noble soul of Corinna soared above common evils, and she
gave orders for cleaning, mending, and replacing, with the greatest apparent unconcern. But she
was sensible of a sad vacuum at her heart. She was now alone, deserted by all her flatterers, and
obliged to relinquish that society, which, next to Montgomery's, was the most delightful to her. Miss Moreton was sensible that this relinquishment had been absolutely necessary to ensure her
safety, as well as that of her friend; but she deeply lamented the dullness, and mistaken and low
notions of the people of Coventry, whom she had vainly endeavoured to enlighten by a ray of her
own Divine Genius! In the absence of all beside, Miss Moreton had recourse to her cousin and
her ward! She found Mary with her forehead bound (for though the glass had made only a skin-
deep wound, yet it was necessary to exclude it from the air), and her cheeks despoiled of their
roses. On Miss Moreton's addressing her with more tenderness than she usually evinced towards
her, the full heart of the poor girl overflowed at her eyes, and she burst into tears! Miss Moreton
appeared to be somewhat moved with her distress. "These people frightened and hurt you last
night, I perceive," said she; "it requires a very strong mind, to meet the torrent of public applause
with equanimity and composure." "Surely you do not believe, that your visitors of the last night meant to compliment you,
Madam?" asked Mary, putting her hand to her sore temple, yet smarting with pain. "Not exactly
that, perhaps: poor creatures! they could not exactly define the nature of their own sentiments, I
believe;" said Miss Moreton, "if we were to ask them for an explanation; but no matter. "I came to propose a little plan to you, Mary, which I have been agitating this morning on
my pillow. My Villa, as you will perceive, wants a little brushing up and gilding, after such a
series of rejoicings and festivities; and as all my friends have left me for a time, I think I cannot
do better than to change the scene for both of us by a little tour!-What say you?" "Mary paused; she seldom had spoken her sentiments to Miss Moreton; but her mind yet
harassed; her frame yet trembling from those occurrences, which had been derived solely from
her imprudent eccentricity; and, fearing a repetition of them, from any new plans which she
might have in agitation, she felt that she could not be silent; and, timidly interesting as she spoke,
she said, "My dear Miss Moreton, knowing as I do, that I am placed entirely under your
guidance, it is an aukward thing for me to give you my sentiments." "Oh! not at all," said Miss Moreton, with something of a confused surprise in her manner;
"pray go on-let me have them by all means." "I must go with you wherever you wish," said
Mary; "and with the utmost pleasure should I accompany you, were I assured, were I certain, that
your intended journey had no reference to the Chevalier D'Aubert. But the impropriety of
following him; the disrepute attached to his character; and above all, the disrespect into which
yours must fall--"
"You have said enough," said Miss Moreton, coolly, "I perfectly understand you, Miss
Cuthbert. You have adopted those narrow notions, which Mrs. Deborah Moreton, and other
strait-laced damsels would impose on hearts and dispositions like mine! I am not at all alarmed at
your lecture, believe me, child. Alas! poor D'Aubert is far from my protecting care and
sympathising voice. I may never see him again; but mine is a capacious mind, Miss Cuthbert, and
I yesterday heard of a friend, who, ill and at a distance, pants for my society, and lingers for my
presence. I feel for the illness of all, for whom I profess regard, and, with the balm of comfort I
would now visit the poor invalid. This, I think, even my aunt Deborah would allow me,-not that
I shall consult her. And now I consider that I have entered into a sufficient explanation with my
ward." "I grieve that I have offended you, dear Madam," said Mary; "but when you consider the
very great difference of my present life to that to which I have been accustomed; when you
consider, too, that my good name is almost all that I can call my own, you will perceive that my
fears are natural ones. I am very young, Miss Moreton. You likewise are in the season of youth;
the conduct of females is narrowly observed; and, if there is no real impropriety discoverable,
still a thousand invidious and uncharitable remarks may be made, and innumerable incidents and
circumstances may wear the hue of culpability." "Conscious virtue has in it something too profound, to be swayed by public opinion," said
Miss Moreton, "even if it was not confident of its general suffrage; but it has likewise an
imposing air of superiority, which fixes universal applause! and admiration will always follow
the destiny of her who soars
"Above the fix'd and common rules
"Of vice and virtue in the schools!" Since Miss Moreton's perusal of Delphine and Corinna, she had adopted those words
which are so frequently met with in the works of Madam De Stael, and which seem to carry
more meaning in them than "meets the ear," or even the understanding. These words, it scarcely
need be mentioned, are "impose," "profound," "suffrage," and "destiny." Mary Cuthbert perceived that it was a vain attempt to try to reason with her protectress;
she had no right to oppose her wishes, and even, should she request to be left at the Attic Villa,
whilst Miss Moreton took her excursion, its present disordered state, and the fermentation not yet
subsided in Coventry, might subject her to frequent and serious alarms. Mary wished to mention to Mrs. Deborah Moreton the intention of her niece; but Miss
Moreton employed Mary (for the first time since she had been at the Villa) in arranging the
books in the Lyceum, which had been sadly soiled and scattered about the preceding night; and,
as if to prevent her from making her escape, she took a chair and a book, and remained in the
room. The journey was to take place on the following morning; Miss Moreton mentioned her
intention of travelling in a post-chaise, with as little show as possible, and without an Abigail. "In a visit to the sick, dress is the last idea that could take possession of my mind," said she; "and
how much more unrestrained and confidential will be my conversation with you, when
unimpeded by the presence of a third person." Mary ventured now to inquire if Miss Moreton intended taking a long journey? "To you,"
said she, "it may appear long-my friend is in Sussex; but I could say with Imogen,
"If one of mean affairs may plod it in a week,
"Why may not I glide thither in a day?" "Is the illness of your friend dangerous?" asked Mary. "Dangerous, in as much as it is
hopeless!" said Miss Moreton, with a deep-drawn sigh. Before Mary retired to rest, she snatched
a minute to write a few lines to Mrs. Deborah Moreton, and, through the assistance of the housemaid,
she sent it off unknown to her protectress. Her note ran as follows:-
"MY DEAR MADAM. "Wednesday night. "I think it my duty to inform you, that Miss Moreton and myself are to set out on a long journey
to-morrow morning. I do not imagine that your niece wished you to be acquainted with her
intention; and I can only pray Heaven, that it may turn out such an one as you may approve. Miss
Moreton has merely told me that she is going on a visit to a sick friend; but of the sex of that
friend I am left in doubt. "I received her word, that the journey has not the remotest reference to the Chevalier
D'Aubert, which has contributed to embolden me; and I have just learnt that Sussex is the county
to which we are to bend our course. "That I would much rather remain quietly at home, you will believe; but the choice is not
left me; I must obey my guardian, and I suspect, though she will not acknowledge it, that recent
occurrences have had some influence on her present movements, and that Miss Moreton thinks it
may be as well to leave the Villa for a short time. "Wherever I go, I shall carry with me a grateful sense of the kindness which you, my dear
Madam, have evinced towards your much obliged,
"And grateful,
"MARY CUTHBERT." Just before Mary Cuthbert quitted her apartment the next morning, the house-maid put
the following letter into her hands:-
"DEAR MISS CUTHBERT,
"I return you my cordial thanks for your favour, which has given me great satisfaction. The very best and most prudent thing which my niece, Miss Moreton, can do, is to leave this
country for a short time. Mrs. Rebecca Nailsbury, cousin german to my late respected mother,
resides in Sussex. She has long laboured under an incurable and hopeless disease; and, confined
to her bed at upwards of ninety years of age, has long wished to behold her relative and my
niece, Miss Clarissa Moreton. I rejoice at Clarissa's having at length determined to introduce herself to Mrs. Nailsbury,
as it is what I have long urged her to do; but she always expressed an utter repugnance to the
visit when I suggested it, and, following her usual plan of opposition, will not inform me that she
is now acting according to my advice. I sincerely wish you a pleasant and comfortable journey. You will find Mrs. Rebecca Nailsbury a very good and regular behaved woman, and will have
nothing to fear, with regard to any improper acquaintances that may be met with at her house; as
she is remarkably scrupulous, and choice in her friends. This is the first time in my life that I
ever entered into a clandestine correspondence; but the occasion seems to justify me, and I avail
myself of the opportunity to conclude myself,
Dear Miss Cuthbert,
Your sincere friend, and well-wisher,
DEBORAH MORETON." "The timorous eye retiring from applause,
"And the mild air that fearfully withdraws." LANGHORNE. NOTHING but the most decided dread of remaining at the Villa, could, in Mary's opinion, have
reconciled Miss Moreton to such a visit as Mrs. Deborah had described. And indeed she feared
that the old lady was still in a secret, with regard to the intentions of her niece. Mary could only hope that she was right; and she was presently called to Miss Moreton
who was ready for the journey. After what had been said concerning dress, Mary had put on a
close robe of black, and a large bonnet on her head. She found Miss Moreton arrayed for
travelling, in a blush-coloured sarsnet, made tight to her body, and very scantily over the lower
part of her form; her hair hung in ringlets on her shoulders, and was slightly shaded by a white
veil; her stockings and slippers were of the same colour with her dress; a gold chain, to which
was suspended an Opera glass, was hung round her shoulders. Mary was soon seated by her protectress, who maugre the confidential conversation,
which she had spoken of, seemed to be fully employed by her own thoughts, except when she
stopped for relays of horses, or to take refreshment; when her inquiries were so odd, and her
manner and appearance so extraordinary, that her companion painfully perceived that Miss
Moreton was a universal object of attention and curiosity, and that, delighted at perceiving this,
she conversed in a louder key, and with still greater energy, in order to increase the number of
her observers. The second morning Miss Moreton said, "we shall stay this night in London, Mary; and I
can amuse you in the early part of the morning, by taking you to see a few of the streets and
squares. Perhaps we may return by the same way; but the course of human destiny is so
uncertain, and so profound in mystery are the intricate recesses of the future, that I always like to
seize the present moment, whilst it is in my power!" Mary was not much exhilarated at the idea of being dragged through the streets of the
metropolis by a person of Miss Moreton's peculiar air and manner; and she said, that she hoped
Miss Moreton would not retard her journey or inconvenience herself on her account. "An
invalid," said she, "must of course be regular, with regard to hours. You will be anxiously
expected, and-." "I am not expected," said Miss Moreton; "my friend does not know of my intention-No! I have
imposed a painful silence on myself, in order to impart a more profound sentiment of pleasure
when I shall unexpectedly appear. My friend is at that period of life, when hours make no
difference with regard to the distribution of time!" From this ambiguous speech Mary gathered, that Miss Moreton thought Mrs. Nailsbury's
confinement to her bed made day and night the same to her; and, though she was still of opinion
that propriety and regularity should be particularly observed in an approach to a house of
sickness, yet she saw that it would be in vain to urge any thing more on the subject. Our travellers reached London late at night, and much fatigued with the journey. On
arriving at an Hotel in the Strand, Mary Cuthbert was glad to go to bed. The next morning she was taken by her protectress from street to street, and square to
square, jostled by some people, spoken to by others, stared at by all; for the extraordinary figure
of Miss Moreton, and the "mauvaise honte" and beauty of her companion formed a general
subject of curiosity. Remarks were made, which frequently reached the ear of Miss Moreton and
of Mary.-The latter "blushed carnation deep;" the former returned, what she would have
termed, "a profound and silencing stare!" Mary Cuthbert wondered that Miss Moreton should prefer walking the streets
unprotected, to going in a carriage; but she had not read Corinna, else she would have known
that, in strict obedience to her model, Miss Moreton took this pedestrian excursion.-Corinna
had walked over Rome with Lord Nelville! "Time will not allow of our now visiting that noble pile of building, the mausoleum of the
mighty dead," cried Miss Moreton, pointing to Westminster Abbey: "Ah! it is amongst the tombs
of heroes only, that the soul is imbued with that profound and peculiar sentiment which may be
said to give it double life!" It was in the afternoon, when our two ladies departed from London. Mary Cuthbert had
so frequently heard of the highwaymen who infested the environs of the metropolis, that her
young and timid heart began to sink. "How far is it to the place of our destination, Madam?" asked she, (for the name of it had
never yet been mentioned by Miss Moreton.) "Only six-and-thirty miles from town," said Miss
Moreton; "we shall soon be there.-You see I have had four horses put to the chaise; and shall
have them at the next stage likewise, in order to expedite our journey." Mary kept her fears within her own breast;-Miss Moreton seemed lost in reflection; and
they reached a down about ten o'clock, which Miss Moreton said was near the end of their
journey; the postillions had previously received orders from her, and they drove through it with
much velocity. It was a cold and chill night; the clouds looked murky, and seemed to portend
rain;-an undefinable sensation of dread seized on the mind of Mary Cuthbert, as she felt herself
bowled over a wide down, where no friendly star afforded glimmering light. The silence of Miss Moreton-the mysterious manner in which she had spoken of her
friend, and of her friend's residence, filled her with alarm; yet she knew not what to fear; for
such was the strange inconsistency of Miss Moreton's character, that it was impossible to fathom
any of her projects. At length they entered a long and gloomy avenue.-Mary could perceive, by the lights
which issued from it, that they were approaching a large and massive pile of building; it
appeared to wear the air of grand and feudal gloom; and the partial illumination of the building,
at the termination of the vista, added to the solemn and sombre look of the avenue. With an instinctive emotion of apprehension, Mary seized the arm of Miss Moreton, and
said, "Is this large place the house of your friend, Madam?"