I am sure it is very odd:” then looking round, expecting to read a confirmation of her opinion in every countenance, and seeing nothing but stoical indifference, she became half ashamed of the emotion that she felt; and continued, in a crying tone, “I’m sure I thought—I thought—” she paused again; but that she thought on any subject, was an assertion so uncommon for her to make, that every one was anxious to hear what she thought on this. However the degree of attention paid to her words, defeated its design, for being unused to it, she was embarrassed, and remained silent, until the Earl kindly said, “And what did you think, my dear?” speaking in the most encouraging tone, for at that moment he saw in her only the child of his beloved friend, and the source from which he had long drawn his most pleasing ideas of future prosperity and comfort for his son. “I thought,” she resumed, “that your lordship wished Lord Courtney to marry me; and I am sure I think he has behaved very ungenteelly, and it is very hard to be treated so, just when I believed I was so near being married, and he always appeared to admire me so. I’m sure I’m very ill used, and very unhappy, for every body will laugh at me, and talk of nothing else.” Here she burst into an agony of tears; nor is she the first person who ever wept unnecessarily, from believing that nothing but her affairs would be talked of, when they were fortunately too insignificant to exite, in the smallest degree, the interest and curiosity which vanity and self-love imagine they must universally inspire. All however, endeavoured to console the afflicted Lady Harriett, though they might not exactly agree with her in regard to her afflictions becoming a popular topic. The Earl could not but smile, notwithstanding his vexation; Lady Rosamond smiled too, but it was half contemptuously. Emma blushed, and felt distressed that Lady Harriett should expose herself by continuing a variety of weak exclamations amid her tears and sobs; whilst Lady Maria, languidly reclining on a sofa, entreated her to compose herself, saying, “You must, child, have gigantic strength of frame, to endure such violent exertions, the very sight of which fatigues me to death. Surely you not only have ‘a throat of brass, and adamantine lungs,’ but a marble head and iron eyes, or you never could weep so excessively, and retain a hope of being able to see, or look tolerably again.” This last argument checked Lady Harriett’s tears immediately; for she recollected that she was going to a ball, at Lady John Talbot’s, (the ci-devant Lady Laura Delany) where she should see Mr. Dunderton; and, notwithstanding her admiration of every thing said, or done by the heroines of the charming works, which she so eagerly devoured, and her desire to imitate them, in all their actions, she never could discover how they contrived to look the most beautiful, after spending several hours in weeping; a recreation which generally sullies the charms of living fair ones, by flushing the complexion, inflaming the eyes, and swelling the features; for which reason, she was not so fond of personating one of the pensive characters, though they were certainly extremely interesting and delightful, as described in the charming pages of fiction. When the Drelincourt party entered the elegant suite of rooms, fitted up by Lady John Talbot, to receive the first guests that she had entertained since her marriage, it was easy to perceive that the news of Lord Courtney’s stolen match was no secret. All who entered into conversation with them, so carefully avoided any enquiry after the object, of whom they were dying with curiosity to know every particular, were so more than ordinarily civil, and so very voluble on every other subject, that the one they carefully avoided, was evidently that on which they were thinking the most particularly. Poor Lady Harriett had almost forgotten her recent mortifications, in the pleasure of adorning herself in a new dress, equally elegant and becoming; for to do her justice, she had some taste for decoration; which might, by a skilful hand, have been directed to objects more worthy of attention; and she had now fortunately procured a seat opposite to a splendid mirror, which reflecting every form in the room, yet presented none to her view so charming as her own. It is, perhaps, wisely decreed, that every situation, however apparently eligible, shall have some drawback to it’s pleasures; some pain, known only to the possessor, who sighs in secret over the imperfection which he carefully conceals, and feels the folly of the envy, which he yet endeavours to encrease by every deception in his power. Such was Lady Harriett’s case at this moment; her eyes were most agreeably engaged in an occupation, of which they were never weary, however constantly employed in it; but her ears were as disagreeably assailed by a conversation, to which she could not avoid listening; as unfortunately she was seated with her back to the parties, and too much confined to admit of a retreat without discovering herself. “Bless me,” exclaimed one of the ladies, “I did not expect to see any of Lady Drelincourt’s party here.” “And why,” asked a gentleman, “should you wish to deprive the rooms of so brilliant an addition?” “Indeed, my lord,” answered the female voice, “you mistake me, I by no means wish to

deprive the rooms of an addition to which they have been so long accustomed; I only wish, for the sake of a little dear variety, that Lady Rosamond, or Lady Maria, would favor us with having some other name announced, for really that of Courtney wearies my ears with repetition, having heard it ever since I left the nursery.” This was meant for wit, and therefore the lady laughed loudly, as a signal to the gentleman, who re-echoed it, as if it were an effort of his risible muscles in sleep. “Ah, you cruel woman,” he exclaimed, leaning back in his chair and shutting his eyes, “how can you ridicule the unfortunate fair ones, who ‘withering on the virgin thorn, consume in single blessedness,’ how can you triumph so cruelly in matron honors over them.” Now the lady to whom he spoke, had been a matron nearly seven years, though she had not yet arrived at years of discretion in any sense of the word, wanting some months of that period, when our legislature pays us the compliment to think we are capable of taking care of ourselves. She had however entered into the holy state of matrimony at a very early period, and with a pretty face, and still prettier fortune, had bestowed herself on an old nobleman; knowing that beauty is a flower which quickly fades, and dreading the possibility of pining in cheerless unimportant celibacy; she therefore gladly accepted the first offer made to her, and thought herself superlatively happy in being able to go out without asking her mamma’s leave, and chaproning misses of fifty into public, instead of being obliged to stay at home, from not always meeting with a friend, whom her prudent mother thought steady enough to protect her. After much unmeaning chit-chat, to which the gentleman listened in a sort of yawning despair, at being obliged to attend, and in which the lady affected to appear deeply interested, in order to tempt some more animated beau to interrupt it, the grand piece of intelligence was given by her, that Lord Courtney had positively married an opera-dancer in Florence. “No surely,” exclaimed her companion, “’pon honor, you petrify me, and so the old don is not quite compos mentis; an opera-dancer you say? I do not like opera-dancers, or else some of the Italians are prodigious fine women. I attempted to be cicesbeo to a few machionesses, and princesses, but the dear creatures require such an infinity of attention, and there were such confounded jealousies and plottings amongst them, that I was obliged to relinquish the pleasing office; my feelings were too fine, I could not bear to see any of them unhappy.” “Oh! you wicked wretch,” returned the lady, “if you make yourself appear such a shocking rake, I shall be quite frightened of you.” “No, do not be alarmed I beg,” he replied in a very incredulous tone, “do not be afraid of me; but I will shew you some sweet portraits, if you will do me the honor to look at them; I keep a closet for the purpose, which I call my cabinet of beauties; and you shall see such as are unknown to you, that will be no breach of honor you know. Well, and so Courtney has married an opera-dancer; not very wise, I think to marry her, but I suppose she is an enormous beauty, and so she will be amazingly the rage for one winter. As soon as they return to England however I would advise him to secure Garrow; well, and what says the Earl to this shocking degeneracy in the race of Drelincourt? how does his noble blood bear the idea of the horrid mixture with the canaille? It is a dreadful prospect, he may expect his grandson to turn out a rope-dancer.” “Oh! he is almost distracted, of course, and so are all the family; you may see how ill they all look; the women are absolutely ugly; and indeed it is very dreadful to think of having to take an opera-dancer about with them! she can criticise the ballets admirably no doubt.” “Egad,”

returned his lordship, “no bad thing, and in case the rage for equality goes forward, she could get her own living and her husband’s too; a very rare instance. But I thought he had a wife ready for him, of papa’s chusing.” “Ready for him, I dare say,” replied the lady, “but, he it seems, was not ready for her, and indeed her inanimate countenance, and swarthy complexion, could not be so disguised by red and white, as to deceive his penetrating eyes, even though gold dust were thrown into them.” “Come, come, my lady you are too bad now. The girl is very well, and her money is immensely well; she is tall and straight, and as to complexion, that is of no consequence, the fashion varies so, and Egyptian brown will have its turn again. In short, as Courtney has given up the prize, I think when I have time I must look after it, for I want a wife confoundedly.” Even this faint praise of another, was by far the most disagreeable topic, he could have chosen to entertain his companion with, and she replied in a tone of peevishness, “Lord Stranton has been seeking a wife so long, that I wonder he does not become weary of so fruitless a task.” “And why,” he returned, in a lower key, “why has it been fruitless? Because I looked for Lady Nevil’s counterpart, and my presumptuous expectations of finding one who equalled her, have always been disappointed.” Lady Nevil thought he talked admirably, and gave him her hand to lead her into the ball-rooms; thereby relieving Lady Harriett from the mortifying situation. So long as the conversation which she had overheard, was confined to ridiculing her friends, she found it very entertaining and witty, but when it included herself, she thought that the speakers must be the most illnatured people in the world, and felt convinced of the truth of Lord Drelincourt’s observation, that scandal is the amusement of little minds, and degrades the retailers of it, much more than the subjects. At the same moment that Lord Stranton led Lady Nevil into the ball room, Miss Dunderton came from it, in search of Lady Harriett. “My sweet friend,” she exclaimed, in the most pathetic tone of romance, “why is your interesting countenance clouded with pensive melancholy? tell your Eliza the cause of your sorrow, that she may sympathise in it.” If knowing the cause of the sorrow which this warm friend so immediately perceived, was all that was necessary to excite sympathy, she had no occasion to restrain her’s one moment, as she well knew how to account for it, and was at that instant considering the best method of forwarding her brother’s interests and her own, by means of the vexation that she affected to lament. Mr. Dunderton soon after appeared, and requested the honor of her ladyship’s hand, for the next two dances; which having gained, he assailed her so powerfully with compliments, and wisely affected such entire ignorance of any unpleasant occurrence, that Lady Harriett was brought into good humour by the first, and by the last, felt inspired with a wish to cheat the world, which she imagined so interested in her concerns. Mr. Dunderton, encouraged by her readiness to accept his advances, at last courageously proposed an elopement, to that happy land, which had it the privilege of separating the parties that it has joined, would probably be a place of the greatest resort in Europe. Lady Harriett could not in humanity or justice, be angry at a proposal, caused by the irresistible force of her charms, and the conflict which they had produced in her lover’s bosom. Her first thought on hearing the extravagant declarations, and hyperbolical compliments addressed to her, was, that as he was undoubtedly sincere, she was at least

justified in listening to him, as Lady Nevil had done to Lord Stranton, who evidently meant nothing but the grossest flattery, whilst Mr. Dunderton, spoke only the true and unadorned dictates of his heart. The second thought was, that a compliance with his entreaties, would convince the world, that she was not mortified by Lord Courtney’s desertion, or at a loss for another lover to supply his place; whether such a motive for compliance be perfectly wise, or honourable, we will not determine, but certainly the conduct of many females has been decided by reasons not much more weighty. The third thought perplexed Lady Harriett much more than her thoughts in general, as they were seldom of any other than the simplest kind. This was no less, than whether she should not disgrace her title by uniting herself with one who had none at present, and little better than none in reversion; for all Lord Drelincourt’s instructions were not thrown away on his ward, and she had comprehended with tolerable quickness, those which taught her any addition to her own consequence, and the distinction between people of condition, and no condition; of ancient rank, and modern rank. Lady Harriett considered, and reconsidered, the arguments on both sides of the question, with all the judgment of which she was mistress, and to do her justice, she recalled every worldly maxim to her mind, to elucidate the subject, untinctured with the least mixture of romance. Indeed after all that has been said against that branch of literature, to the study of which, she and her amiable friend Eliza, were like many other young ladies exclusively attached; we do not believe that on a candid and impartial enquiry, it will be found that the fascinating productions of the Minerva Press, have taught their fair readers to marry for love, whatever other crimes may be laid to their charge. On the contrary, they generously endeavour to steel the female heart, against the insidious attacks of that little deity, by representing wealth, splendor, and titles, as articles very essential to the felicity, which those who would decry the ingenious works, in which the present age is so fruitful, maliciously accuse them of ascribing to love alone. So far from this, if by mistake a heroine be drawn, marrying an amiable man, to whom she is attached, and in whose society, she is contented with competency, (a thing that cannot in these days be despised, for being too easy to acquire,) her moderation is invariably rewarded, by her husband being discovered as the heir of an earldom, or some trifling affair of that kind; a mark of a strawberry, a worked cap, a coral, some brother kindly dying, or uncle luckily returning from the East Indies, is made the cause of honors, luxuries, and riches; which of course, the readers are informed, add infinitely to the happiness of the parties, whose happiness apparently needed not any addition, and must entirely check any bad consequences, that might arise from closing the book, with a conviction that moderate desires and moderate gartifications, are the most probable sources for the enjoyment of content, and the practice of virtue. We have surely given Lady Harriett time to fix her resolutions by this digression; but we were led into it, by a generous wish to rescue fictitious history, from an objection unjustly made to it: for conscious that there are too many, which could not be so easily refuted, we cannot suffer it to labour under one, which daily experience shews us it does not deserve. Mr. Dunderton perceived the conflict in his mistress’s mind, he perceived and trembled: he certainly spoke with great sincerity, when he declared, that the moment of her decision, was the most anxious he had ever known, and that on it depended more than

he could express to the fair arbitress of his fate; for on it, depended the payment of several debts, which he had contracted, in the hope of his success, and the happiness of an establishment far from his paternal roof, which he cared not if he never entered again, so rapidly had he improved by fashionable society. He again implored Lady Harriett to believe him sincere in what he asserted. She did, nor was she deceived, but by herself, for if she affixed one meaning to his assertions, and he had previously affixed another, he could not possibly be expected to know her ladyship’s ideas on the subject. Let it suffice to say, that her desire to convince the world that she was neither slighted, nor mortified, induced her to consent to a deed, by which she must incur the suspicion she wished to avoid; and Mr. Dunderton with inexpressible pleasure fixed the plan of their departure, which was to take place the very next day. This was not difficult, for Lady Harriett often dined with Miss Dunderton, and though Lord Drelincourt by no means approved of her violent intimacy with this young lady, very properly thinking, that it was not one, from which she could derive much benefit, yet, neither did he foresee great harm from its continuance; and his wish to render her residence in his family agreeable, induced him to suffer her to follow her own inclinations, regarding the time that she spent with her friend, only as wasted in her society, instead of that of many others equally frivolous. It was finally agreed, that Lady Harriett should call on Miss Dunderton the next morning, and then send a note to Lady Drelincourt, to say, that she should spend the day with her; instead of which she should take her leave almost immediately, and be conducted by her impatient lover to a chaise and four, which would soon whirl them beyond the impertinent interference of friendship. When Mr. Dunderton had gained the lady’s consent, it will be supposed that the grand difficulty was surmounted; but not so; there remained yet another; and one which has often rendered fruitless, enterprises of a much nobler, and more generally beneficial nature than the present; this was neither more nor less, than a deficiency of an article, which becomes every day more fashionable and indispensable, insomuch that any one suspected of being without it, is despised, and treated with very undisguised contempt in all good company. We think that we already hear some of our fair readers exclaim, “How unnatural and vulgar, to represent all the characters in want of money, for that must be what is meant;” but have a little patience, lovely and gentle readers; we must confess, that to us, the want of money, appears one of the most natural wants of the present day; and that many others are of our opinion, we humbly conclude, by the eagerness with which all ranks endeavour to satisfy it, and the ingenious means that they use for that purpose. As to the vulgarity of such a want, it is so generally felt, that if universality constitute fashion, we will not hesitate to declare, that it is as far removed from vulgarity, as the ease of a woman of quality, from the bashfulness of a country girl; the delightful negligence of a modern man of fashion, from the formal politeness of a pupil of Lord Chesterfield; the promises of a candidate at an election, from his performances when he has gained it; the words of a courtier, from his meaning; the religion of half the country from devotion, and that of the other half from charity; or any other extreme, with which our readers may be acquainted. A generous confidence, between parents and children, is certainly as pleasing to behold, as it is beneficial in its consequences. This did not always exist between Mr. Dunderton and his papa, but on the present occasion, the former was induced to make a

confidant of the latter, knowing the impossibility of proceeding without his assistance; he therefore candidly stated his designs to his father, and the motives which had urged him to them; saying with great sincerity, that he was not impelled by passion, or blinded by partiality, but urged by prudence, and encouraged by the hope of benefiting himself in so advantageous a connexion. If any thing could be more surprising than that Mr. Dunderton should submit his plans to his father’s opinion, it was, that those plans should be approved of by him, as it was the first instance in which Lord Dunderton and his son had ever agreed. On this occasion he warmly commended his judgment; told him that Lord Courtney’s misbehaviour was a good chance for him, that it had made stocks fall, and enabled him to buy in at an easy rate, and that it was an ill wind that blew nobody good. He then enquired minutely concerning the lady’s fortune, and was much pleased to find his son well informed as to the particulars of it; in short, he approved of every thing, but advancing the money necessary for the matrimonial expedition. Here he could not conquer the natural reluctance that he felt on parting with a portion of that good, which he had all his life been labouring to acquire, and he argued and bartered with his son respecting the cheapest way of going to work, as he expressed it, as if he was bargaining with a cattle- driver to bring him a young filly from a country fair. Four horses, he thought were terribly extravagant, and said it would be quite enough to have them for the first and last stage each way; observing that he had never rode in a carriage with four horses in his life, except sometimes when going to vote at an election, and latterly on the Lord Mayor’s day, and such like solemn occasions. Indeed he thought going to Scotland, in any way, was an unnecessary expence, and proposed that the young folks should get married, and keep snug at some of the neighbouring villages for a little time; where, as the country was beginning to be very pleasant, they might have a good bit of pleasure, and fresh air, at little cost, and no risk. To this pleasurable scheme, Mr. Dunderton objected the difficulty of finding a clergyman willing to undertake the dangerous office of joining their hands, as Lady Harriett was under age; he also dwelt upon the ignorance that they must betray if questioned concerning a route which they had never taken; but Lord Dunderton engaged to find as many clergymen, as his son could find couples, who would compassionately join them in the holy state, on which our laws have, contrary to their usual wisdom, fixed such severe shackles, that it seems as if they were now conscious of their impolicy, and therefore generously wave the punishment threatened to the daring ministers who shall disregard them. As to the second objection, Lord Dunderton answered very truly, that they would not be the first travellers who had returned home, without being able to communicate information of any part of their route, or the first who had described places which they had never seen. After much argument, that threatened to destroy the satisfaction with which both parties had at first considered the subject, Lord Dunderton reluctantly gave his son a draft for one hundred and fifty pounds, advising him not to be over ready in producing it, but to see what cash his bride had about her, as she would willingly assist him with a few loose corns, on such an occasion, if he appeared short run; and “a penny saved was a penny got.”
If any thing could have added to Lord Drelincourt’s mortification at his son’s marriage, it would have been the discovery of his ward’s folly, when it was too late to prevent any bad consequences that might arise from it. Lord Drelincourt was too much a

man of honor, and too faithful to any trust which he undertook, to feel indifference respecting Lady Harriett’s conduct or happiness, now that he had no longer the hope of uniting her to his own family, by the ties of consanguinity. He did not feel any resentment against her, for he considered her as influenced by the sensations of the moment, and the artful allurements of those, who knew how to take advantage of her weakness. But he severely condemned Lord Dunderton, whom he justly conceived accessary to the design, and he resolved to wait upon him immediately, in order openly to testify his displeasure at so selfish and dishonorable an acquiescence. Lord Dunderton, however protested his entire ignorance of the whole, until he had been informed of it, by a letter from his son; and though the Earl was strongly tempted to give him the lie direct yet his own sacred regard for truth, his conviction of its importance in society, and the contempt, with which he thought every one who deviated from it ought to be treated, made him very unwilling to accuse any one of a breach of it, without the most positive proofs; as after such an accusation, he would have deemed it degrading ever more to hold converse with its object. But doubt had taken such strong possession of his mind, that he could not at once dispel it, sufficiently to resume the subject by which it had been inspired. He therefore after a few minutes silence, during which, Lord Dunderton did not appear any more at ease than himself, affected to turn his attention to some paintings, which were at any time worthy of more admiration, than their possessor knew how to bestow on them. “Them there are thought very valuable, my lord.” said their sapient owner, who appeared glad to divert the conversation, “and they ought, there is a power of money laid dead in them.” “These are the works of some great masters,” replied the Earl very coldly. “Yes, your lordship,” answered the scientific peer, “I think they are pretty enough, I always buy a good few together, and then it is odds if there are not some, worth looking at among them. That there is called the feast of the vines, and you see Bacchus sure enough, laying drunk a-top of that cask. I like history pieces, and I can shew your lordship a Welshman by Wright of Derby, as natural as life, one would swear one could take the leek out of his hat; I have it in my counting ho—— that is study, I mean.” Lord Drelincourt declined the pleasure, saying that he had an appointment which he was obliged to attend, and therefore wished to finish the business about which he came; and that was, to declare, that as the sole care of Lady Harriett’s person and fortune was left to him, until she attained her twenty-first year, he conceived himself bound notwithstanding she had deprived him of the former part of his charge to redouble his vigilance in the latter; that being now the only way, in which he could shew his attention to the trust reposed in him, and his anxiety for her welfare. He therefore thought that Lord Dunderton must acquiesce in the propriety of his conduct as a guardian, when he solemnly declared, that until she attained the period when her fortune would be consigned into her own disposal, he should not allow the smallest part of it to be appropriated to her use; but that on the arrival of the time when he should gladly resign his trust, Lady Harriett would find, that he had transacted her affairs, with the integrity, which his regard for his deceased friend her father, and for his own honor demanded. Lord Dunderton by no means approved of this kind of integrity, and as it is very natural to judge the intentions of others, by comparing them with what our own would be in similar circumstances, he immediately thought, that the Earl could only wish to keep Lady Harriett’s affairs in his hands, with a hope of reaping some advantage from them. He could not disguise his vexation, and told Lord Drelincourt, that as his own son

had so recently committed the very same fault, he might make allowances for Mr. Dunderton, as he had doubtless done for Lord Courtney. “Sir,” replied the Earl, elevating himself to the very utmost of his fine height, “I cannot think the cases parallel: and if they were, I would rather see my son starve, than solicit a maintenance for him, from his wife; but, I have done; I have communicated my intentions to you, I shall abide by my resolutions, and have the honor to wish you a good morning.” So saying, he took his leave, regardless of the angry remonstrances of Lord Dunderton, whose frequent wishes that he had known the Earl’s resolutions a day sooner, did not contribute to erase the impressions already made on Lord Drelincourt, of his having been meanly privy to the transaction, and afterwards basely denying any knowledge of it. Smiles on past misfortune’s brow, Soft reflection’s hand can trace; And o’er the cheek of sorrow throw A melancholy grace;
While hope prolongs our happier hour Or deepest shades that dimly low’r And blacken round our weary way, Gilds with a gleam of distant day. Still where rosy pleasure leads,
See a kindred grief pursue;
Behind the steps that misery treads, Approaching comfort view:
The hues of bliss more brightly glow Chastised by sable tints of woe,
And blended form with artful strife The strength and harmony of life. GRAY. IN the Earl’s present frame of mind, the gaieties of London disgusted, and business seemed irksome to him. He was too tenderly beloved by his family, for his wishes not to be theirs; and at his desire they left the capital, where the latter part of their residence had been rendered unpleasant by many mortifications, and endeavoured to lose the remembrance of them, in the tranquillity of Castle Drelincourt. The Earl did not allow himself to indulge in weak complaints, or blameable repinings; he obliged himself to consider the bright side of the picture, which he had at first contemplated in its darkest colours; and the natural candour of his mind, soon dispelled the mist, raised by prejudice and disappointment, and taught him to look forward with composure to the meeting, of which, the bare idea, had in his first moments of despondency, appeared an insupportable affliction. There needed only the signal of a smile re-appearing on his benignant countenance, to animate all around him with delight; and as he surveyed the affectionate group, by which he was surrounded, he felt that he had other sources of happiness besides worldly grandeur, and outward shew. In this state of returning cheerfulness, the family received with comparative pleasure, an account of the day when the fugitives might be expected; and when it arrived, every bosom was agitated, though with different emotions. Lord and Lady Drelincourt were filled with sensations of parental love, too powerful to admit those of displeasure, in any great degree, though sufficient to destroy the perfect satisfaction that they would otherwise have experienced. Edmund was

anxious as to the reception with which his sister might meet, and the impression that she would make upon the family. Lady Rosamond was curious to see the female, whose charms had effaced the recollection of hers, from the breast of a man whom she had loved, though she had discarded him in a fit of ill-humour at her own faults. The gentle and affectionate Emma, longed to embrace the sister of her beloved Edmund, and felt already warmly attached to her. Even Lady Maud and Lady Bertha were interested; the former deplored with a rueful countenance, the introduction of foreign blood, into a family, in whose veins the pure English stream, had flown undefiled, till this unlucky mixture; and lamented the increasing partiality that the nation shewed for aliens, which she pronounced would finally be its ruin: whilst the latter called Henry a recreant knight, but longed to see the peerless dame, whose charms had caused him to forget his allegiance to Lady Harriett. Lady Maria was the least moved, a little anxiety to see her brother, and a little curiosity to know if Everilda were as handsome and interesting as Edmund made up the whole of her emotion. After a day that appeared unusually long, the evening succeeded, as is generally the case even in the longest day. The party were assembled in the drawing room; one took up a book, another a pencil, a third touched the keys of a piano-forte; all were employed, and none thought of what they were doing. At length the sound of horses’ feet and carriage wheels, relieved every one from thinking on a subject, which none chose to make the theme of conversation. The travellers were now heard to ascend the stairs, and Edmund devoutly wished that he had the power of annihilating the next five minutes. The door was thrown open, and Lord Courtney entered, leading his lady, and Donna Claudina; he knelt with Everilda at the feet of his father, who forgetting all his anger, blessed them, and desiring them to rise, resigned them to Lady Drelincourt, whose maternal heart knew none but the softest emotions; she embraced them, and wept, whilst Lady Courtney forcibly reminded of her own mother, bedewed her hand with tears, and exclaimed with graceful energy, “Ah madam, you are kind and good, as I have been taught to expect. Already you forgive me; you acknowledge me as your daughter; oh! teach me to deserve the envied title!” Lady Drelincourt again embraced, and assured her of her love. Everilda then turned hastily to Edmund, and throwing herself into his arms, burst afresh into tears, saying, “I know not how to intreat forgiveness for an act, by which I have the happiness of seeing my dear brother again.” He pressed her tenderly to his bosom, nor was ashamed of the tears, which trembled in his own eyes, as he gazed on a sister so fondly beloved, and the first of his family whom he had seen during an absence, of nearly two years. The introduction of the remainder of the party, was of course less impassioned; though Lady Courtney covered Emma with blushes, by taking her hand, and saying, “My heart tells me, I am not addressing a stranger; suffer me think that I am speaking to a beloved sister.” Edmund approached, and joining their hands, raised them to his lips, saying, “Never may your unity be interrupted; may it improve into the most refined friendship, and prove a source of happiness to you, as the contemplation of it will ever be to me.” When the first congratulations were over, refreshments were brought in, and whilst the travellers were employed in taking some, the rest of the party had leisure to examine them. In Lord Courtney, every trace of care was effaced, by the kind reception that he had met with; and his countenance was distinguished only by the glow of

health, the smile of cheerfulness, and the glance of tender rapture, with which he surveyed his Everilda. Her beauty appeared to the utmost advantage, even under the disguise of a travelling dress; but she had now thrown off a large fur pelisse, which had hidden her fine form; her hat likewise was laid aside, and a profusion of auburn ringlets carelessly flowed from the band, by which the remainder was confined in large curls; her bloom was heightened by exercise and agitation; the slight embarrassment of her manner, added to the interest of her appearance, whilst the varying emotions of her soul, encreased every instant the charms of her intelligent countenance. Her animation was happily contrasted, by the interesting melancholy of the pensive Claudina, who felt alone in the large circle, and was strongly reminded by witnessing the bliss of domestic affection, of her own desolate, and friendless situation, which was rendered yet more wretched, by the cruelty of her only relative, her brother. These reflections filled her eyes with tears; she strove to disperse them, by the smile of resignation, which faintly played about her lips; the ineffectual struggle called a slight blush into her cheeks, and just painted them sufficiently, to shew how much the glow of happiness would become her. Sorrow never wore a lovelier form, or inspired more interest in the hearts of the beholders; soothed by their attentions, she felt her spirits gradually revive, and Everilda diffused additional animation around her, when she saw her own smiles reflected in the countenance of her friend. Though Lady Courtney’s introduction to the Earl in the character of his daughter-in-law, was certainly very opposite to what his wishes had once been, yet he could not long withstand the fascination of her manners, the brilliancy of her talents, and the excellent disposition which seemed to regulate all her actions. Had she even been less amiable, his heart would have pleaded for her with irresistible eloquence, for she powerfully appealed to its feelings by her resemblance to her father; and whilst tracing in her countenance and expressions, the features and manner of his early friend, Lord Drelincourt could feel no sentiment but that of the warmest affection, for the object, who constantly recalled to his mind, one in whose society he had passed many of his happiest days. If Everilda soon obtained the Earl’s esteem, that of the ladies, was bestowed upon her, with at least equal readiness. The appearance of kindness, was enough to incite her to deserve it; for some time all her study was to please, and the effects of her laudable exertions were agreeable as she could desire. Unfortunately however the happiness which this perfect family-concord, created in her bosom, was the very means of interrupting its source; for in the ebulitions of it, her vivacity caused her in some instances, to overstep the cautious decorum, and polite attention, which she had on her first introduction, rigidly prescribed to herself. Sir Edward Clayton, (for in consequence of his uncle’s death, we must introduce him to our readers by that title,) had left England the moment he heard of the expected arrival of a woman whom he adored, notwithstanding her unjustifiable conduct towards him. Finding that he could not yet trust himself in her society, without feeling emotions, which he was too honorable to indulge, he wisely took refuge in flight; resolving not to encounter temptation until he was well assured that he could rise superior to it. He therefore took his sister, who told him he was born to be jockied by the women, to a small estate, in a remote part of Ireland, which had been left to him by Sir John with the rest of his property, and which he now wished to dispose of, as it was quite abstracted from his other possessions. During their visit there, his sister’s rosy complexion, smart figure, and goodnatured

manners, captivated an Irish baronet; and as he rode well, had an excellent stud, and delighted in field sports, he had not much difficulty in prevailing on her to run for life in the same yoke, as she expressed it; and her brother, pleased to see his sister happily settled, almost forgot the unpleasant cause of his visit to Ireland, in the satisfaction that he received from its consequences. Sir Edward’s departure was of course mentioned at the castle, and on hearing it the imprudent Everilda exclaimed, that she regretted his absence as she had promised herself much amusement from witnessing the struggle of resentment and love in his bosom, when he again beheld her: Lady Rosamond was still too partial to her old admirer, to look very complacently on the woman, whose superior charms had so rapidly effaced the impression which hers had once made on him; this speech was not calculated to make her forget the mortifying circumstance, and she replied with perhaps too much asperity, “Sir Edward Clayton, Madam, is not generally thought a subject of mere amusement, neither are his talents and manners often a source of ridicule to any who are capable of appreciating their value.” The coldness with which she spoke and the freezing epithet of Madam, struck Lady Courtney forcibly: she well knew what had been the nature of Sir Edward’s intimacy with the family and might therefore naturally have imagined the subject could not be pleasing to Lady Rosamond; but instead of excusing the harshness of these words, by reflecting on the provocation that she had given, she suffered herself to be hurried away by impatience, and added to it by replying, “My dear Lady Rosamond, there needs no argument to convince me that his attractions have been found irresistible; and I ask pardon for the selfishness by which I was prompted to wish for a scene, that I might easily have known could not be generally entertaining;” this little dialogue passed during the first month of Lady Courtney’s residence at the Castle; it was easy to see that the impression it left on her mind, and Lady Rosamond’s was not such as to promise any very great cordiality; and after this, no subject however trifling, could be discussed, without giving rise to a difference of opinion between them. Lady Courtney conscious that her introduction into the family was not exactly what had been desired, was jealous of every word that could possibly be interpreted into an affront; and particularly from Lady Rosamond, who was as little used to control, as herself, and approached too near her in talents, beauty, and disposition, not to inspire an idea of rivalry; whilst the powers of wit and satire, were so liberally and equally bestowed on each, that an incessant war of words was maintained between them, and it was difficult to decide after the combat, which party had proved victorious. In those engagements however, each may be said to lose more than can be won; for the pleasure of triumphing over the vanquished in argument, is much more than counterbalanced, by the probability of having gained one enemy, and lost many friends. However wit may be admired at a distance, all shrink from its approach, justly fearing, that severity of which, they may in their turn expect to be the objects.