Never speak o' sic a thing. But how many could ye afford
to gie, an I _were_ to set you at liberty?" "In the first place, I will give you five hundred head of good English
nolt," said Lady Jane. "Eh? What?" said Charlie, holding his horse still, and turning his ear
close round to the lady's face, that he might hear with perfect
distinctness the extraordinary proffer. It was repeated. Charlie was
almost electrified with astonishment. "Five hunder head o' nout!" exclaimed he: "But d'ye mean their heads by theirsels?--cuttit aff,
like?" "No, no; five hundred good live cattle." "Mercy on us! Gude faith, they wad stock a' Yardbire--an' Raeburn,"
added he, after a pause, putting his horse again slowly in motion; "an'
Watkerrick into the bargain," added he, with a full drawn sigh, putting
the spurs to his beast, that he might go quicker to carry him away from
the danger. "For troth, d' ye ken, my lord, we're no that scarce o'
grund in Scotland; we can get plenty o' that for little thing, gin we
could get ought to lay on't. But it's hard to get beasts, an' kittle to
keep them i' our country. Five hunder head o' black cattle! Hech! an
Charlie Scott had a' thae, how mony braw lads could he tak at his back
o'er Craikcorse to join his master the warden! But come, come, it canna
be. War somebody a Scots lord, as he's an English ane, an i' the same
danger, I wad risk muckle to set him free. But come, Corby, my fine
naig, ye hae carried me into mony a scrape, ye maun carry me out o' this
ane, or, gude faith, your master's gane. Ha, lad, ye never had sic a
back-fu' i' your life! Ye hae five hunder head o' black cattle on't, ye
dog, an' ye're carrying them a' away frae your master an' Yardbire wi'
as little ceremony as he took you frae Squire Weir o' Cockermouth. Ah,
Corby, ye're gayan like your master, ye hae a lang free kind o'
conscience, ye tike!" "But, my dear Sir," said Lady Jane, "you have not heard the half of my
proffer. You seem to be a generous, sensible, and good natured
gentleman." "Do I?" said Charlie," Thanks t' ye, my lord." "Now," continued she, "if you will either set me and my page safely down
on English ground, or within the ports of Edinborough, I'll add five
thousand sheep to the proffer I have already made you." "Are ye no joking?" said Charlie, again stopping his horse. "On my honour I am not," was the answer. "They'll stock a' Blake-Esk-head an' the Garald-Grains," said Charlie:
"Hae ye a free passport to the Scottish court?" "Yes, I have, and signed with the warden's name." "Na, na, haud your tongue there; my master has nae name," said Charlie:
"He has a good speaking name, an' ane he disna think shame o', but nae
name for black an' white." "I'll show you it," said Lady Jane. "Na, ye needna fash," said Charlie; "I fear it wad be unmannerly in me
to doubt a lord's word." "How soon could you carry us to Edinborough?" inquired Lady Jane,
anxious to keep muckle Charlie in the humour of taking her any where
save into the hands of Douglas. "That's rather a question to speer at Corby than me," said Charlie; "but
I think if we miss drowning i' Tweed, an' breaking our necks o'er the
Red-brae, an' sinking out o' sight i' Soutra-flow, that I could tak in
hand to hae ye in Edinborough afore twal o'clock at night.--Bad things
for you, Corby." "Never say another word about it then," said Lady Jane; "the rest are
quite gone before us, and out of sight. Turn to the left, and ride for
Edinborough. Think of the five hundred cows and five thousand sheep." "Oh, that last beats a'!" said Charlie. "Five thousand sheep! how mony
is that? Five score's a hunder--I'm sure o' that. Every hunder's five
score; then--and how mony hunder maks a thousand?" --

"Ten," said the page, who was forced to laugh at Charlie's arithmetic. "Ten?" repeated Charlie. "Then ten times five hunder that maks but ae
thousand; an' other ten times five hunder--D--n me if I ken how mony is
o' them ava. What does it signify for a man to hae mair gear than he can
count? I fancy we had better jogg on the gate we're gaun, Corby." "I am sure, friend, ye never had such a chance of being rich," said Lady
Jane, "and may never, in all likelihood, have such a chance again." "That is a' true ye're saying, my lord, an' a sair heart it has gi'en
me," said Charlie; "but your offer's ower muckle, an' that maks me dread
there's something at the bottom o't that I dinna comprehend. Gude faith,
an the warden war to suffer danger or disgrace for my greed o' siller,
it wad be a bonny story! Corby, straight on, ye dog: ding the brains out
o' the gutters, clear for the camp, ye hellicat of an English hound. What are ye snoring an' cocking your lugs at? Od an ye get company like
yoursel, ye carena what mischief ye carry your master into. Get on, I
say, an' dinna gie me time to hear another word or think about this
business again." The young lady began here to lose heart, seeing that Charlie had plucked
up a determination. But her companion attacked him in her turn with all
the flattery and fair promises she could think of, till Charlie found
his heart again beginning to waver and calculate; so that he had no
other shift but to croon a border war-song, that he might not hear this
dangerous conversation. Still the page persevered, till Charlie, losing
all patience, cried out as loud and as bitterly as he could, "Haud your
tongue, ye slee-gabbit limb o' the auld ane. D--n ye, d'ye think a man's
conscience is to be hadden abreed like the mou' of a sack, an' crammed
fu' o' beef an' mutton whether he will or no? Corby, another nicker an'
another snore, lad, an' we'll soon see you aff at the gallop." Thus ended the trying colloquy between muckle Charlie Scott o' Yardbire
and his two prisoners; the rest of his conversation was to Corby, whom
he forthwith pushed on by spur and flattery to the camp. When the truth came to be discovered, many puzzled themselves
endeavouring to guess what Charlie would actually have done had he known
by the way what a treasure he had in his arms,--the greatest beauty, and
the greatest heiress in England;--for Charlie was as notable for
kindness and generosity as he was for bodily strength; and, besides, he
was poor, as he frankly acknowledged; but then he only wished for
riches to be able to keep more men for the service of his chief. Some
thought he would have turned his horse round without further ceremony,
and carried her straight to Yardbire, on purpose to keep her there for a
wife; others thought he would have risked his neck, honour, and every
thing, and restored her again to her friends. But it was impossible for
any of them to guess what he would have done, as it was proved
afterwards that Charlie could not guess himself. When the truth came to
be divulged, and was first told to him, his mouth, besides becoming
amazingly extended in its dimensions, actually grew four-square with
astonishment; and when asked what he would have done had he known, he
smacked his lips, and wiped them with the back of his hand as if his
teeth had been watering--and, laughing to himself with a chuckling
sound, like a moor-cock, he turned about his back to conceal his looks,
and only answered with these emphatic words: "Gude faith, it was as weel
I didna ken." Some write of preclair conquerouris,
    And some of vallyeant emperouris,
    And some of nobill mychtie kingis,
    That royally did reull the ringis;
    And some of squyris douchty deidis,
    That wonderis wrocht in weirly weidis;
    Sa I intand the best I can
    Descryve the deidis and the man. SIR DAV. LINDSAYE. Wald God I war now in Pitcary! Becass I haif bene se ill deidy. Adew! I dar na langer tairy,
      I dreid I waif intill ane widdy. _Ibid._

In the same grotesque guise as formerly described, Charlie at length
came with his two prisoners to the outposts of the Scottish army. The
rest of the train had passed by before him, and warned their friends who
was coming, and in what stile; for no one thought it worth his while to
tarry with Charlie and his overloaden horse. When he came near the
soldiers they hurra'd, and waved their bonnets, and gathering about
Charlie in crowds, they would not let him onward. Besides, some fell a
loosing the prisoner behind him, and others holding up their arms to
release him of the one he carried before; and, seeing how impatient he
was, and how determined to keep his hold, they grew still more
importunate in frolic. But it had nearly cost some of them dear; for
Charlie, growing wroth, squeezed the Lady Jane so strait with the left
arm, that she was forced to cry out; and putting his right over his
shoulder, he drew out his tremendous two-hand sword, "Now stand back,
devils," cried Charlie, "or, gude faith, I'll gar Corby ride ower the
taps o' the best o' ye. I hae had ower sair a trial for heart o' flesh
already; but when I stood that, it sanna be the arm o' flesh that takes
them frae me now, till I gie them into the Douglas's ain hands. Stand
back, ye devils; a Scott never gies up his trust as lang as his arm can
dimple at the elbow." The soldiers flew away from around him like a flight of geese, and with
the same kind of noise too,--every one being giggling and laughing,--and
up rode Charlie to the door of the Douglas' pavilion, where he shouted
aloud for the captain. Douglas, impatient to see his illustrious
prisoner, left the others abruptly, and hasted out at Charlie's call. "Gude faith, my lord," said Charlie, "I beg your pardon for garring you
come running out that gate; but here's a bit English lord for ye, an'
his henchman,--sic master, sic man, as the saying is. There war terrible
charges gi'en about them, sae I thought I wad secure them, an' gie them
into your ain hands." "I am much beholden to you, gallant Yardbire," said Douglas: "The care
and pains you have taken shall not be forgotten." This encouraging Charlie, he spoke to the earl with great freedom, who
was mightily diverted with his manner, as well as with his mode of
securing the prisoners. "There's his lordship for ye," said Charlie, holding him out like a
small bale of goods: "Mind ye hae gotten him safe off my hand; an'
here's another chap I hae fastened to my back. An a' the English nobles
war like thir twa, I hae been thinking, my lord, that they might tak'
our lasses frae us, but we wadna be ill pinched to tak their kye frae
them; an' it wad be nae hard bargain for us neither." So saying, he cut
his belts and thongs of raw hide, and let the attendant lady, in page's
clothes, free of his body. "He's a little, fine, soft, cozey callan
this," added Charlie, "he has made my hinderlands as warm as they had
been in an oon." Douglas took Lady Jane off from before the gallant yeoman in his arms. He observed with what a look she regarded him; and he was sure, from the
first view he got of her features, that the page Colin must have been
right with regard to the sex of the prisoner. He likewise noted the
holes in her ears, from which it was apparent that pendent jewels
had lately been taken; and he hoped the other part of the page's
information might likewise be correct, though how to account for such an
extraordinary piece of good fortune he was wholly at a loss. He led her
into the inner pavilion, and there, in presence of his secretary and
two of his kinsmen, examined her papers and passports. They were found
all correct, and signed by the public functionaries of both nations, in
favour of Jasper Tudor, son to the Earl of Pembroke. "These are quite sufficient, my young lord," said Douglas; "I see no
cause for detaining you further. You shall have a sufficient guard till
you are out of the range of my army, and safe furtherance to the
Scottish court." The prisoner's countenance lighted up, and she thanked Douglas in the
most grateful terms, blessing herself that she had fallen into the hands
of so courteous a knight, and urged the necessity of their sudden
departure. Douglas assured her they should be detained no longer than
the necessity of the times required; but that it was absolutely
requisite, for his own safety, the safety of the realm, and the success
of the enterprise in which he was engaged, and so deeply concerned, that
they should submit to a personal search from head to foot, lest some
traitorous correspondence might be secretly conveyed by them. The countenance of the prisoner again altered at this information. It
became at first pale as a lily, and immediately after blushed as deeply
as the damask rose, while the tears started to her eyes. It was no
wonder, considering the predicament in which she now stood; her delicate
lady form to be searched by the hands of rude warriors, her sex
discovered, and her mission to the Scottish court found out to be a wild
intrigue. She fell instantly on her knees before Douglas, and besought
him in moving accents to dispense with the useless formality of
searching her and her young kinsman and companion, assuring him at the
same time that neither of them had a single scrap of writing that he had
not seen, and adjuring him on his honour and generosity as a knight to
hearken to this request. "The thing is impossible, my lord," said Douglas;" and, moreover, the
anxiety you manifest about such a trifle argues a consciousness of
guilt. You must submit to be searched on the instant. Chuse of us whom
you will to the office." "I will never submit to it," said she passionately, "there is not a
knight in England would have refused such a request to you." "I would never have asked it, my lord," said he; "and it is your utter
inexperience in the customs of war that makes you once think of
objecting to it. I am sorry we must use force. Bring in two of the
guards." "Hold, hold, my lord," said Lady Jane, "since I must submit to such a
degradation, I will submit to yourself. I will be searched by your own
hands, and yours alone." They were already in the inner tent. Douglas desired his friends to go
out, which they complied with, and he himself began to search the person
of Lady Jane, with the most careful minuteness, as he pretended, well
aware what was to be the issue of the search. He examined all her
courtly coat, pockets, lining, and sleeves,--he came to her gaudy
doublet, stiff with gold embroidery, and began to unloose it, but she
laid both her hands upon her breast, and looked in his face with eyes so
speaking, and so beseeching, that it was impossible for man to mistake
the import. Douglas did not mistake it, but was bent upon having proof
positive. "What?" said he, "do you still resist? What is here you would conceal?" "Oh my Lord," said she, "do you not see?" "I see nothing," said he; and while she feebly struggled he loosed the
vest, when the fair heaving bosom discovered the sex of his prisoner,
and at the same time, with the struggle, the beautiful light locks had
escaped from their confinement, and hung over her breast in waving
ringlets. The maid stood revealed; and, with the disclosure, all the
tender emotions and restrained feelings of the female heart burst forth
like a river that has been dammed up from running in its natural
channel, and has just got vent anew. She wept and sobbed till her fair
breast was like to rend. She even seized on Douglas' hand, and wet it
with her tears. He, on his part, feigned great amazement.