Amidst a numerous correspondence, letters must be short, and consequently subjects are treated with disadvantageous brevity; and that the time which is spent in writing common-place ideas, might be much more usefully employed in gaining new ones, few I believe will deny. I will not dwell on the confidence, often ill placed, which by being continued in writing, has laid the parties concerned, under painful and unavoidable restraints; experience is the only teacher whose precepts enforce conviction; and a youthful heart will pour out its warmest effusions, until the ardor of the moment being passed, memory reviews its productions; reflection would correct them, but they are already out of reach, and may be perused a second time by your correspondent, with sentiments similar to your own, on the recollection of them. I am however far from wishing to entirely deny you the pleasure of writing, or receiving letters; and perhaps the design of transmitting your observations, might stimulate you to accuracy in making them. I would only warn you against encumbering yourself with a load, which, however inconvenient you may find it, cannot be shaken off without giving offence; and advise you to write fully to one, rather than briefly to many. In mentioning religion to you, Henry, you will not imagine that I am about to enter into a disquisition on its importance, of which I believe you to be fully sensible; and I should conceive myself to have been very remiss as the instructor of your infancy, and the guardian of your youth, if I had at this time to enquire into, or regret your opinions on so essential a topic. The conduct which will necessarily be induced by your principles, will be the best evidence of their propriety. But do not confine their benefits to your own bosom; do not rest contented with a sense of right belief yourself, and be ungrateful enough to hear others ridicule and despise religion, without your standing forth in its behalf. Next to uttering infidelity, there is a fault in bearing with it, and suffering its advocate to construe your silence into approbation, or at least into indifference. Formerly in enumerating the good qualities of a distinguished character, that of being a christian always held the foremost place, and as human actions, will ever be prompted in some degree by human motives, perhaps the praise justly annexed to an epithet so honorable, might be a powerful inducement to deserve it. “Our enlightened age has blotted from the page of panegyric, the title which ought to include every virtue, but we do not see the omission supplied, by any subject of admiration more praiseworthy. I trust however that the very circumstance of the

prevalence of infidelity, will in time lessen its influence. They who are led away by novelty, will grow weary of repeating sarcasms, no longer new, and they who wish to astonish by the daring eccentricities of their opinions, will be disgusted when they find them in the mouth of every witling, who by burlesquing sacred things, can always extort a smile, after his own powers fail to command one; whilst the man of a really enquiring mind, will be careful how he raises doubts, when he hears them repeated by every fool, who seeks to disguise his ignorance, under the affectation of scepticism. Let me exhort you then my dear Henry, to ‘be ready to give every man a reason, for the faith which abideth in you,’ and though I do not wish you to intrude your sentiments unnecessarily, yet never suffer them to be attacked without frankly explaining, and firmly defending them. “I have nothing more to add. Your attachment to Mr. Barlowe, is sufficient to ensure respectful conduct towards him, treat him as a friend; you will find him a sincere one, and your behaviour to him, will model that of those around you.—
“He paused and tenderly caressing
The darling of his wounded heart, Looks had means only of expressing Thoughts language never could impart.”
After this lengthened conversation, in which Lord Drelincourt joined the kindness of the friend, to the anxiety of the parent, he returned with his son, to the remainder of the family, and the evening was spent with the affectionate melancholy naturally rising in the minds of friends, who know that at the same hour the next day, they shall be separated. Short is the course of every lawless pleasure, Grief like a shade on all its rootsteps waits Scarce visible in joy’s meridian height,
But downwards as its blaze declining speeds, The dwarfish shadow to a giant spreads. MASON•
THE day at length arrived, the long-dreaded day, which was to deprive this affectionate family of one as estimable as beloved! Henry entered Edmund’s apartment at an early hour in the morning; he was pale, trembling and agitated; he grasped Edmund’s hand, and for some time was unable to find utterance. At length he exclaimed, “Oh! my friend; had I possessed your virtue, your fortitude, had I followed your advice, or listened to the dictates of my own conscience, what anguish might I have been spared! I need not tell you, that my visit into Oxfordshire was nominal; I read your doubts in your countenance when I mentioned it. In truth it was the thought of a moment, suggested by the fear of losing her, whom you would have rescued from destruction. I went to her, and with undissembled agony, informed her of my dread, lest we should be separated; her anguish too plainly told me to what extent I was beloved, and insensible to every thing but the fear of losing me, she deplored her wretchedness in being deprived of her only friend, the sole consolation of her deserted state. Ill did I requite her gratitude and love! All my resolution vanished at the sight of her distress; in a fatal moment I promised her my hand, though I reserved to myself the privilege of with-holding it, until I attained my twenty-fifth year: what I proposed by the delay, I know not even now; but I have already proved myself capable of falsehood, and I shudder to think how far my guilt may yet extend. “Loving me as she did, agitated as she was, by the fear of losing me, whom she fondly thought her only benefactor; seeing in the rest of the world no friend, knowing that she had scarcely an acquaintance, is it surprising if she for a moment hesitated, unwilling to rashly refuse, terms apparently eligible and with which many would have gladly and immediately complied? Yes, she hesitated, but her excellent judgment and native rectitude, pointed out immediately, the injury that she should do me, by accepting my proposals, and this consideration had more effect in her decision, than the injustice, (all lovely and virtuous as she is) that she should do herself. She refused my offer with floods of tears, and entreated that I would have the goodness to send her into Scotland, where she would endeavour to forget me, and seek tranquillity by burying the past in oblivion. The conflict which I had witnessed in her soul, and her final conquest over her affection; only endeared her the more strongly to me. I left no arts, no arguments, untried to shake her resolution, and at last succeeded, by affecting to doubt the tenderness, which could so firmly resist entreaty. This insinuation overpowered her fortitude, which though it shielded her from yielding to persuasion, was not proof against the appearance of displeasure; and after vainly endeavouring to appease it, she consented to put herself into my power, and trust to my honor for a future reparation, which yet, such was her regard

for me, I saw she hardly wished to receive. Yes, I saw, and was ungrateful enough to console myself, with the idea that when the time appointed for its performance should arrive, I could easily prevail on her affection, to acquit me of my promise, by stating to her the evils that might acrue to me from its fulfilment. “To enjoy the pleasure of her society, unembittered by the fear of interruption, and to amuse the agitation of her mind, I made the tour of the greatest part of England with her, travelling in a hired carriage, attended only by Dawson and the faithful Jane, to whom Mary had become much attached. During my journey, my chains were every day rivetted more firmly, by the artless sweetness, and engaging conversation of my companion. I thought myself fortunate above all other men, and was only awakened from my dream of felicity, by the necessity of returning home, for I felt that I had prolonged my absence almost beyond the power of excusing it. You are acquainted with the rest, but you are not acquainted with what I have suffered. It is now that I am punished for my dereliction of honor and integrity. I have parted from Mary, you will have guessed that she is at Appleton; yes, I have parted from her; and surely my late happiness, has been dearly purchased with the misery of the moment, in which I bade her farewell; but it is past, though her anxieties have scarcely begun, for I was cowardly enough to deceive her, and to tell her that my absence would be short; she, whilst surprised at my excessive grief, sweetly chid me for it amidst her own tears. Oh! Edmund, she has many claims on me; promise to befriend her; by your attachment to me, promise it. I am sufficiently wretched in leaving her, without the bitter aggravation of leaving her unprotected.” No longer the gay, the volatile Henry; the repentant Lord Courtney wept as he gave this charge to Edmund, who promised to act in every thing as he wished, and conjured him to compose himself. We will not dwell on the parting scene; it is not probable that any of our readers are ignorant of the feelings occasioned by the separation of friends; and it is an unpleasing task to dwell on the grief of a hitherto happy family. Now whither shall I fly to find relief;
What charitable hand will aid me now? Will stay my falling steps, support my ruins,
And heal my wounded mind with balmy comfort? EDMUND had at first thought of returning to his parents in the company of his friend, but Lord Drelincourt, who became every day more attached to him, requested him to prolong his visit, adding, that he should think it unkind, if Edmund deserted him, at a time when his company, always valuable, would be inestimable. This entreaty was too flattering to be resisted, and it was easy to prevail on Edmund to lengthen his visit in a family where his Emma resided. The Earl, to disperse the gloom occasioned by his son’s departure, proposed making the tour of Scotland, and the most important parts of England, as he should, by that means, have the pleasure of at once gratifying and instructing all his family. This agreeable scheme was entered into with great eagerness, and as the summer was far advanced, they prepared for it with all possible expedition. Edmund did not however forget his promise to his friend; he took care to see Miss Macdonald before he left the country, and informing her of the address which would constantly find him; he entreated her, in the most polite and friendly manner, to allow him the pleasure of being serviceable to her in any way, in which she would honor him with her commands. She thanked him with her usual grace; but declined his assistance, saying, that she should need none during the short period of Lord Courtney’s absence. Edmund was shocked to see the serenity with which she spoke upon a subject respecting which he knew her to be deceived; and he felt conscious of aiding the deception by his silence, but he feared to break it, lest he should betray Henry’s confidence a second time, without answering any good effect. It was not Lord Drelincourt’s intention to deprive this deserted orphan of his son’s protection, and to cast her friendless on the world: he had formed his plans respecting her, and hoped that they were such, as she would in time be grateful to him for having put in execution. He had learned the name and address of her aunt, and Glasgow was purposely included in his route, to give him the opportunity of personally stating her niece’s claims on her. If she consented to receive her, all would be well; her errors would be unknown; her youth and ignorance might excuse them even to herself, and time, it was to be hoped, would restore her to tranquillity, and her own esteem. If he succeeded as he wished, he resolved to give her consequence in the eyes of her aunt, by equipping her in a style, suitable to the respectable rank of society in which she was to appear; and his benevolent heart pleased itself with the thought, that his gifts would be at once tokens of his forgiveness and of his anxiety for her welfare. The object of his kindness, in the mean time, was awakened from her dream of security, and became a prey to mortification and despair. ROWE. We have already introduced to our readers Lord Courtney’s obsequious valet, Dawson. His master had the highest opinion of his fidelity, which was indeed unshaken, so long as he was liberally rewarded for it. Lord Drelincourt was not, however, equally partial to this domestic, and particularly requested his son to engage another for his travels. He consented for two reason; the first was, that not feeling himself quite at ease in the Italian language, he wished to hire a native of Italy, in order to accustom himself to it; the second, that by leaving the faithful confidant of his amour in England, he should be certain of gaining whatever information he might wish for, respecting the object of his affections. Now Dawson always thought as his lord thought, and admired what his lord admired: perhaps, sometimes this great congeniality of opinion was purchased at the expense of sincerity, but in one instance it was not so; and the respect with which he behaved to Miss Macdonald, was, contrary to his general rule, felt, more than professed. After this worthy member of the parti-coloured fraternity was dismissed his lordship’s service, he thought that every obligation between them ceased. When, therefore, the departure of the family into the North left him free from observation, and secure from resentment, the first moments of his leisure were dedicated to insult the unfortunate victim of Lord Courtney’s love, by declarations of a similar passion from his valet-de-chambre. Miss Macdonald knew what was due to herself, though she was conscious that she had lost many claims to respect, by appearing in an uncertain and equivocal situation. She condescended not to be angry, but she treated her presumptuous admirer with a dignified contempt, which stung him to the quick. Degraded in his own eyes, and not liking the sensation inspired by the mortifying discovery, he resolved to avenge himself, by placing Mary in a situation humiliating as his own; he therefore told her, bluntly, the light in which she would be always considered by all the world; and added, that the hope of ever regaining respectability in society, was as false, as its foundation was deceitful, for that Lord Courtney had been sent abroad solely to break off his connection with her; that the term of his absence might be lengthened to four or five years, and that he had promised to marry Lady Harriett Parkhurst immediately on his return. Dawson, in the latter part of his information, went somewhat further than he was authorized; but he had been so accustomed to relieve the sober narrative of truth by the enlivening graces of fiction, that it is not surprising if a habit contracted in early life was continued, whenever he found, as was generally the case, that he was more attended to, and thought more entertaining from the agreeable variety which he introduced. Mary had, however, heard too much to enquire into its foundation; but she had firmness enough to order her malignant informer instantly to leave her presence, and never more to intrude into it on any pretence whatsoever. He withdrew, congratulating himself on his address in planting misery in a bosom till then undisturbed; and hoping to reap from her despair, a compliance, with which he otherwise durst not have flattered himself. Perhaps, amongst all the sensations that throbbed in Mary’s breast, none were more acute, more painful to be borne, than those arising from the idea of being so soon forgotten by the man, who had appeared unequalled in benevolence, delicacy and affection. She began to write, but she was unable to reproach him, for her pen traced, almost without effort, expressions of tenderness; she read them, and shuddered when she recollected that they were no longer deserved, and might even no longer be pleasing. “Why should I write?” she exclaimed, as she tore the unfinished lines, and consigned

them to the flames; “why should I write? his father may intercept my letters, or he may receive them himself with indifference. Oh, my God!” she continued, clasping her hand and melting into tears, “I have been very guilty, I deserve punishment, but from him it is hard to bear: and yet he wept when he parted from me; they were tears of contrition; he is not naturally vicious; perhaps even this apparent cruelty, may be but the perfection of duty, the firmness of rectitude. “Ah! why cannot I follow the example which he has afforded me? Why cannot I forsake paths of guilt on which I shrink from reflecting. Alas! I have no father to oblige, no parent to fortify my weakness, to hail my return to virtue. Oh, my father! my dear sainted father! dost thou now behold thy child! Ah! in this moment, how keenly do I feel the force of thy dying words! I have forfeited the integrity from which thou badest me hope for support, but heaven will not permit thy bliss to be tarnished, by suffering thee to witness the wretchedness of thy deserted child.”
Whilst Mary’s soul was thus a prey to anguish, the Earl was congratulating himself, on having succeeded beyond his most sanguine expectations with her aunt; who, struck with remorse for her past conduct, and flattered by the personal interference of a nobleman, as exalted in character as in rank, declared, with tears, her willingness to receive her sister’s child, whose situation she engaged to make agreeable in every respect. Exulting in his success, the Earl wrote immediately to Miss Macdonald, in the kindest and most soothing terms: in language calculated at once, to assure her of his esteem, and to raise her in her own. What then was the shock which his benevolence received, when his letter was returned with information, that the person to whom it was addressed, had left Appleton the week before its arrival, and that the people with whom she had lodged, were utterly ignorant of her future intentions, or of the place to which she might have removed. The Earl, greatly concerned at receiving this intelligence, imparted the uneasiness which it inspired in him, to Edmund, who could not, for a moment, bring himself to think Mary vicious, or unworthy; but feared that her flight was the result of wearied expectation, and disappointed hope, on the subject of Lord Courtney’s return. The Earl warmly condemned his son for having deceived her respecting it, saying, “It was a selfish weakness of which I could not have suspected him. Nor shall I be surprised at any conduct which may result from it; for how can he expect truth where be gives an example of falsehood? I pity the poor victim of his dishonorable passion, and would rather know her to be wretched, than believe her to be guilty.”
Enquiries were useless, when they could not even be directed by conjecture, and Lord Drelincourt was obliged to seek consolation in reflecting on the rectitude of his intentions. Leaving him to pursue his tour, and to spend the winter as usual, we will beg our readers to favor us with their attention to our acquaintance on the continent. Say, thou inconstant, what has Damon done,
To lose the heart his tedious pains had won? Tell me what charms you in my rival find,
Against whose power no ties have strength to bind? Has he, like me, with long obedience strove
To conquer your disdain and merit love? Has he with transport every smile ador’d,
And died with grief at each ungentle word? Ah, no! the conquest was obtain’d with ease,
He pleased you by not studying to please:
His careless indolence your pride alarm’d
And had he lov’d you more, he less had charm’d. LORD LYTTELTON. ALMOST at the same time that Lord Courtney entered the Italian States, Clayton was preparing to leave them, in consequence of the following epistle from his sister:
“Clayton Hall, Devon. “DEAR BROTHER,
“This comes with my great grief to inform you, that our kind friend, and worthy uncle is no more, being fairly run down by death, and obliged to give in after a hard chace. He never was well after he breathed the confounded smoke of London; all the time he was there, he looked like a cow in a cage, and when he returned into the country, his appetite had failed, and he could not bear the sight even of a round of beef or a venison pasty; which I thought looked very dangerous, for you know they used to be his favorite morsels. He had three physicians, which to be sure might be against him; but he was so bad one night, that I thought he had fairly stole away, so foolishly in my fright sent for one, and he proposed sending for two more; for I do suppose they play into each other’s hands when they can. So they came every day to consult, as they pretended, but I never heard any consultation they had, excepting about the news or taxes, or weather; and as they met in the blue room, I generally heard them giving their opinion, as they called it, which they certainly did on every subject but their patient; who, however, might not fare worse for their silence; and perhaps they thought, ‘least said, soonest mended.’ I hope you will leave foreign parts directly you receive this, for I am terribly down in the mouth, and my eyes water from morning till night, with thinking of the kind friend we have lost; he was a true Englishman born and bred; and as honest a man as ever sat on horseback; he was staunch as the best hound in his pack, though docile as a spaniel; there are few left like him, seeing he was one of them, now affected to be despised or laughed at; that is to say, a worthy country squire, a title, in my opinion, more respectable than that of a town lord; and I believe his tenants will be of my way of thinking. “I doubt I shall be as soft as a turnip before you come back, for I have no heart to get out of doors; indeed my Highflyer goes very tenderly yet on his off fore foot, and has hung his toe ever since the confounded farrier pared him into the quick; I wish I had the pared him into the quick; I wish I had the paring of the rascal’s ears, for I have now no pleasure in getting on to my saddle, and never was one that could find much entertainment within doors, not having any turn for book-learning, my uncle being no way given to it; and indeed, I cannot think there is much good in it, seeing that every year there are a vast number of new books published, and that we grow neither wiser nor better for reading them, but rather worse, if we may believe what the writers themselves say about the times. “The grass is down, and we have heavy crops; the corn likewise looks very well, and stands rank; in short, the estate to which you have succeeded, is smiling in peace and plenty; you come to no rack-rents, or lands out of heart; and God grant you may live to enjoy it many years in health and happiness, and be as much beloved as the late worthy possessor was. “I am, dear brother,
“with my loving service to you,
“your dutiful,
“and affectionate sister,
“FRANCES CLAYTON.”
Whatever our readers may think of this composition, the writer considered it as a very serious undertaking, for she had never written so long an epistle in her life before; and indeed seldom took a pen in her hand, but to give a receipt, or make out the pedigree of a horse. The eloquence of Demosthenes however could not have produced more sudden effects, as Clayton, sincerely afflicted at his worthy uncle’s death, and anxious to soothe his sister’s sorrow, set out immediately on the receipt of it; and was only consoled for the pangs that he felt, on tearing himself from the beautiful Everilda, by the hope of soon returning to claim her for his bride. It is scarcely necessary to inform our readers, that Lord Courtney was requested to consider the villa of the Marchese di Rodalvi as his home, during his residence in that most favored part of Italy, where it was situated. Charmed with possessing the son of a beloved friend for a guest, the Marchese and his amiable lady lavished on him the same kindness and attention, as Edmund’s letters constantly informed them he was receiving from Lord Drelincourt. In this agreeable family Lord Courtney began to recover the cheerfulness, and exhibit all the graces of manner, and playfulness of talents, by which he had always been distinguished, till the gloom of self-reproach had clouded the serenity, which conscious rectitude had before diffused over his mind. He did not however forget Mary: he wrote to her with undiminished affection, and was uneasy when several mails arrived without bringing answers to his letters. One moment he thought that the neglect might be intended as a punishment, for the artifice he had used, in taking leave of her; and, whilst he acknowledged its justice, he yet felt piqued that her resentment should have power to triumph over her love. The next he feared lest she should be ill; he contemplated her in sickness and in sorrow; and his

tenderness shrunk from the scene pourtrayed by his fruitful imagination. In this state, hoping, yet fearing; wishing, yet dreading, it is not surprising that even the dazzling beauties of the lovely Everilda should fail to inspire in a heart already occupied, any warmer passion than admiration; and it is still less surprising, that the admired Italian, haughty as charming, should perceive, with anger and mortification, the comparative neglect of claims to adoration, as universally allowed, as they were unequalled; and the fair Florentine rejected with coldness and disdain the homage of numerous nobles who solicited her smiles, whilst she sighed to triumph over the heart of the insensible Englishman. To effect this conquest she left no means untried; and as we have never represented Lord Courtney as a stoic, our readers will easily imagine that the powerful attractions of a facinating female, could not be daily displayed, without making some impression on the object whom they were intended to subdue. Perhaps no man ever loved less, from knowing that he ought not to love. Every thing that increases anxiety, adds to the interest already inspired; every obstacle exites new ardour to surmount the difficulty; and from the moment that constancy is obliged to call in the arguments, of reason, or of honor, love laughs triumphantly, and anticipates his new victory. Everilda was quick in marking her advantages, and every one that she gained, encouraged her to perseverance. In the triumph of vanity, she forgot what was due to affection; the hope of gaining Lord Courtney’s assiduities, erased the recollection of the faithful Clayton’s from her mind; and if ever she remembered his love, it was only to remember also, that her’s had decreased from the moment of his extorting a confession of it, which swelled his bosom with rapture, but which left in her’s a void only to be filled up by the hope of again conquering, again hearing supplications, which belong but to the fearing, anxious, doubting lover. When her own words had assured Clayton of his happiness, his language necessarily changed; it changed however only to that of gratitude and tenderness.