















<Chapter title="


My venerable Governess, guardian of my youth, must I then behold you no
more? No more, at breakfast, find your melancholy features shrouded in
an umbrageous cap, a novel in one hand, a cup in the other, and tears
springing from your eyes, at the tale too tender, or at the tea too
hot? Must I no longer wander with you through painted meadows, and by
purling rivulets? Motherless, am I to be bereft of my more than mother,
at the sensitive age of fifteen? What though papa caught the Butler
kissing you in the pantry? What though he turned you by the shoulder
out of his house? I am persuaded that the kiss was maternal, not
amorous, and that the interesting Butler is your son. Perhaps you married early in life, and without the knowledge of your
parents. A gipsy stole the pretty pledge of your love; and at length,
you have recognized him by the scar on his cheek. Happy, happy mother! Happy too, perhaps, in being cast upon the world, unprotected and
defamed; while I am doomed to endure the security of a home, and the
dullness of an unimpeached reputation. For me, there is no hope
whatever of being reduced to despair. I am condemned to waste my
health, bloom, and youth, in a series of uninterrupted prosperity. It is not, my friend, that I wish for ultimate unhappiness, but that I
am anxious to suffer present sorrow, in order to secure future
felicity: an improvement, you will own, on the system of other girls,
who, to enjoy the passing moment, run the risk of being wretched for
ever after. Have not all persons their favorite pursuits in life, and
do not all brave fatigue, vexation, and calumny, for the purpose of
accomplishing them? One woman aspires to be a beauty, another a title,
a third a belle esprit; and to effect these objects, health is
sacrificed, reputation tainted, and peace of mind destroyed. Now my
ambition is to be a Heroine, and how can I hope to succeed in my
vocation, unless I, too, suffer privations and inconveniences? Besides,
have I not far greater merit in getting a husband by sentiment,
adventure, and melancholy, than by dressing, gadding, dancing, and
singing? For heroines are just as much on the alert to get husbands, as
other young ladies; and to say the truth, I would never voluntarily
subject myself to misfortunes, were I not certain that matrimony would
be the last of them. But even misery itself has its consolations and
advantages. It makes one, at least, look interesting, and affords an
opportunity for ornamental murmurs. Besides, it is the mark of a
refined mind. Only fools, children, and savages, are happy. With these sentiments, no wonder I should feel discontented at my
present mode of life. Such an insipid routine, always, always, always
the same. Rising with no better prospect than to make breakfast for
papa. Then 'tis, 'Good morrow, Cherry,' or 'is the paper come, Cherry?' or 'more cream, Cherry,' or 'what shall we have to dinner, Cherry?' At
dinner, nobody but a farmer or the Parson; and nothing talked but
politics and turnips. After tea I am made sing some fal lal la of a
ditty, and am sent to bed with a 'Good night, pretty miss,' or 'sweet
dear.' The clowns! Now, instead of this, just conceive me a child of misery, in a castle,
a convent, or a cottage; becoming acquainted with the hero by his
saving my life--I in beautiful confusion--'Good Heaven, what an angel!' cries he--then sudden love on both sides--in two days he kisses my
hand. Embarrassments--my character suspected--a quarrel--a
reconciliation--fresh embarrassments.--O Biddy, what an irreparable
loss to the public, that a victim of thrilling sensibility, like me,
should be thus idling her precious time over the common occupations of
life!--prepared as I am, too, by a five years' course of novels (and
you can bear witness that I have read little else), to embody and
ensoul those enchanting reveries, which I am accustomed to indulge in
bed and bower, and which really constitute almost the whole happiness
of my life. That I am not deficient in the qualities requisite for a heroine, is
indisputable. All the world says I am handsome, and it would be
melancholy were all the world in error. My form is tall and aërial, my
face Grecian, my tresses flaxen, my eyes blue and sleepy. But the great
point is, that I have a remarkable mole just over my left temple. Then,
not only peaches, roses, and Aurora, but snow, lilies, and alabaster,
may, with perfect propriety, be adopted in a description of my skin. I
confess I differ from other heroines in one point. They, you may
remark, are always unconscious of their charms; whereas, I am, I fear,
convinced of mine, beyond all hope of retraction. There is but one serious flaw in my title to Heroine--the mediocrity of
my lineage. My father is descended from nothing better than a decent
and respectable family. He began life with a thousand pounds, purchased
a farm, and by his honest and disgusting industry, has realized fifty
thousand. Were even my legitimacy suspected, it would be some comfort;
since, in that case, I should assuredly start forth, at one time or
other, the daughter of some plaintive nobleman, who lives retired, and
slaps his forehead. One more subject perplexes me. It is my name; and what a name--Cherry! It reminds one so much of plumpness and ruddy health. Cherry--better be
called Pine-apple at once. There is a green and yellow melancholy in
Pine-apple, that is infinitely preferable. I wonder whether Cherry
could possibly be an abbreviation of CHERUBINA. 'Tis only changing y
into ubina, and the name becomes quite classic. Celestina, Angelina,
Seraphina, are all of the same family. But Cherubina sounds so
empyrean, so something or other beyond mortality; and besides I have
just a face for it. Yes, Cherubina I am resolved to be called, now and
for ever. But you must naturally wish to learn what has happened here, since your
departure. I was in my boudoir, reading the Delicate Distress, when I
heard a sudden bustle below, and 'Out of the house, this moment,'
vociferated by my father. The next minute he was in my room with a face
like fire. 'There!' cried he, 'I knew what your famous romances would do for us at
last.' 'Pray, Sir, what?' asked I, with the calm dignity of injured innocence. 'Only a kissing match between the Governess and the Butler,' answered
he. 'I caught them at the sport in the pantry.' I was petrified. 'Dear Sir,' said I, 'you must surely mistake.' 'No such thing,' cried he. 'The kiss was too much of a smacker for
that:--it rang through the pantry. But please the fates, she shall
never darken my doors again. I have just discharged both herself and
her swain; and what is better, I have ordered all the novels in the
house to be burnt, by way of purification. As they love to talk of
flames, I suppose they will like to feel them.' He spoke, and ran
raging out of the room. Adieu, then, ye dear romances, adieu for ever. No more shall I
sympathize with your heroines, while they faint, and blush, and weep,
through four half-bound octavos. Adieu ye Edwins, Edgars, and Edmunds;
ye Selinas, Evelinas, Malvinas; ye inas all adieu! The flames will
consume you all. The melody of Emily, the prattle of Annette, and the
hoarseness of Ugo, all will be confounded in one indiscriminate
crackle. The Casa and Castello will blaze with equal fury; nor will the
virtue of Pamela aught avail to save; nor Wolmar delighting to see his
wife in a swoon; nor Werter shelling peas and reading Homer, nor
Charlotte cutting bread and butter for the children. You, too, my loved governess, I regret extremely. Adieu. CHERUBINA. It was not till this morning, that a thought of the most interesting
nature flashed across my mind. Pondering on the cruel conduct of my
reputed father, in having burnt my novels, and discharged you, without
even allowing us to take a hysterical farewell, I was struck with the
sudden notion that the man is not my father at all. In short, I began
with wishing this the case, and have ended with believing it. My
reasons are irresistible, and deduced from strong and stubborn facts. For, first, there is no likeness between this Wilkinson and me. 'Tis
true, he has blue eyes, like myself, but has he my pouting lip and
dimple? He has the flaxen hair, but can he execute the rosy smile? Next, is it possible, that I, who was born a heroine, and who must
therefore have sprung from an idle and illustrious family, should be
the daughter of a farmer, a thrifty, substantial, honest farmer? The
thing is absurd on the face of it, and never will I tamely submit to
such an indignity. Full of this idea, I dressed myself in haste, resolving to question
Wilkinson, to pierce into his inmost soul, to speak daggers to him; and
if he should not unfold the mystery of my birth, to fly from his house
for ever. With a palpitating heart, I descended the stairs, rushed into
the breakfast-room, and in a moment was at the feet of my persecutor. My hands were folded across my bosom, and my blue eyes raised to his
face. 'Heyday, Cherry,' said he, laughing, 'this is a new flourish. There,
child, now fancy yourself stabbed, and come to breakfast.' 'Hear me,' cried I. 'Why,' said he, 'you keep your countenance as stiff and steady as the
face on our rapper.' 'A countenance,' cried I, 'is worth keeping, when the features are a
proof of the descent, and vindicate the noble birth from the baseness
of the adoption.' 'Come, come,' said he, 'your cup is full all this time.' 'And so is my heart,' cried I, pressing it expressively. 'What is the meaning of this mummery?' said he. 'Hear me, Wilkinson,' cried I, rising with dignified tranquillity. 'Candor is at once the most amiable and the most difficult of virtues;
and there is more magnanimity in confessing an error, than in never
committing one.' 'Confound your written sentences,' cried he, 'can't you come to the
point?' 'Then, Sir,' said I, 'to be plain and explicit, learn, that I have
discovered a mystery in my birth, and that you--you, Wilkinson, are
not--my real Father!' I pronounced these words with a measured emphasis, and one of my
ineffable looks. Wilkinson coloured like scarlet and stared steadily in
my face. 'Would you scandalize the mother that bore you?' cried he, fiercely. 'No, Wilkinson,' answered I, 'but you would, by calling yourself my
father.' 'And if I am not,' said he, 'what the mischief must _you_ be?' 'An illustrious heiress,' cried I, 'snatched from my parents in her
infancy;--snatched by thee, vile agent of the diabolical conspiracy!' He looked aghast. 'Tell me then,' continued I, 'miserable man, tell me where my dear, my
distracted father lingers out the remnant of his wretched days? My
mother too--or say, am I indeed an orphan?' Still he remained mute, and gazed on me with a searching intensity. I
raised my voice:

'Expiate thy dire offences, restore an outcast to her birthright, make
atonement, or _tremble at retribution_!' I thought the farmer would have sunk into the ground. 'Nay,' continued I, lowering my voice, 'think not I thirst for
vengeance. I myself will intercede for thee, and stay the sword of
Justice. Poor wretch! I want not thy blood.' The culprit had now reached the climax of agony, and writhed through
every limb and feature. 'What!' cried I, 'can nothing move thee to confess thy crimes? Then
hear me. Ere Aurora with rosy fingers shall unbar the eastern gate----'

'My child, my child, my dear darling daughter!' exclaimed this
accomplished crocodile, bursting into tears, and snatching me to his
bosom, 'what have they done to you? What phantom, what horrid disorder
is distracting my treasure?' 'Unhand me, guileful adulator,' cried I, 'and try thy powers of
tragedy elsewhere, for--_I know thee!_' I spoke, and extricated myself
from his embrace. 'Dreadful, dreadful!' muttered he. 'Her sweet senses are lost.' Then
turning to me: 'My love, my life, do not speak thus to your poor old
father.' 'Father!' exclaimed I, accomplishing with much accuracy that hysterical
laugh, which (gratefully let me own) I owe to your instruction;
'Father!' The fat farmer covered his face with his hands, and rushed out of the
room. I relate the several conversations, in a dramatic manner, and word for
word, as well as I can recollect them, since I remark that all heroines
do the same. Indeed I cannot enough admire the fortitude of these
charming creatures, who, while they are in momentary expectation of
losing their lives, or their honours, or both, sit down with the utmost
unconcern, and indite the wittiest letters in the world. They have even
sufficient presence of mind to copy the vulgar dialect, uncooth
phraseology, and bad grammar, of the villains whom they dread; and all
this in the neatest and liveliest style imaginable. Adieu. Soon after my last letter, I was summoned to dinner. What heroine in
distress but loaths her food? so I sent a message that I was unwell,
and then solaced myself with a volume of the Mysteries of Udolpho,
which had escaped the conflagration. At ten, I flung myself on my bed,
in hopes to have dreams portentous of my future fate; for heroines are
remarkably subject to a certain prophetic sort of night-mare. You
remember the story that Ludovico read, of a spectre who beckons a baron
from his castle in the dead of night, and leading him into a forest,
points to his own corpse, and bids him bury it. Well, owing, I suppose,
to my having just read this episode, and to my having fasted so long, I
had the following dreams. Methought a delicious odour of viands attracted me to the kitchen,
where I found an iron pot upon the fire simmering in unison with my
sighs. As I looked at it with a longing eye, the lid began to rise, and
I beheld a half-boiled turkey stalk majestically forth. It beckoned me
with its claw. I followed. It led me into the yard, and pointed to its
own head and feathers, which were lying in a corner. I felt infinitely
affected. Straight the scene changed. I found myself seated at a dinner-table;
and while I was expecting the repast, lo, the Genius of Dinner
appeared. He had a mantle laced with silver eels, and his locks were
dropping with costly soups. A crown of golden fishes was on his head,
and pheasants' wings at his shoulders. A flight of little tartlets
fluttered around him, and the sky rained down hock, comfits, and Tokay. As I gazed on him, he vanished, in a sigh, that was strongly
impregnated with the fumes of brandy. What vulgar, what disgusting
visions, when I ought to have dreamt of nothing but coffins and ladies
in black. At breakfast, this morning, Wilkinson affected the most tender
solicitude for my health; and as I now watched his words, I could
discover in almost all that he said, something to confirm my surmise of
his not being my father. After breakfast a letter was handed to him, which he read, and then
gave to me. It was as follows:

    London. In accepting your invitation to Sylvan Lodge, my respected friend,
    I am sure I shall confer a far greater favor on myself, than, as
    you kindly tell me, I shall on you. After an absence of seven
    years, spent in the seclusion of a college, and the fatigues of a
    military life, how delightful to revisit the scene of my childhood,
    and those who contribute to render its memory so dear! I left you
    while you were my guardian; I return to you with the assurances of
    finding you a friend. Let me but find you what I left you, and you
    shall take what title you please. Yet, much as I flatter myself with your retaining all your former
    feelings towards me, I must expect a serious alteration in those of
    my friend Cherry. Will she again make me her playmate? Again climb
    my shoulders, and gallop me round the lawn? Are we to renew all our
    little quarrels, then kiss and be friends? Shall we even recognize
    each other's features, through their change from childhood to
    maturity? There is, at least, one feature of our early days, that,
    I trust, has undergone no alteration--our mutual affection and
    friendship. I fear I cannot manage matters so as to be with you before ten
    to-morrow night: remember I bespeak my old room. Ever affectionately your's,

    ROBERT STUART. To Gregory Wilkinson, Esq. 'There,' cries the farmer, 'if I have deprived you of an old woman,
    I have got you a young man. Large estates, you know;--handsome,
    fashionable;--come, pluck up a heart, my girl; ay, egad, and steal
    one too.' I rose, gave him one of my ineffable looks, and retired to my
    chamber. 'So,' said I, locking my door, and flinging myself on the bed,
    'this is something like misery. Here is a precious project against
    my peace. I am to be forced into marriage, am I? And with whom? A
    man whose legitimacy is unimpeached, and whose friends would
    certainly consent. His name Robert too:--master Bobby, as the
    servants used to call him. A fellow that mewed like a cat, when he
    was whipt. O my Bob! what a pretty monosyllable for a girl like me
    to pronounce. Now, indeed, my wretchedness is complete; the cup is
    full, even to overflowing. An orphan, or at least an outcast;
    immured in the prison of a proud oppressor--threatened with a
    husband of decent birth, parentage and education--my governess
    gone, my novels burnt, what is left to me but flight? Yes, I will
    roam through the wide world in search of my parents; I will ransack
    all the sliding pannels and tapestries in Italy; I will explore Il
    Castello Di Udolpho, and will then enter the convent of Ursulines,
    or Carmelites, or Santa della Pieta, or the Abbey of La Trappe. Here I meet with nothing better than smiling faces and honest
    hearts; or at best, with but sneaking villains. No precious
    scoundrels are here, no horrors, or atrocities, worth mentioning. But abroad I shall encounter banditti, monks, daggers, racks--O ye
    celebrated terrors, when shall I taste of you?' I then lay planning an elopement, till I was called to dinner. Adieu. O my friend, such a discovery!--a parchment and a picture. But you
shall hear. After dinner I stole into Wilkinson's study, in hopes of finding,
before my flight, some record or relic, that might aid me in
unravelling the mystery of my birth. As heroines are privileged to
ransack private drawers, and read whatever they find there, I opened
Wilkinson's scrutoire, without ceremony. But what were my sensations,
when I discovered in a corner of it, an antique piece of tattered
parchment, scrawled all over, in uncouth characters, with this
frightful fragment. _This Indenture_
    For and in consideration of
    Doth grant, bargain, release
    Possession, and to his heirs and assigns
    Lands of Sylvan Lodge, in the
    Trees, stones, quarries. Reasonable amends and satisfaction
    This demise
    Molestation of him the said Gregory Wilkinson
    The natural life of
    Cherry Wilkinson only daughter of
    De Willoughby eldest son of Thomas
    Lady Gwyn of Gwyn Castle. O Biddy, does not your blood run cold at this horrible scrawl? for
already you must have decyphered its terrific import. The part lost may
be guessed from the part left. In short, it is a written covenant
between this Gregory Wilkinson, and the miscreant (whom my being an
heiress had prevented from enjoying the title and estate that would
devolve to him at my death), stipulating to give Wilkinson 'Sylvan
Lodge,' together with 'trees, stones, quarries, &c.' as 'reasonable
amends and satisfaction,' for being the instrument of my 'Demise;'
and declaring that there shall be 'no molestation of him the said
Gregory Wilkinson,' for taking away 'the natural life of Cherry
Wilkinson'--'only daughter of----' something--'De Willoughby, eldest
son of Thomas'--What an unfortunate chasm! Then follows, 'Lady Gwyn of
Gwyn Castle.' So that it is evident I am at least a De Willoughby, and
if not noble myself, related to nobility. For what confirms me in this
supposition of my relationship to Lady Gwyn, is an old portrait which I
found a few minutes after, in one of Wilkinson's drawers, representing
a young and beautiful female dressed in a superb style, and underneath
it, in large letters, the name of, 'NELL GWYN.' Distraction! what shall I do? Whither turn? To sleep another night
under the same roof with a wretch, who has bound himself to assassinate
me, would be little short of madness. My plan, therefore, is already
arranged for flight, and this very evening I mean to begin my
pilgrimage. The picture and parchment I will hide in my bosom during my journey;
and I will also carry with me a small bandbox, containing my satin
slip, a pair of silk stockings, my spangled muslin, and all my jewels. For as some benevolent duchess may possibly take me into her family,
and her son persecute me, I might just as well look decent, you know. On mature deliberation, I have resolved to take but five guineas with
me, since more would make me too comfortable, and tempt me, in some
critical moment, to extricate myself from distress. I shall leave the following billet on my toilet. To Gregory Wilkinson, Farmer. Sir,

    When this letter meets your eye, the wretched writer will be far
    removed from your machinations. She will be wandering the convex
    earth in pursuit of those parents, from whose dear embraces you
    have torn her. She will be flying from a Stuart, for whose
    detestable embraces you have designed her. Your motive for this hopeful match I can guess. As you obtained one
    property by undertaking my death, you are probably promised another
    for effecting my marriage. Learn that the latter fate has more
    terrors for me than the former. But I have escaped both. As for the
    ten thousand pounds willed to me by your deceased wife, I suppose
    it will revert to you, as soon as I prove that I am not your
    daughter. Silly man! you might at this moment obtain that legacy,
    by restoring me to my real parents. Alas! Sir, you are indeed very wicked. Yet remember, that
    repentance is never too late, and that virtue alone is true
    nobility. The much injured CHERUBINA. All is prepared, and in ten minutes I commence my interesting
expedition. London being the grand emporium of adventure, and the most
likely place for obtaining information on the subject of my birth, I
mean to bend my steps thither; and as Stuart is to be here at ten
to-night, and as he must come the London road, I shall probably meet
him. Should I recognize him, what a scene we shall have! but he cannot
possibly recognize me, since I was only eight years old when we last
parted. Adieu. The rain rattled and the wind whistled, as I tied on my bonnet for my
journey. With the bandbox in my hand, I descended the stairs, and
paused in the hall to listen. I heard a distant door shut, and steps
advancing. Not a moment was to be lost, so I sprang forward, opened the
hall door, and ran down the shrubbery. 'O peaceful shades!' exclaimed I, 'why must I leave you? In your
retreats I should still find "pleasure and repose!"' I then hastened into the London road, and pressed forward with a
hurried step, while a violent tempest beat full against my face. Being
in such distress, I thought it incumbent on me to compose a sonnet;
which I copy for you. SONNET

Bereft by wretches of endearing home, And all the joys of parent and of
friend, Unsheltered midst the shattering storm I roam, On mangled feet,
and soon my life must end. So the young lark, whom sire and mother
tend, Some fowler robs of sire and mother dear. All day dejected in its
nest it lies; No food, no song, no sheltering pinion near. Night comes
instead, and tempests round it rise, At morn, with gasping beak, and
upward breast: it dies. Four long and toilsome miles had I now walked with a dignified air;
till, finding myself fatigued, and despairing of an interview with
Stuart, I resolved to rest awhile, in the lone and uninhabited house
which lies, you may recollect, on the grey common, about a hundred
paces from the road. Besides, I was in duty bound to explore it, as a
ruined pile. I approached it. The wind moaned through the broken windows, and the
rank grass rustled in the court. I entered. All was dark within; the
boards creaked as I trod, the shutters flapped, and an ominous owl was
hooting in the chimney. I groped my way along the hall, thence into a
parlour--up stairs and down--not a horror to be found. No dead hand met
my left hand, firmly grasping it, and drawing me forcibly forward; no
huge eye-ball glared at me through a crevice. How disheartening! The cold was now creeping through me; my teeth chattered, and my whole
frame shook. I had seated myself on the stairs, and was weeping
piteously, wishing myself safe at home, and in bed; and deploring the
dire necessity which had compelled me to this frightful undertaking,
when on a sudden I heard the sound of approaching steps. I sprang upon
my feet with renovated spirits. Presently several persons entered the
hall, and a vulgar accent cried:

'Jem, run down to the cellar and strike a light.' 'What can you want of me, now that you have robbed me?' said the voice
of a gentleman. 'Why, young man,' answered a ruffian, 'we want you to write home for a
hundred pounds, or some such trifle, which we will have the honour of
spending for you. You must manufacture some confounded good lie about
where you are, and why you send for the money; and one of us will carry
the letter.' 'I assure you,' said the youth, 'I shall forge no such falsehood.' 'As you please, master,' replied the ruffian, 'but, the money or your
life we must have, and that soon.' 'Will you trust my solemn promise to send you a hundred pounds?' said
the other. 'My name is Stuart: I am on my way to Mr. Wilkinson, of
Sylvan Lodge, so you may depend upon my sending you, by his assistance,
the sum that you require, and I will promise not to betray you.' 'No, curse me if I trust,' cried the robber. 'Then curse me if I write,' said Stuart. 'Look you, Squire,' cried the robber. 'We cannot stand parlying with
you now; we have other matters on hands. But we will lock you safe in
the cellar, with pen, ink, and paper, and a lantern; and if you have
not a fine bouncing lie of a letter, ready written when we come back,
you are a dead man--that is all.' 'I am almost a dead man already,' said Stuart, 'for the cut you gave me
is bleeding torrents.' They now carried him down to the cellar, and remained there a few
minutes, then returned, and locked the door outside. 'Leave the key in it,' says one, 'for we do not know which of us may
come back first.' They then went away. Now was the fate of my bitter enemy, the wily, the wicked Stuart, in my
power; I could either liberate him, or leave him to perish. It struck
me, that to miss such a promising interview, would be stupid in the
extreme; and I felt a sort of glow at the idea of saying to him, live! besides, the fellow had answered the robbers with some spirit, so I
descended the steps, unlocked the door, and bursting into the cellar,
stood in an unparalleled attitude before him. He was sitting on the
ground, and fastening a handkerchief about his wounded leg, but at my
entrance, he sprang upon his feet. 'Away, save thyself!' cried I. 'She who restores thee to freedom flies
herself from captivity. Look on these features--Thou wouldest have
wrung them with despair. Look on this form--Thou wouldest have prest it
in depravity. Hence, unhappy sinner, and learn, that innocence is ever
victorious and ever merciful.' 'I am all amazement!' exclaimed he. 'Who are you? Whence come you? Why
speak so angrily, yet act so kindly?' I smiled disdain, and turned to depart. 'One moment more,' cried he. 'Here is some mistake; for I never even
saw you before.' 'Often!' exclaimed I, and was again going. 'So you will leave me, my sweet girl,' said he, smiling. 'Now you have
all this time prevented me from binding my wound, and you owe me some
compensation for loss of blood.' I paused. 'I would ask you to assist me,' continued he, 'but in binding one
wound, I fear you would inflict another.' Mere curiosity made me return two steps. 'I think, however, there would be healing in the touch of so fair a
hand,' and he took mine as he spoke. At this moment, my humanity conquered my reserve, and kneeling down, I
began to fasten the bandage; but resolved on not uttering another word. 'What kindness!'