Yet a declaration of this nature would be infinitely more excusable than that which you have made, for it might proceed from an excess of gratitude and a lively sense of the blessings that inspired it; but if a decrease of his happiness might be permitted to convince him of its uncertainty, is it not also to be feared that the repining mind may be taught by additional calamities, that those under which it murmured, were comparatively easy to be borne.” Seeing Everilda looked distressed, though not convinced, and understanding the silent appeal she made to heaven, by raising her eyes to it, he proceeded in a yet milder tone, “I mean not to declaim in the mere pride of words; I trust that the actions of my past life may give weight to the arguments I would use; I teach what I do know; I have been acquainted with Sorrow so long, that I now consider her as a friend, to whose society, though gloomy, I am so much accustomed, that the gay novelty of any other would not repay me for the trouble of seeking it.”

“I know it is not always possible to forget, it is what I could never teach myself, but I would learn to remember without bitterness, and this is what I would wish to teach you.” “Alas,” replied Everilda, “there is even in this life, ‘the worm that dieth not;’ for when the arrows of adversity are turned aside by the shield of fortitude, when the stings of neglect are weakened by the consciousness of rectitude, when even the bitterness of death is allayed by the consolations of remembrance, yet for self-reproach there is no cure, to its wounds the world can apply no palliative, no lethean balm; and when it can endure its own sufferings without incessant torments, it merits still more severe condemnation. Oh God,” continued she, clasping her hands and giving way to an agony of tears, “‘a contrite heart thou wilt not despise, but a wounded spirit who can bear.’” “Yet is not that rather an effusion of wounded pride or mortified self love, than the humble sentiment of penitence or contrition?” asked Mr. Price; he then continued, “It would ill become me to be severe on mankind, and never should the language of censure pass my lips, but with the hope of producing reformation. Yet I fear, if we consider the remorse that arises in the mind, from the recollection of an error, we shall find that the injuries produced by our follies, are less bearable, as we see after the mist of passion or prejudice is evaporated, how easily they might have been avoided. Then indeed every day adds to the painfulness of our recollections, because every day weakens the impulses, which occasioned our fault, and adds to those, which make us ardently long to recal it. “To repent truely, and to reap benefit from repentance, we must divest ourselves of the garb of selfishness, and be clothed in that of humility; we must deplore our crimes and not their consequences; and when we may humbly hope to have reconciled ourselves to God, by the means which he has graciously pointed out to us, we may then think of a reconciliation with our own reflections.” Such were the discourses held by the worthy divine, whenever he perceived Everilda unusually depressed. Ignorant as he was of her condition in life, or of the peculiar circumstances that had driven her to seek refuge in a situation to which it was easy to perceive she had not been accustomed he knew that she was unhappy, nor did he wish to know more, unless further knowledge could teach him to make her less so. His compassion was warmly interested for her, and he lamented the early wreck of such talents, and graces as shone even through the dark cloud, in which her daily increasing dejection enveloped them. But if he compassionated Everilda, he reverenced almost to enthusiasm, the virtues of Claudina; unwearied patience, unshaken fortitude, and uncomplaining sweetness, were assembled in the smile of resignation that illuminated her countenance, the pensive expression of which, could not fail to inspire the most tender sympathy in minds of sensibility, congenial to her own; and as she assiduously watched the declining health, and drooping spirits of her friend, guessing her wishes, and anticipating her wants with the tenderest solicitude, she seemed to personify her, who as described by Mason,
“Her meek hands folded on her modest breast, In mute submission lifts th’ adoring eye,
E’en to the storm that wrecks her.”



Let me, o! let me near some fountain lie! That thro’ the rock lifts up its foamy head;
Or let me dwell upon some mountain high,
Whose hollow root, and baser parts are spread
On fleeting waters, in its bowels bred:
That I their streams, and they my tears may feed;
Or clothed in some hermit’s ragged weed,
Spend all my days in weeping for this cursed deed. GILES FLETCHER. WE will not detain our readers with an account of Sir Edward Clayton’s sensations, when he heard of Lord Courtney’s death. All that a mind of sensibility could feel, at the dreadful thought of being accessary to the death of a fellow creature, was felt by him; and encreased by the recollection, of the amiable qualities of the deceased, and the wretchedness into which his untimely fate had plunged those connected with him. Literature, in which Clayton could once find a balm for every wound, now became hateful to him. What indeed could books teach him? Poetry and fiction, only led him to contrast and lament the sad realities of life; whilst morality and reasoning, taught him but to condemn more severely, his own conduct, of which the retrospect was already too painful. In this unfortunate situation he resolved to study the book of nature, and endeavouring to divert mental uneasiness by bodily employment, he assumed the name of Balfour, and wandered on foot through the greatest part of Wales, staying a few days at any place that appeared agreeable to him, and quitting it when the attractive but transient charm of novelty had fled. At Caermarthen he met with an old acquaintance, a clergyman, to whom he communicated his change of name, and reasons for so doing, and this friend, anxious to serve him, gave him letters to many of his brethren, and amongst the rest, to Mr. Price; and he made use of these letters, just as he felt a temporary wish to have some one, to whom he could communicate his remarks, or was pleased with the situation of those, to whom they were addressed. The latter motive induced him to deliver an introductory epistle to Mr. Price, with whose conversation and manners he was soon so highly gratified, that he resolved to suspend his wanderings, and endeavour to find consolation in the precepts, and reap benefit from the example, of the chastened mourner, who notwithstanding the retired life he had led for many years, possessed a mind richly stored, if not with classical learning, yet with that kind of reading and sentiment which perhaps affords a greater, and more pleasing variety of information. It is not requisite for a person to have passed the principal part of his time in the busy scenes of life, to enable him to be an agreeable and instructive companion in retirement. It is certain, that if the paucity and uniformity of incidents be such, as to inspire no interest, and rouse no reflection, the mind must depend solely on its own powers for amusement; and then, memory

may indeed afford truly valuable additions to present ideas, by recalling past scenes, and the sensations inspired by a retrospective view of them, will be gentle, and pleasing, as those felt on perusing for the second time, after a lapse of years, a work in which we were before strongly interested. They please indeed more from a recollection of the much greater pleasure, of which we had before been sensible; the vision is not now so bright; like a landscape by moonlight, the colours appear faded, and indistinct, but the very gloom in which they are involved is grateful, and perhaps adds to the effect. We repeat that it is not seeing much, but reflecting on what we do see, by which the amusements of youth may add to the pleasures of age; and it generally happens that they who live the most in the busy world, are precisely they who profit the least by its variety. The statesman, retiring in disgust, renounces the projects of patriotism and ambition, without seeking to occupy the large space, which they had till then filled in his mind; but man was not born to be idle; emperors have amused themselves in solitude, with making watches, or planting cabbages; and he who guided the helm of the state, whose breath made war or peace, whose hand dispensed the riches of his country, or the lives of his countrymen, will in retirement amuse himself with feeding goldfish, laying stones in even rows in his gravel walks, or any other pastime equally innocent. The disabled warrior may still “shoulder his crutch, and tell how fields were won;” but he is as often content to pass the bottle, or hold a hand at cards, without betraying any information superior to that possessed by many who,
“Along the cool sequestered vale of life, Have kept the noiseless tenor of their way.”
The sailor, after exposing himself to every peril of the wind and waves, is glad to cast anchor towards the decline of life, in a snug birth, procured by his hazardous industry, and forgets by his fireside, the roaring of the winds, and the rocking of the waves. The manners of different climes, have left few traces on his mind, and those few are gradually effaced, for as Sir William Davenant observes,
“He’s made no use of sight,
By any thing observed in wide strange seas, But only of the length of voyages.”
He is indeed consulted as an oracle respecting the weather, and when he meets with any old acquaintance, he talks of rocks and straights, dangerous passages, and safe anchorages, but of men and manners, he is perhaps unable to give an opinion, notwithstanding the variety that he may have seen. Cowper’s life illustrates these remarks; during twenty years, he went not thirteen miles from one sequestered spot; yet do his writings betray any want of incident? or what succession of incidents could give rise to more just and beautiful observations, than he has made in his retirement? Indeed it appears to us highly probable, that his twenty years of seclusion, were spent with much more satisfaction to himself, and benefit to his fellow creatures, than the same period may be by those sons of fortune, who in that time run through half the countries of Europe, to

return and abuse their own; who spend their youth like fools, their middle-age like knaves, and their old-age like children. The justice and elegance with which Young expresses his ideas on this subject, will we trust sufficiently apologize for our presenting them to our readers, however our own crude remarks may suffer by a comparison with those of this celebrated author. “Wisdom is the growth of experience, but experience is not the growth of action, but of reflection on it. In an active life are sown the seeds of wisdom, but he who reflects not, never reaps; has no harvest from it; he carries the burthen of old-age, without the wages of experience; nor knows himself to be old, but from his infirmities, the parish register, and the contempt of mankind. And what has age if it have not esteem?—it has nothing.—”
“And so all this long digression, is to prove that the world is foolish and wicked, as if we did not know that without your illtimed information,” say some of the courteous ones, who may honor these pages by a perusal; yet, fair and gentle readers, accuse us not of a design so malevolent, but rather exert some of that forbearing quality, so necessary for the votaries of the Minerva of modern days, and you will then patiently hear, and implicitly believe, that our intentions were simply to prove, that Mr. Price in his little parsonage at Llewenmawr, was a companion as interesting and rational, as could be found in the circle at St. James’s. “Simply enough indeed, and tediously enough, but pray proceed, and do not tax us more with the apologies than you have done even with the offence.” Now, most respected readers, that being a speech admitting of two constructions, we shall, as experience has taught us is the wisest way, construe it into a compliment, and shew ourselves grateful, by immediately complying with the request. Sir Edward soon told Mr. Price that he should like to become a resident, in the vale of Llewenmawr, for a few weeks, if he could be accommodated with lodgings. Mr. Price replied with a courtesy of manner, still more flattering than his words, “Could I find any accommodations in the village equal to my desires for your comfort, Mr. Balfour, I would not be so selfish, as to solicit you to remain my guest; but I frankly confess, I know not of any better, than the bed-room that you have under my roof, and the little closet that I dignify with the name of study, which I beg you will consider appropriated solely to your use; these with a chair in my parlour, and a place at my table, whenever you will honor me with occupying them, and the range of my grounds, over the whole of which, you might range in one quarter of an hour, are what I have to offer you, what you are not only heartily welcome to, but will oblige me by accepting, and what you will not find any of my parishioners capable of offering you. Thus you see,” continued he, smiling, “I threaten you into a compliance with my wishes.” “And mine my dear sir,” said Sir Edward, “are too much interested in it, to need the repetition of such friendly entreaties. I should have preferred a lodging could I have procured one, as your conversation is such a temptation to me, that in order to enjoy it, I fear I shall intrude on your solitude, oftener than may be agreeable to you; but whenever I am troublesome tell me so, and give me an opportunity of shewing my sense of your kindness, by the readiness with which I would make my gratification yield to your convenience.”
Sir Edward accordingly took up his abode with the worthy clergyman; and his mind gradually recovering from the anguish under which it had smarted, softened into a melancholy not unpleasing. The tidings of Lady Courtney’s disappearance had not reached him, and he endeavoured to detach his thoughts entirely from her, feeling that by so doing, he paid the only

tribute of respect in his power, to the memory of a man, whom in life he had esteemed, but whose death he had unfortunately precipitated. Perhaps he had the less merit in this forbearance, as he found it more easy to practise than he had once supposed it could ever be. But now horror would have mingled with his love, and he could not bring himself to even wish for the woman whom he had so fondly adored, when he considered her as the widow of the man whom he had destroyed. Whether it were that in dwelling on the remembrance of Claudina, his ideas were unalloyed by any sentiments foreign to that tenderness and sensibility, which she was eminently calculated to inspire; whether it were that she gained by the force of contrast, or whether as Rochefaucault asserts, “The heart is never so readily disposed to receive new impressions, as when it is smarting under the wounds caused by old ones;” certain it is, that Sir Edward incessantly thought of her, wished earnestly that he had esteemed her as she deserved, when he first became acquainted with her, and then sighed again, as he recollected that it would have availed nothing, for, had she not owned that she loved, and loved without hope? This recollection filled him with a peevishness, for which he knew not how to account. He was certain it was not jealousy; that could not exist without passion, and he knew that he had never felt the influence of passion but for Everilda. He might have been happy however, he acknowledged, had Claudina condescended sooner to become his monitress, for who so capable of instruction as she, whose conduct so amiably illustrated the precepts she would teach? He wished to know her sentiments on the late unhappy occurrence, but he feared she must condemn him, and feeling that her censures would make him still more dissatisfied with himself, he endeavoured to rejoice that he should probably never be made acquainted with them. Oh peaceful solitude! Where all things smile and in sweet concert join, All but my thoughts, they still are out of time, And break, like jarring strings, the harmony. TATE. Mr. Price did not forget in the pleasure he found from his new friend’s society, the attention that he owed to his interesting female acquaintance, and he was so regular in his visits to them, that Sir Edward laughingly enquired into the inducements he had, to be so constant in his devoirs. Mr. Price gave him all the information in his power concerning the ladies, whom Sir Edward had never seen, owing to the increasing indisposition of the one not allowing her to go abroad, and the unwearied kindness of the other, who could not be prevailed on to leave her sick friend. Mr. Price knew only the time and manner of their arrival; the reason of their retirement, he had never even conjectured, for he possessed none of the restless curiosity, “which grows by what it feeds upon.” They appeared to be unhappy, and he had done what he could to alleviate their affliction, “of which,” said he, “it was unnecessary to know the source, if that knowledge would not have enabled me to remove it; and I respected their sorrows too much, to discover a wish to be more intimately acquainted with the nature of them. I am however inclined to imagine that they are french emigrants, for they read and speak that language apparently with much more ease than the english, which indeed though they seem to understand it perfectly, and converse in it with the fluency of natives, they yet evidently pronounce with a foreign accent.” He then praised in the highest terms the young lady, whom he had never heard addressed by any other name than that of Louisa, and extolled her amiable and interesting attention to Mrs. Belmont, which was the name that Lady Courtney had adopted. “Such firmness joined to so much sensibility, such piety, resignation and fortitude,” said he, “I have never seen equalled but in one, who was lovely and amiable, as she is now,” he sighed deeply as he concluded, and hastily went to the little window, whence, notwithstanding the twilight was fading away, he could still discern the humble stone that marked his Maria’s grave. Sir Edward echoed his sigh, and thought there was yet in the world, another, whose gentle virtues, and unassuming charms would not suffer by a comparison with those of the amiable foreigner, or of the unfortunate Maria, so untimely blasted. The widower’d clergyman had in his enthusiasm touched a discordant string, and Clayton versed in the feelings of the heart, and the eloquent manner in which silence sometimes expresses them, conjectured what passed in the bosom of his friend, and resolved to leave him to his own reflections, well knowing that there are moments, when any society is an interruption to the communion which the unhappy love to hold with solitude. It was at an hour when every noise in the village was hushed, save those which add charms even to stillness. The moon had risen in unclouded majesty, and some of her beams “slept sweetly on the bank,” whilst others played on the surface of the brook, which fled with limpid speed to join the waters of many streams, that were proud to add their stores to the ocean. The wind just agitated the trees, sufficiently to make mournful music, and at intervals the tinkling of bells, and barking of the watch-dogs were heard, whilst the ponderous swing of a distant waggon, broke with fuller sound upon the charmed ear. Sir Edward’s feelings were soothed by the beauty of the moonlight scene, and his fertile imagination was picturing the vague and indefinite kind of happiness, which though he never could exactly define in what it should consist, he had incessantly sought, and had been as constantly disappointed in his search. He was roused from his reverie by hearing a guitar struck in plaintive notes; and looking round this sublunary sphere as far as his very contracted prospect would allow, he found himself opposite to the walls, which enclosed the peerless fair ones, of whom his friend had so often expressed his pity and admiration. From these walls the dulcet sounds did certainly proceed; Clayton was at all times an enthusiastic admirer of music, and like Marmontel’s Fonrose, he generally carried his flute about with him. He now took it from his pocket, his soul was on his lips, and he longed to breathe forth the dictates of sensibility. The fear however of appearing to treat two unprotected strangers with levity or disrespect, deterred him, and he contented himself with listening to the pensive, and fascinating vocal strains, which the lady now added to her instrument; the words he could not distinguish, but the voice was surely Claudina’s. The improbability of the idea checked the momentary transport it had inspired. “Of late,” he said to himself, “I can never hear of any thing virtuous or delightful, but I associate Claudina with it; and why should I not? she is deserving of far higher praise than I can bestow upon her, shall I then merely refuse it, because I know that from me, it could create in her heart no stronger passion than gratitude?” Whilst he thus argued with himself, the music ceased, and he saw through the white muslin curtain, a female figure walk across the room. Candles were brought in soon after, and he could then plainly discern both the ladies. They were in sable garbs, and one appeared to weep whilst the other hung over her in an affectionate attitude and seemed to be speaking the most soothing language of consolation. He waited some minutes in the hope of being once more gratified with the melancholy harmony, but he was disappointed, for shortly after one of the ladies occupied herself with needlework, and the other seating herself near the table reclined her head upon her hand and apparently abandoned herself to silent meditation. Not expecting to derive much gratification from being a spectator of this scene, particularly through a curtain, he returned home, with the remembrance of Everilda vibrating through his heart, and agitating it with a thousand painful sensations; till the mild image of Claudina appearing like his guardian angel, put every harsher thought to flight. The day after Clayton’s evening ramble, Lady Courtney happened to remark the more than usual paleness and dejection of her faithful friend, who, tho’ she could forbear complaining, could not conceal the ravages which confinement and uneasiness had made in her health. Everilda was equally shocked and distressed at a conviction, which she blamed herself for not having felt before.— “Alas!” said she, “my Claudina, I was not always so selfish, the sense of my own sorrows has destroyed my sympathy for those of others; but I will not suffer you longer to confine yourself so strictly with me; my situation,” added she sighing, “deprives me of the pleasure of accompanying you in your walks, but your account of them will enliven me, and I shall feel very grateful if I can see exercise bestow even a temporary bloom on the cheek, which has been deprived of it by too great a sympathy in my misfortunes.” Claudina’s cheek did,

indeed, gain a temporary bloom as Everilda spoke, conscious that the feelings of her own wayward heart had conduced to rob her of it, but she would not consent to leave her friend alone. To obviate that objection, Lady Courtney sent to beg the favor of Mr. Price’s company, and when he arrived, Claudina bent her steps towards her favorite though deserted walk by the sea shore. It was at that season of the year when the beauties of nature are declining daily. Claudina was particularly sensible of the change which had taken place in the scenery during her long confinement to the house. The change however was not unpleasing to the frame of mind that she was in; the rich and varied hues of the autumnal foliage amply compensated, in her eyes, the loss of its summer freshness; and the cawing of the rooks, as they wheeled round in the air, soothed her feelings into harmony as perfect as could have been inspired by the sweetest notes of all the feathered tribe. When Mr. Price went to Lady Courtney, Sir Edward Clayton strolled to the sea shore to indulge the reflections which pleasingly expand in solitude. He was wandering amongst the cliffs, when turning round one which projected considerably, he saw a female seated on a fragment of rock, and so picturesque were her attitude and situation, that she appeared to his romantic fancy as the figure of Contemplation gazing at the ruins made by the hand of Time. She did not see him, and he knew not whether to advance or to retreat, curiosity dictated the former, politeness urged the latter, but curiosity prevailed, though it is generally imagined that only female minds are subject to her influence. “It is undoubtedly the young emigreé,” he said to himself, “and I shall be able to pronounce on the degree of merit, that she may claim in secluding herself from the world, when I know the degree of beauty which she hides in retirement.” He was however at the moment disappointed, for the young lady hearing the sound of footsteps, hastily arose and proceeded in her walk. She was veiled, and he could not catch a glimpse of her features, which he was the more anxious to do, as he thought her figure and manner resembled those of Claudina. This idea made him quicken his steps. “Yet why should I endeavour to overtake her?” he asked “is an imaginary resemblance on her part, any excuse for an impertinence on mine? let me not shew her that even retirement, cannot protect her from insult:” he paused and slackened his steps, “yet,” continued he mentally, “I would not insult any female, and least of all one whom I know to be unhappy, and believe to be unfortunate; but it is late, she is far from home, and surely there can be no impropriety in my offering to guard her thither,” He then once more quickened his pace, as did the fair one her’s also, but he gained upon her, she heard the near approach of his steps, and condemned herself for having walked so long, and strayed so far. She endeavoured to exert more speed, but it was ineffectual, she saw the shadow of the intruder parallel with her own, and she thought it would be more wise to slacken her pace and suffer him to pass her. Clayton could see her agitation, she trembled alike with fear and with fatigue, but she averted her face, and drew her veil still closer over it. He thought some apology was due from him, “I hope, Madam, I have not alarmed you,” he said, his voice in a moment fixed her attention, she gazed on him as wondering if her thoughts by day, had the power of representing him as perfectly, as he appeared to her in her nightly dreams. “Sir Edward Clayton!” “Claudina!” they exclaimed together, and their hearts at the same instant acknowledged the dominion of the same sentiment. In him it inspired rapture, which beamed in his countenance, and animated his expressions; in her it created confusion, and a thousand nameless conjectures, and regrets. She was not now however so very sorry that she had stayed so far, for as she already

resolved never to see him after that afternoon, if she could avoid it, she was therefore better pleased to have met with him on the seashore, than she would have been to see him in the village, for that would have prevented her walks in future, and she felt within the last few minutes that the air had been of infinite service to her. Claudina still trembled, and her faltering voice betrayed her, Sir Edward remarked it, and reproached himself for having alarmed her; she attributed it entirely to weariness, and he entreated her to take a seat for a few minutes. She complied, but was scarcely seated, when she thought it had the appearance of wishing to prolong the time of his attending her, and the too great caution which betrays the secret it would guard, impelled her to continue her walk. “She has not yet forgiven me,” sighed Sir Edward to himself, “and this unexpected meeting which filled my heart with transport, now only adds to my sorrow by convincing me of the disdain with which I am regarded by her.” The conversation turned on the occurrences that had led to their meeting, Sir Edward deplored afresh the unhappiness he had occasioned, and lamented that one so lovely and captivating as Lady Courtney, should be estranged from society, and her friends, and devote herself to slow consuming sorrow. Claudina felt a sensation in her breast whilst Sir Edward extolled Everilda, which damped the happiness his presence had inspired. For a moment she doubted his declared ignorance of their abode in Llewenmawr, and feared that he might take up his residence there, in the hope of seeing the object of his early and unfortunate attachment. “If so,” she mentally argued, “I must be absolved from my promise of secresy, for never will I be instrumental to the dishonour of my friend, or of her family; and it is a debt I owe to myself and to society, to guard against even the appearance of countenancing vice.” These reflections clouded her brow, and her gravity confirmed Sir Edward in his idea of her dislike. Silence ensued, but at length he broke it by saying “If Lady Courtney’s unhappiness excite my sincerest pity, and add to the contrition I have long felt, what then must be my admiration of the friendship which soothes her with unremitting tenderness, withdrawing from society the most captivating charms, to bury them in a solitude rendered still more dreary, by the despair which you must too often be obliged to witness, without the power of alleviating.” “I am indeed too often agonized by it,” replied Claudina, “and in that consists the severity of my trial. Society I have no merit in renouncing, for it had long ceased to give me pleasure, and in solitude I am at least spared the task of hiding the feelings of the heart under feigned smiles,” a sudden glow animated her pensive features as she spoke, and Clayton looking stedfastly on her, exclaimed. “How is that man to be envied whose merits could make so deep an impression on a heart of so much sensibility and worth! Yet if he be unconscious of his happiness, he is an object of pity, and if knowing, he can still neglect it, he must be not only unworthy of it, but of existence.” The rapid changes of her countenance whilst he spoke, evinced her emotions, tho’ he was ignorant of their source, and he continued, “oh! pardon me if I offend by thus adverting to the confidence with which you once honored me; pardon me I entreat you, for I know not what I would say, let my distraction plead my excuse. I am about to leave England, ah! do me the justice to believe that to serve you in any part of the globe my existence shall freely be spent in your service; nor should I account my life entirely wretched, if its last moments were soothed by the consciousness of having been instrumental to your happiness.” A thousand sensations undefinable and contradictory, struggled in Claudina’s breast, but words could not express any of them, and the fruitless attempt to do it, expired in silence on her trembling lips. Thus the conscious lovers pursued the remainder of their way eloquent even in silence. For know, gentle

readers, that words, the vulgar vehicle by which common characters convey common ideas, are deemed, superfluous by all who are under the dominion of Cupid. They being a race of people wholly different from any other with which we are acquainted, have a language peculiar to themselves, and devote their sublime geniuses to translating smiles, construing glances, and commenting upon sighs. The pleasantest path must however have a termination, and the enamoured pair reluctantly arrived, notwithstanding their lingering steps, at the door of the hall. They would then willingly have recalled the time which they had devoted so entirely to contemplation, but it was too late to correct the taciturnity, which they could now only secretly lament. Sir Edward however at parting pressed Claudina’s hand with fervour, and she, roused from the uniform languor in which her life had lately passed, could not conceal the agitation inspired in her bosom by sensations so delightful, and to which she had been so long a stranger. She forgot the presence of Mr. Price, she forgot the effect which surprise might have on Everilda, she forgot every thing but that she had parted from Clayton, and bursting into tears as she entered the room, she exclaimed, “I have seen him once more, my dear friend, I have seen him,” but soon ashamed of the emotion she had betrayed, she informed Lady Courtney more calmly and circumstantially of her unexpected rencontre; a smile of transient pleasure and hope illumined the countenance of the latter. “Thank God,” she exclaimed, “I trust I shall yet live to see my friend happy, and then will the stillness of the grave be indeed envied by me.” Claudina blushed, having only that moment recollected the presence of Mr. Price who with all the delicate consideration natural to him, had risen to take his leave as soon as he perceived that something interesting had occurred. “No, Mr. Price,” said Lady Courtney, extending her hand to him with inimitable grace. “You must not leave us, I will no longer have any reserve with so valuable and excellent a friend, propriety no less than inclination now calls on me to entreat your acceptance of my confidence. You, my dear,” continued she turning to Claudina “may perhaps wonder to see me so calm, but this inestimable counseller has at length taught me resignation, he has taught me to subdue the impatience of my own reproach, and to submit to the just censure of the world, which before made the remembrance of my misfortunes insupportable: he has taught me to look humbly for pardon to heaven, and in the devout hope of gaining it, I am well contented to bear the punishment which my own follies have inflicted on me.” She then gave a candid account of her life, from the period of her first becoming acquainted with Sir Edward Clayton, down to the time of Claudina’s meeting with him. She did not endeavour to palliate the vanity that had led her to sport with his peace, in permitting the continuance of attentions, which added fuel to his ill- treated flame, but she solemnly denied ever having, even in thought, entertained a sentiment inimical to the honor of her husband whom she adored; “and it is this consciousness which supports me now,” said she, “for vanity is dead within me, and no warmer passion ever prompted my complacency; Sir Edward will be convinced of this when he sees me, my altered appearance will bring conviction to his mind, the delusion to which I, blameably, contributed will vanish, and all his attentions will, I trust, be turned to one infinitely more calculated to make him happy then I was, even when most deserving of his love.”
Mr. Price, as may be imagined, endeavoured to gain Lady Courtney’s consent to inform her friends of her retreat; representing in the most moving terms, the distress that her disappearance must have caused, the joy which any information of her would inspire, and above all, the importance it might be for some of the family to be present at the birth of her child, an

event which she now daily expected. These arguments opened all her wounds afresh, and she wept to excess, though not with
the bitterness which had hitherto accompanied her tears. “Alas! Sir,” she exclaimed, “you know not the exalted character of the friends whom I have offended, their worth makes me feel more painfully my own degradation; ah, even my own dear father and mother, how could I bear to meet their eyes! Alas! they would not reproach me, their conduct to me was marked only by unbounded tenderness, and ill have I requited it by treachery, disobedience, and ingratitude! Indeed I could not, however selfish I may appear by confessing this weakness, I could not bear to see even my child caressed by those who must detest its mother: oh no, suffer me to remain unknown; I may not live long, death will be welcome to me if you, my good sir, and my faithful friend weep over my grave, which should be near to that of her whom you loved; and perhaps at some future period, my child, my dear child, whom already I doat on with a mother’s fondness, may come to shed a tear over my remains, for time will wrap my faults in oblivion, and it will not be taught to despise the memory of its mother when she can no longer offend.”
Mr. Price seeing her so much agitated, forbore to press the subject further at that time, though he could read in Claudina’s dove-like eyes the meek language of gratitude for the earnestness with which he had pressed a suit that he resolved to renew on the first favorable opportunity.