











There, in domestic virtue rich and great,
As erst in public, ‘mid his wide domain,
Long in primeval patriarchal state,
The lord, the judge, the father of the plain,
He dwelt; and with him in the golden chain
Of wedded faith, ylink’d a matron sage
Aye dwelt; sweet partner of his joy and pain, Sweet charmer of his youth, friend of his age, Skill’d to improve his bliss, his sorrow to assuage. WEST. AMONG the innumerable villas which grace the banks of the Arno, in the neighbourhood of Florence, none were more distinguished by elegance than that of the Marchese di Rodalvi, who had early in life resigned the bustle of the world, to enjoy the pleasures of rational retirement, enriched with books, and enlivened by the occasional society of friends, whose cultivated minds, and polished manners were congenial to his own. During six months, the Marchese had considered himself particularly fortunate in having been favoured with a visit from Lord Drelincourt, an English nobleman, to whom he had been attached from his youth, and who had been advised to try the efficacy of a warm climate, towards the restoration of his health, which he had lost by an indefatigable attendance on politics, and vexation from seeing his schemes frustrated and his services neglected. Frederick Augustus Courtney, Baron Courtney, Earl of Drelincourt, was, at this period of our history, forty-seven years of age, tall and of a noble figure, his countenance expressive and thoughtful, tho’ terrible in anger, of which, however, it seldom assumed the appearance; its general character was that of benevolence, tho’ his penetrating dark eyes sometimes darted such inquiring glances, that they, who from conscious depravity could not bear their scrutiny, sought to conceal the embarrassment which it occasioned by calling it designing and morose. But artifice was a stranger to Lord Drelincourt’s breast, and would have been equally abhorred by him as a crime, and despised as a meanness. He thought, with Francis the First, that “foi de gentilhomme,” was the strongest assertion which could be required; and his own spotless honour was a convincing proof, that, from him, it was all that was necessary. A faithful subject, a tender husband, an affectionate parent, and a sincere friend, could Lord Drelincourt be otherwise than respected? When we add, that he was a kind master, an indulgent landlord, the hope of the poor, and the champion of distress; many of our readers will condemn us for exhibiting “a faultless monster which the world never saw;” but we are too well acquainted with human nature to insult their experience by asserting, that we draw a perfect character from real life: no, though we are mortified to confess it, Lord Drelincourt had a fault, which could at times

eclipse all his virtues, “the fault by which e’en angels fell,” was the black bane from which his heart had not been purified. Yet a very large portion of this besetting sin, which held even Lord Drelincourt in thraldom, had its foundation in virtue, mistaken virtue it is true, and carried to excess; but we may venerate the cause though we must condemn the effects. Lord Drelincourt had been brought up with most exalted ideas of his prerogatives, which had produced in him the baneful effects of expecting more, from every one, than any one was inclined to grant. His father, after a licentious and disgraceful youth, of which the follies extended even to middle age, had retired with a ruined constitution, to estates, heavily encumbered by his past extravagancies. He there conceived every day new disgust for his former excesses, and new resentments against those who had called themselves his friends, but who had forsaken him, when they could no longer make him subservient to their designs; though many of them were infinitely his inferiors in rank, fortune, talents, and even virtues, few as he possessed at the time of his associating with them. He married, and entirely renounced the world, collecting all that was useful and desirable from it, into Castle Drelincourt, the seat of his ancestors, where he passed the remainder of his days, endeavouring to atone for his early misconduct by the practice, as he believed, of every duty, and by instilling into his son, the present Earl, who was the only pledge of his union, the knowledge and love of virtue. Unfortunately, the old Earl forgot to mention, that “the excellence, which makes all other excellencies amiable, is humility;” and the young Lord Courtney did not appear likely to know it by intuition; but then, to make amends for this omission, he was constantly warned to preserve inviolate the dignity of his rank; past times were expatiated on with rapture to him, and contrasted with the present age, to guard him against its degeneracy. His youthful imagination was fired with tales of the valour and magnificence of his ancestors, he sighed to see the castle once more filled with armed men, with ladies fair and barons bold; his young head ran on tilts and tournaments, rebellions and sieges, and before he was fifteen years of age, he had learnt to regard every thing modern with contempt or indignation; but what may appear very surprising, a further acquaintance with the world, on which he had looked with disgust from the retirement of Castle Drelincourt, did not contribute to alter his opinion. If any thing more had been necessary to warp the mind of Lord Courtney, and cloud it with prejudice, it would have been effected by the flatteries and absurd conduct of his aunts, the maiden sisters of the Earl, by whose extravagance they had been deprived of their portions, which were unluckily left by their father in his son’s hands, until they should marry; and could we suppose interest ever to influence matrimony, we should fear that the poor ladies in losing their property, lost also the probability of establishing themselves in the married state; certain it is, that from the time in which it was pretty confidently whispered that their brother, perhaps through the hope of changing his luck, had ventured their fortunes at a fashionable gaming house, from that time their admirers grew more respectful in their adorations, which at last ended in that indisputable mark of true love, a timid silence; and the ladies, after having candidly acknowledged for ten years successively, that they should soon be thirty, were obliged to submit to waste the winter of their charms in the seclusion of their brother’s castle; where Lady Maud became a rigid devotee, and inveighed against the vices of the age with a most edifying countenance, in which the mortifications of worldly vanities were strongly depicted;

whilst Lady Bertha, who was worthy of a better state than the cheerless one of celibacy, consoled herself by reading romances, and studying simples. These ladies vied with each other in fondness for their nephew, and whilst his father extolled the past, and Lady Maud railed against the present times, Lady Bertha told him tales of chivalry, compared him to Cyrus, and insisted that he should wear a plume of feathers in his hat. Lady Drelincourt, his mother, who was an amiable and domestic woman, smiled at the different follies of her husband and his sisters, contenting herself with exhorting her son to be punctual in his religious and moral duties, and never to demean himself by an ignoble action; reminding him always, that virtue was true nobility, and that where much was given much would be required. Under the instructions of his aunt Bertha, Lord Courtney became, at a very early age, an adept in the art of love; and the charms of Lord Milbourne’s youngest daughter made a powerful impression on his youthful mind. Lord Milbourne did not reside far from Castle Drelincourt: he was an amiable man, and of considerable talents, but a numerous family and confined income, rendered his residence in the country rather a matter of necessity than of choice; it was, however, regarded as a very fortunate event by the youthful lovers, who were thereby enabled to see each other frequently; and by the time that the lady was thirteen years of age, and Lord Courtney fifteen, the attachment between them became so apparent, that it could not be concealed from the Earl, who thinking that absence might be the most effectual means of conquering this juvenile passion, determined upon a more public education for his son, than he had at first intended; and Lord Courtney, accordingly, left his parental fire-side, to be initiated into the mysteries of Eton College. He there met with the present Marchese di Rodalvi, whose father died a short time before, and he having always expressed a wish that his son should be educated in England, the young Marchese was sent thither by his uncle, who was left his guardian. The friendship of these two young men commenced with their introduction to each other, and was strengthened by going together to the university. After their studies were completed, Lord Courtney gained the Earl’s permission to accompany his friend on the grand tour, from which, however, he was recalled by the afflicting news of his mother’s death, and the dangerous illness of his father. He flew on the wings of filial love, and arrived at Castle Drelincourt, in time to receive his father’s last blessing, and exhortations to preserve inviolate the honour of his ancestors. The young Earl was much affected at the sudden deprivation of both his parents, but Lady Maud checked the violence of his grief, by telling him it was unchristian to “mourn as they without hope,” and that he ought to be grateful that the ravages of death had spared his aunts. As soon as the Earl could bear to think of consolation, he felt that it could be imparted the most effectually by a lovely and virtuous woman. The object of his boyish attachment had never been erased from his mind, and now rose in his estimation on every succeeding interview; he therefore resolved to follow the early impulse of his heart, and in a few months he had the pleasure of requesting his Italian friend to visit England once more, to witness his marriage. The Marchese came; time flew on “pleasure’s rosy pinions;” and when he was obliged to tear himself from the Earl’s fascinating society, which had tempted him repeatedly to countermand the orders that he had been given for his return, he found himself so desolate and solitary, amidst all the gaieties of Florence, that he thought the wisest thing which he could do, would be to follow the example of his

friend, and to enter into the married state, in which he had recently witnessed an enviable degree of felicity. He accordingly soon after led to the altar a beautiful and accomplished woman, whose virtues and society from that time, constituted all his happiness. After this event, the intercourse between the friends became limited, for some time, to the exchange of letters, but they still continued to take the most anxious interest in each others’ concerns: The satisfaction of the Earl in his union would have been complete, but for the vexation occasioned by the failure of male issue. The first addition to his family was a girl, and though he was disappointed, yet parental feelings were too exquisite to leave any sense of mortification. The next year produced another girl, and Lord Drelincourt could not but think that a boy would have been better. The poor babe, as if conscious that it was an un-wished-for guest, drooped and soon left a world where it had not found a kind reception. Lady Drelincourt wept, and regarded the loss of her child as a judgment from heaven for not being contented with its decrees; but she had hopes again, and again produced a female, whose beauty, even from its birth, interested all beholders. Lord Drelincourt remembered his lady’s mortification the preceding year, and disguised his own; but he wrote to his friend, and candidly acknowledged that his disappointment was severely felt. The Marchese’s answer ought to have reconciled him to it: “Whilst you, my dear friend,” said he, “repine at the dispensations of Providence in sending you three daughters successively, the Marchesa and I can scarcely think it possible, that a parent’s sensations should be otherwise than delightful. Alas! they are what we have never known; the want of them is the only imperfection in our domestic happiness, and I see a cloud sometimes come over the lovely countenance of the Marchesa, when we visit those who, more fortunate than ourselves, are enjoying the caresses and endearments of their children. Would that it had pleased Heaven to grant us the little girl, whom you lost! we should not then have one wish incomplete.” Heaven at length heard the prayers of both parties. The Marchesa pressed to her enraptured bosom a lovely girl, in the same month that the Earl was rendered happy by the birth of a son. This joyful event diffused felicity over Castle Drelincourt, where it took place. One of the grooms accidentally met Lady Drelincourt’s woman, and hearing the tidings, ran without any ceremony to acquaint the Earl, who was walking up and down his study in great anxiety. “O my Lord!” exclaimed the poor fellow, almost breathless with the speed that he had made; “the child is born, guess what it is.” The Earl entirely overlooking the unusual familiarity of his domestic, replied in doubting accents, not daring to speak as he hoped, “A girl, perhaps?” “No, my Lord, no,” said the delighted fellow, “it is a boy, a fine boy! and may he live to be as good a master to us as your Lordship is.” The Earl cordially joined in this wish, and dismissing the messenger of the happiest tidings he had ever heard, with a golden testimony of his approbation, he fell on his knees in gratitude to Heaven, returning thanks for the birth of his son, and invoking every blessing on his infant head. Two years after this, another daughter was born, which completed the Earl’s family; and the Marchesa had likewise a son within a year after the birth of her daughter. We shall pass over the succeeding years in silence, in order to resume our narrative at the period when we first introduced the parties to our reader’s notice. Regard the world with cautious eye, Nor raise your expectation high. See that the balanc’d scales be such, You neither hope nor fear too much; For disappointment’s not the thing, ’Tis pride and passion point the sting. Life is a sea where storms must rise, ’Tis folly talks of cloudless skies. He who contracts his swelling sail Eludes the fury of the gale. COTTON. LORD Drelincourt had received such benefit from a winter’s residence in Italy, that he became impatient to return to England; but he was still detained by the reluctance which he felt to leave his friend, whom he might perhaps never see again. At length he resolved to fix a day for his departure, and to request, at the same time, that the Marchese’s son, Edmund, might be permitted to accompany him; “It will soften the pain of our separation, my dear friend,” said the Earl; “in your son, I shall every day be reminded of what you were, when our intimacy commenced, and in that pleasing recollection, I shall forget the distance by which we shall be separated.” The Earl’s request was too kind, and advantageous, for the young Count, to be denied; yet he was so dear to his parents, and his society was so valuable, that it could not be granted without reluctance. But they read in Edmund’s eyes, the desire, natural and praiseworthy in youth, of becoming acquainted with new objects, and they were unable to withstand the slightest appearance of entreaty, for he had never hitherto formed a wish, to which they could not consent with pleasure: it was therefore finally determined, that the Earl should leave the villa, at the expiration of one week, and that Edmund should be the companion of his journey. The Marchesa wept every day, until the arrival of the fatal one, which was to separate her from her beloved son, for the first time since his birth. His sister, the lively Everilda, who was his senior by fifteen months, he had so far gained over to his cause, as even to plead in its behalf, yet, notwithstanding this, when she saw the Earl’s travelling chariot drive up to the door, she threw her arms around her brother’s neck, protesting in an agony of tears that he should not leave her. Arguments were lost on her, for unfortunately, she had not been accustomed to listen to them; and when, at last Edmund was obliged to tear himself by force from her embraces, she was conveyed to her chamber in strong hysterics, and the Marchese and Marchesa forgot their grief for the departure of their son, in anxiety for their beloved daughter, their first-born, the idol of her doating parents. Edmund’s youthful heart soon recovered from the sorrow naturally felt on leaving home, particularly for the first time; a home, too, endeared as his was to him by every indulgence and elegant gratification; but he had hitherto been confined entirely to it, and he now anticipated with laudable ardour, the improvements which he might reap from a change

of scene: nor was his animation lost upon Lord Drelincourt, whose feelings were soothed by the tenderness and sensibility of his young friend. It is not our intention to swell these pages unnecessarily, by a hackneyed description of the places through which our travellers were to pass, as we do not approve of giving to a novel the appearance of a book of modern travels, tho’ modern travels sometimes assume that of a novel. Therefore, whilst they are quietly pursuing their route, and seeing every thing useful or delightful, we shall amuse our readers, by sketching the appearance and disposition of the young man, whom Lord Drelincourt had honoured with his regard. Edmund di Rodalvi was, at this period, in his nineteenth year, of a most engaging figure, tall and slender; it was scarcely possible to see one more finely formed, or where dignity and grace were more happily conspicuous: his complexion was brown, and his visage oval; fine teeth, and most brilliant dark eyes, gave expression to a countenance, which, though sometimes beaming with the most speaking animation, was in general, more interesting from a melancholy sweetness uncommon in a young man, and yet more so in one of his nation; but Edmund was the child of sensibility, his disposition, naturally gentle, had become yet milder under the influence of a domestic education, and it was only on important occasions, that the fire of an Italian darted from his eyes, and shone with resplendence in his countenance. His information, even without taking his youth into consideration, was great, and his accomplishments numerous. In acquiring them, time had flown unperceived, though spent in perfect retirement; but he had contemplated the world at a distance with delight, and now exulted in the opportunity that he should have, of comparing the theory of solitude with the practice of society. Unmolested by any accident, Lord Drelincourt arrived in London with his young companion, who had every day risen in his esteem. They alighted at an elegant house in Berkeley-square, and whilst the Earl’s heart beat with anxious solicitude for his family, Edmund’s experienced an unusual flutter, at the idea of being introduced to those, with whom he was to be an inmate for some months, and on whom he already felt dependant for his future comforts in England. At that moment he reverted to the dear friends whom he had left in Italy, and shall we acknowledge that the recollection of them filled his fine eyes with tears, which we can only beg may be excused, on the consideration of his domestic education and filial affection: absurdities we acknowledge almost unheard of at present. Fortunately, Edmund’s reveries were interrupted by the opening of the door, and the next minute the Earl found himself clasped in the warm embrace of his affectionate son, a young man of engaging appearance, who was immediately introduced to Edmund by the Earl, saying, “This is Lord Courtney, my son:” then turning, added to his son, “The Count Rodalvi, whom I desire you to esteem.” Edmund, pleased with Lord Courtney’s countenance, advanced to offer his hand, but he was mortified to find his overtures received only by a distant bow, and a formal welcome to England. Poor Edmund thought of Italy again, and never felt more forcibly his distance from his friends, than when he heard Lord Drelincourt’s anxious inquiries concerning those dear to him. Lord Courtney informed them, that his mother and sisters were at Castle Drelincourt, and that all the world were in the country, as he had been in town above a week, in expectation of his father’s arrival, and had not met with a single acquaintance. Edmund thought, that amid the numerous crouds of people, they had seen as they entered London, (for it was a fine

Sunday in July), all the world might have met acquaintance, and he began to fear that Lord Courtney was one of the new sect, known in the present day by the name of puppyists, though after the cool reception which he had received from him, he candidly acknowledged to himself, that he could not precisely form an impartial judgment of his character. Lord Drelincourt declared his intentions of setting off the next day to his seat; and Edmund retired to his couch, wisely forgetting his cares by enlisting under the banners of Morpheus. The next morning, Edmund quitted his apartment at so early an hour, that he began to imagine, he should have ample time for solitary reflection, before either of the gentlemen appeared. In a few minutes, however, Lord Courtney entered with so intelligent and benevolent a countenance, that though Edmund had been disappointed in his expectations from it the preceding evening, he could not help forming the same again, and they were now nearly resolved into certainty, by the different style in which he was accosted; friendliness, goodnature, and native sincerity, appeared in every word that the young Lord uttered. Edmund, for a moment, regretted the fickleness which must prompt such different modes of conduct, and then remembered it no longer. Lord Drelincourt, kindly waving his first intention of leaving town immediately, delayed his departure three days longer, to give Edmund an opportunity of viewing the public buildings, and other objects worthy of notice; and as Lord Courtney was very active in his office of cicerone, Edmund saw in that short time enough of the capital to understand the usual topics of conversation, and looked forward with pleasure to the winter, when he should be able to study it with the attention requisite, to become really acquainted with a place containing such varied gratifications for curiosity, and so many inexhaustible sources of information. What so sweet,
So beautiful on earth, and ah! so rare As kindred love and family repose! CASTLE-Drelincourt was situated in the most beautiful and fertile part of Devonshire, and was one of those places which nature and art appear emulous to adorn: whilst the former bestowed on it every advantage of situation, salubrious air, luxuriant woods, and crystal springs; the latter, exulting in her powers, displayed her ingenuity to the utmost extent of the most refined cultivation. By her magic wand, every part of the grounds inspired sensations of tranquillity and admiration, and the hues of the different trees and shrubs, were contrasted with such exquisite variety, or so gradually blended into each other, that the eye was alternately amused and refreshed. The building itself was awfully grand: It had been the residence of the Earls of Drelincourt for centuries. “Time’s gradual touch had mouldered into beauty many a tow’r,
Which when it frown’d in all its battlements Was only terrible; and many a fane monastic, Which when deck’d in all its spires,
Serv’d but to feed some pamper’d abbot’s pride, And awe th’ unlettered vulgar.”
The massy structure of the edifice, plainly told that it had been erected in times, when strength was the only security against oppression. Its situation was admirably adapted to its character. Embosomed deep in woods, it was guarded on every side by hills, gradually swelling into mountains almost inaccessible: on some of the eminences were still seen the ruins of fortresses, that, in former times, had guarded those passes, which if gained by the enemy, would have enabled them to starve the proud castle below into obedience. In the front, the sea bounded the possessions of the Earl, who was particularly attached to this seat of his ancestors, for it had been the scene of many valiant deeds, and in itself possessed every magnificence, and comfort, whilst the surrounding country was fine, and rich in noble seats. The party arrived at the castle towards the evening of the day after they left London. The congratulations of the domestics, were fervent though respectful, and were received with great complacency by Lord Drelincourt, who in a few minutes had the pleasure of embracing his Lady and daughters. The most heartfelt delight beamed in the Earl’s eyes, and tears of tenderness suffused those of the ladies. Whilst they overwhelmed him with caresses and inquiries, poor Edmund who felt himself rather overlooked in the hurry of the scene, after the first congratulations, amused himself by studying the countenances of the ladies, who composed the Earl’s family, he began with Lady
YOUNG. Drelincourt, whose matronly figure happily united tenderness and dignity; an air of serene gravity spread itself over her features; the general expression of which, was calculated to gain the esteem and affection of all who studied it. Her eldest daughter, Lady Rosamond Courtney, next claimed attention; this lady was at that age, when the features begin to gain in expression, what they may perhaps lose in bloom, she had nearly attained her twenty-sixth year, but although she united every elegant accomplishment, and great information, to a face and figure of the first class beauty, she still remained unsolicited in marriage; and a sense of the injustice shewn to her charms, threw a cloud over her fine features, which sometimes betrayed a degree of hauteur, increased in proportion as she thought herself neglected. She was of a commanding height, and the whole style of her beauty, was that of the majestic haughty Juno, strongly contrasting with the yet more perfect, and truly feminine charms of Lady Maria, the second daughter, who was now reclined on a sofa, from which she had only risen for a few moments to embrace her father; an air of langour appeared in her, which would seem to have been caused by indisposition, had not a complexion fair as alabaster, and of brilliant clearness, heightened by a fine peach-like bloom, forbidden the idea. Her blue eyes were shaded by long silken brown lashes, and a few ringlets of the same colour, played on her polished forehead, whilst the broad lace of her cap, added delicacy to the features, which it partly concealed. Altogether Edmund thought that he had never seen so lovely a woman, and he might have gazed on her much longer, had not his eyes met those of the object whom he was admiring, and he hastily turned them from her, to the youngest daughter, Lady Emma, whom Lord Courtney had called to partake of his chair, and who was listening to her father, with a countenance of such animated sweetness, that Edmund wondered how he could have overlooked it before, and on a more minute examination, he was delighted with its sensibility and intelligence. She was simply attired in a muslin frock, her flaxen hair curled in natural ringlets, which were chiefly fastened by a comb, though a few escaped their confinement to sport upon her ivory neck; her eyes were of a darker blue than her sister Maria’s, and the lashes were yet more beautiful. The bloom in her cheeks was perhaps more interesting, by not being permanent, for in general the lilly was predominant, but when ever she spoke, or met the eye of admiration or attention, the rose, faithful to its trust, returned in its liveliest tints, and proclaimed itself the herald of the most attractive innocence, and unaffected modesty; her figure was petite, but formed by the hand of symmetry, and every movement was dictated by ease and natural grace. Such were the females to whom Edward had been introduced, when their first emotions began to subside, the parties retired to dress for dinner, after which, the remainder of the day was passed en famille, and before it was over, Edmund began to feel quite at home, in the amiable and accomplished family circle, by which he was surrounded. We have said that the Earl was partial to the seat of his ancestors; he was indeed never so happy as when at Castle Drelincourt, and anxious to make all connected with him share in his pleasure, he spared no expence, or indulgence, which could make the country desirable for a residence. The day after his arrival, he began to concert schemes for the amusement, and gratification of his family, and proposed to celebrate his return to England, by giving an entertainment and ball, to the surrounding nobility and gentry, from whom, congratulations and inquiries poured in, as soon as the Earl was known to be at the castle. Cards were accordingly sent out, and the intermediate time was agreeably

employed by Edmund, in examining the books, and paintings, of which the Earl had a fine collection, and every room proclaimed the literary taste of its possessor, whilst the elegance of the decorations, and appropriate ornaments, reflected the highest credit on the ladies, under whose directions they were executed. Lady Rosamond designed admirably, and one room was appropriated to a series of her drawings from Milton’s works. This room was fitted up with peculiar neatness, and in it the ladies assembled in the mornings, when they did not choose to be alone; it communicated with the library on one side, and on the other with a noble gallery, in which were a variety of musical instruments, and which was chiefly devoted to the delights of harmony. Edmund every day gained esteem in the family, and every day became more tenderly attached to it. Lord Courtney treated him with the most unreserved friendship, and begged that he might no longer be addressed by his title, as the sound of your lordship, threw an air of ceremony over their most confidential discourses. The character of this young Lord, though abounding in inconsistencies was truly amiable: he had great abilities, and a quickness of perception almost incredible, which might have rendered him one of the first characters of the day, but it was unhappily blended with such versability of pursuit, that no science, or talent, was thought of by him longer, than whilst he was acquiring it. He played brilliantly, but could never practise long enough to do it with correctness. He had a taste for drawing, but by the time he had laid his implements ready for sketching his outlines, he recollected an engagement, and his imperfect design was reserved for completion at some more distant period. He spoke French, Italian and German, with fluency and strict grammatical propriety; he was an excellent classic, and had a taste for composition, both in prose and verse; he would sometimes be seized with a love of study, which would confine him to his library for weeks, in which time he would begin twenty different subjects, proceed happily through the greater part of his discussions, and finish none of them. He rapidly acquired a knowledge of natural history and chemistry, and when acquired, he as rapidly laid the pursuit of them aside. He had likewise a turn for mechanics, and experimental philosophy, in short, there was scarcely either art or science, on which he could not speak, at least well enough to prove, that very little attention would enable him to fully comprehend the subject in debate. His disposition was as various, as were his acquirements, he could pass alternately “from grave to gay, from lively to severe,” he would one moment hold a serious argument with a lady on the trimming for her dress, and the next learnedly discuss with a scholar, the loves of Dido and Eneas. He was naturally generous even to prodigality, disdained a mean action, was warm in his affections, and sincere in his attachments. He had however been not a little spoiled by the unlimited indulgence shewn to him from infancy, in consequence of which, though health and spirits, gave him the appearance of uninterrupted good humour, it was yet depending often on the caprice of the moment, and was, like that of many others, the most apparent when he was the most pleased. But his parents were very happy in him, and were with reason proud of his acquirements, his father as a literary man, was gratified with his taste for reading and composition, and the praises, which had been justly bestowed on some of his most finished attempts in the latter, gave the highest pleasure to the Earl, who rightly thought, that a man of rank ought at least to be a patron, and judge of literature, and of the

fine arts. His mother was delighted with his pleasing appearance and manners, and could not conceal from him, that she thought him one of the finest young men of the age, in which Henry perfectly coincided, but laughed at the same time, with such vivacity, that his sisters knew not whether he meant to declare his own opinion, or goodnaturedly to ridicule that of Lady Drelincourt. The Earl rejoiced that his son had no taste for inferior company; on the contrary he was perhaps too fastidious, for his own family united so many pleasing accomplishments to solid information, and polished manners, that he expected from others, more than it was probable he should find, and disappointment sometimes gave rise to ill-founded disgust. Edmund was a companion the most suited to his taste of any that he had ever seen, not that their dispositions were exactly similar, but as discords heighten harmony in music, so the pensive tenderness of Edmund’s temper formed an agreeable contrast to the volatile warmth of Henry’s; their attachment every day gained strength, and at last Edmund told his friend, how much he had been hurt by the coldness with which he had been at first received by him. “My dear fellow,” replied Henry with his usual frankness, “I saw immediately that I should esteem you, but I confess that my father’s manner was not likely to make me do it more willingly, “This is the Count Rodalvi whom I desire you to esteem,” his determined style of speaking piqued me, and I resolved not to comply immediately with his desire, though I mortified myself by delay.” This little explanation set Edmund at ease, as before it took place, his pleasure in Henry’s friendship was sometimes damped, by a fear of its inconstancy. With a temper so amiable, conduct so irreproachable, and talents so promising as we have described, it is almost unnecessary to add that Lord Courtney constituted the delight of his family, and that all the Earl’s ideas and expectations of felicity, had their source in this beloved and valuable son. “Swift to reward a parent’s fears
A parent’s hopes to crown,
Roll on in peace ye blooming years That rear him to renown:
When in his finished form and face, Admiring multitudes shall trace, The beauties of his line combin’d; The courteous yet majestic mien, The liberal smile the look serene, The great and gentle mind.”



Up springs the dance, along the lighted dome Mixed and involved a thousand sprightly ways! The glittering court effuses every pomp,
The circle deepens, beam’d from gaudy robes, Tapers and sparkling gems, and radient eyes
A soft effulgence o’er the palace waves.