A wise physician, skill'd our wounds to heal,
Is more than armies to the public weal. POPE'S HOMER. IT was, indeed, but too true, that it was Frederic Harrington who now lay, to all
appearance, in the agonies of death, at Mr. Marsham's farm-house. The desire of again
seeing his beloved Mary once more before he sailed, the letter from his uncle, concerning
the fatal masquerade, made him resolve to gratify, if possible. To approach her in disguise, to assure himself of her constancy and affection
towards him, urged this impetuous young man, whose passions and predilections were all
hasty, and in the extreme, to make this rash attempt; and in order to effect his purpose, he
requested to pass the day and sleep on shore. The wind was unfavourable, and appeared likely to continue so; and as the
commander in chief of the expedition was not expected to arrive till the third day after,
his too indulgent commanding officer granted him the favour he requested. Frederic Harrington had formerly contracted a friendship with a German officer of
rank, and who happened to be quartered near the place of embarkation; and to avoid all
the delays of procuring a habit, Harrington borrowed a complete equipment from him,
which he knew would sufficiently disguise and ensure him from all suspicion; and taking
post-horses, he stopped not till he arrived at an inn, a few miles distant from Eglantine;
where he halted to equip and refresh himself. As he was passing to the chamber to which he meant to change his dress, he saw
the servant of a general officer with whom he was well acquainted, passing with some
hurry to another apartment, while the well-known voice of the General struck his ear as
he said, "Well, bring my things, that I may dress immediately; for if the only pair of
horses, as they tell you, are engaged, by heaven, I must walk to the masquerade; for go I
will." Frederic was fearful of being known, yet he wished to oblige a friend; and
therefore sent a billet to this effect:
"A gentleman who is going to Lady Caroline Leslie's masked-ball, has engaged
the only horses left: very urgent reasons render him desirous of being concealed! If
General Rainham will pardon the writer of this note waiting on him in a mask, he will
feel himself happy to accommodate General R. with a seat in his chaise." The General, who had also his private reasons for wishing to be concealed, who
went only from curiosity, and to say he had been at a masquerade given by an ecclesiastic,
a very rare divertissement at the houses of our clergy, since the days of the famous


Cardinal Wolsey, gladly accepted the offer, and returned for answer, "that he hoped to be
favoured with the same indulgence of being equally an incognito from the shield of a
mask to his polite escort." The winning Harrington soon made his haughty companion desirous of continuing
the fellowship through the evening, and they seldom quitted each other, except in those
moments when Frederic offered his homage to the idol of his fond regards; and it was not
long before he found out the unobtruding Mary, amongst a crowd of fashionable
insensibles and awkward imitators amongst the girls of fortune in the country. In time, the perverse Frederic, well skilled in the knowledge of the female world,
perceived the interest he had excited; and that interest he discovered was not felt for
Frederic Harrington, but for one apparently a stranger and a foreigner! and Frederic began
to be jealous of himself! For though he proved his own irresistibility, yet as Mary had no
idea that it was really him, he fancied he plainly saw an inconstancy in her nature, which
though he felt himself more in love with her than ever, made him shudder; for he had
resolved, nor did he yet feel inclined to change his resolution, to make Mary his own, by
the indissoluble ties of marriage. The champaign at the side-board was exquisite; the General and he did ample
credit to it: the heat of the room made them insensible of the quantity their thirst caused
them to quaff; and the fatigue of Harrington's journey, with the little sustenance he had
taken, made the wine operate in that degree, which though not amounting to intoxication,
yet shewed its heating effects in captious irascibility. Not choosing to mix more than he could avoid with the company, the General was
the person on whom he vented his ill-humour, and the altercation before mentioned took
place, and which had been often previously debated by these two very contending parties
in the St. James's coffee-house, and in which Harrington knew he* was correct in his
information. General Rainham, however, equally convinced in his own mind, that he was
right, and being equally flushed with wine, went out immediately with Frederic; and their
travelling pistols being loaded, they retired to a meadow, belonging to Mr. Marsham, just
as the
"Grey dawn began to dapple the east." Edward followed as quick as possible, but he was too late to prevent the fatal rencontre,
and arrived only in time to see the Hussar fall, bleeding, with an heavy groan. The combatants had not yet unmasked. The General took off his, and said, as his
reason returned with the horrid effects of the dispute, "O God! who is it that I have
killed?" Edward uncovered the face of Frederic, but not yet, from the partial light of the
opening morning, being able to distinguish his features, said, "Alas! sir, I know not; but
whoever you are, fly, while flight is in your power; preserve your own life: and may
length of years be given you for deep repentance, that you have shortened those of
another!" *Historique. *Historique. *Historique. General Rainham, however, in all the uncurbed agony of grief, refused to abscond,
until he had first brought a surgeon to this unhappy victim of fashionable punctilio. Mr. Alberry, a man of humanity and whose secrecy might be relied on, was the
chief, and almost the only practitioner in the village: he instantly obeyed the summons,
and pronounced the wound to be fatal, and the utter impossibility of the patient surviving
it many hours; and again exhorting, and then not in vain, the General to ensure his safety
by flight. Mr. Alberry, with the assistance of Edward Marsham, bore the unfortunate
Frederic Harrington to the farm-house, where soon the agonized sight of Edward was
convinced he saw in the wounded young man, the nephew of his brother Charles's best
benefactor; and indeed the senses of Frederic not being yet fled, soon made him inform,
in broken sentences, the anxious Curate who he was, and who, notwithstanding the bodily
anguish he endured, yet ardently enquired which way was the wind? and bitterly sighed,
at the idea of not being able to join his regiment. The famous village surgeon and apothecary, Mr. Alberry, was a man of a warm
and benevolent heart; and had his medical skill been proportionate to the excellent
qualities of that seat of feeling, he would have been the first in his profession. By practising in the Marshams' family from their infancy, he was a competent
judge of their constitutions; he therefore never mistook complaints, which were in general
very slight, and the volume of Buchan which lay in his parlour-window, always furnished
him with proper remedies for the young people*. Two chirurgical operations, which he
had performed, served to establish his fame, beyond a possibility of doubt, in the village;
one was the amputation of a leg, the first he had performed, without the assistance of, or
consultation with another surgeon: and though his lopping off that useful member
happened to be premature, yet, as no one knew any thing about that, and the patient being
a fine young man of three-and-twenty, possessed of an Herculean strength of constitution,
the wonderful operation was spoken of with great admiration of the doctor's talents, all
through the village and its environs. The next was on his own infant son, who had the
misfortune to be born with a hare-lip: parental anxiety called forth all his energies, all his
watchfulness: after he had closed it and fastened down the sides with the finest needles,
he sat whole nights waking, with the child on his knees, to lull it to sleep, and prevent its
cries from breaking the fragile and delicate closure; convinced that the care, patience, and
anxiety of a parent alone, could keep the eyes from being closed in sleep for many
succeeding nights. The boy, cured of this defect, grew uncommonly handsome; and the fame of Mr.
Alberry spread far and wide: what served to establish it more firmly with the Marshams,
was his certain prognostics of Mrs. Edward Marsham's early death and consumptive
habits, long before her friends had imagined her health to be in any way declining: not
that the lady was at all consumptive, though naturally delicate; and a severe labour with
her youngest daughter had been the sole cause of her demise in the bloom of her life. This, however, made him a croaking doctor; and if he had not all the skill, he had
a great deal of the art of his profession: he always appeared to apprehend his patients to
be in imminent danger; and of which he found the good effects: if the sick person died,
his judgment was undoubted; if he recovered, the greater were his medical powers. A ball he had never extracted in his life, and he was afraid now to venture: at any
rate, he really felt assured in his own mind that the present patient must die from the
effects of his wound alone, and therefore he would not attempt the extraction, but
declared it was impossible that it could be extracted. Sir Edward Harrington, however, instantly dispatched with all speed a message to
one of the most eminent surgeons in London, and who had always attended his family, to
hasten to Eglantine immediately. After the above account of Mr. Alberry, the reader will, no doubt, entertain some
hopes of Frederic Harrington's recovery; the wound in his shoulder was certainly a very
bad one, but he was not mortally wounded, though the violent agitation of his mind, and
the fatigue he had undergone, combined to bring on a fever, which would inevitably
prove dangerous, without the strictest care and attention. The agonies of Sir Edward's mind may be felt, but can neither be described, nor
even conceived, except by those who might chance to be placed in a similar situation: the
wind had changed, the commandant had joined, and the expedition had sailed! The
accident which had happened to his nephew, prevented him, not only from distinguishing
himself in the field of honour, but it would fix a stain on his military character, which, if
he recovered, could never be thoroughly obliterated, from his being absent at such a
momentous crisis, merely to enjoy the pleasures of a private masquerade; for he had yet
to learn the state of his nephew's heart with regard to Mary; and even had he then known
it, the impetuosity of impulsive feeling, and the want of government in the passions of his
nephew, would have caused this truly parental uncle to be only the more offended at his
conduct: but added to this, his wounded honour, was the bitterly afflicting idea of the
danger of that life, in which his own might be said to be bound up. He was too ready,
from his own anxious fears, to believe the ill report made by Mr. Alberry, and the
dreadful idea that his Frederic would be snatched from him for ever, excluded all
inclination for food or rest, till the arrival of the skilful and worthy Dr. Ch-dl-r from
London. This dispenser of the healing art, possesses, with the most unrivalled medical and
chirurgical abilities, the most feeling and gentle heart; his manners are a sweet compound
of mildness and tenderness, and his soothings and kindness equally restore the diseased to
health, with his excellent prescriptions: he always urges, and alas! how few, like him,
make it a matter of real importance-how requisite it is, that the mind should be at ease,
to keep the body in continued sanity. His polite and gentle manners ameliorate the
situation of the sick person at each of his visits. Accept, worthiest of thy profession,
accept the humble and grateful tribute of praise offered to thee, by the author of this
essay, who, for sixteen years since the time she first and last sought thy healing aid for a
slow and undermining fever, has enjoyed an almost uninterrupted series of pure and
regular health, that first of all earthly blessings. Unswayed by sordid interest, and only
alive to the welfare of his fellow-creatures, this excellent man often refuses the golden
fee, and visits only as the generous friend! His fortune is large, and he employs it in doing
good: what pity that such a man should be childless! All the present inmates of the farm-house rejoiced at his arrival; for he soon
imparted hope, in regard to the wound, and extracted the ball without difficulty; but still
expressed anxiety about the fever of his patient, which he could tell, by many incoherent


sentences that Frederic uttered during his deliriums, had been chiefly heightened by
mental agitation. Mr. C-- therefore, told all who attended him, that to make his mind
easy and tranquil, must be their most important care; and that they must grant him every
indulgence his feelings might require: and observing, after a few visits, the smiling
satisfaction of his patient, at the approach of Mary, and how readily and gratefully he took
all that her hand administered, he requested that she might be his chief attendant. If Frederic had never loved before, the tenderness of his Mary's attentions to him,
the pallid hue of her anxious and interesting countenance, would have fixed him her
captive. Sir Edward, yet unsuspicious of their mutual attachment, blessed her, as a
ministering and health-dispensing angel: nor was the compassionate Margaret, in these
kind instances, much less an object of his admiration. The delicate-minded Dr. Ch-dl-r, often affected to consult with the country
apothecary, about the state of the wounded Frederic, that his feelings might not be hurt,
and gave him in private, in the sweetest and gentlest manner, many friendly hints of
advice, which the good heart of Alberry felt peculiarly grateful for. Dr. C-- let him
have also all the merit he could, in the increasing amendment of the patient: thus, though
Alberry acknowledged every where, that none but a surgeon of the most consummate
skill and courage would have dared to have been so desperate as to have extracted the
ball, which was one of those remedies he was not fond of, namely, kill or cure; and
indeed, his medicines (for Dr. C-- ordered them all from his shop) had done wonders,
in saving a man who stood on the very threshold of the grave!-thus the medical fame of
Mr. Alberry was established at Eglantine on surer grounds than ever. These violent delights have violent ends,
And in their triumph die; the sweetest honey
Is loathsome, in its own deliciousness, and
In the taste, confounds the appetite: therefore
Love moderately; long love doth so;
Too swift arrives as tardy, as too slow. SHAKSPEARE. WHILE these events were passing at Eglantine, Lady Isabella Emerson and Major
Raymond were so far advanced on their northern journey, that it was easily conceived all
attempts to pursue them would be vain; and it was equally vain to urge, in the most
strenuous manner, Sir Charles Sefton, whose large fortune could support the expence of
extraordinary speed in the pursuit, to follow and prevent this ill-placed marriage; in vain
they told him that it was only the rash haste of their sister's temper, in some jealous
pique, and that they were sure she loved no one but their dear Sir Charles Sefton: no, Sir
Charles assured them, with much sang-froid, that since Lady Isabella had evinced her
affection for another, and had made use of himself only as a tool to accomplish her
purpose, no power on earth should compel him to wed such a woman, and he was
resolved to think no more of her. He then hastened to quit the acquaintance of the Leslies
as fast as possible, though if he ever after met them in parties of fashion, he has always
affected to be very glad to see them, and deplore the misfortune of not meeting them
oftener; and even Lady Isabella he could have seen with all the nonchalance of a man of
the world, as if she never had been in idea the mistress of his once most ardent affections. Mr. Leslie made a violent bustle, and a show of pursuit; but which ended in a
quick return, and a declaration that they had taken a different route, and that now it was
impossible to trace them. The village had ample food for conversation, at all the tea and whist parties in the
vicinity: Lady Wringham, her husband, and those she could trust, said she always thought
Lady Isabella a proud, forward puss; though in some companies she would, like Mrs.
Candour, draw up her head, and "say nothing." But at every party was canvassed over
Lady Isabella Emerson's elopement, and Mr. Harrington's duel, with they wondered who! Various were their conjectures of the unknown person, who had taken himself off, no one
could tell whither: no doubt but the Curate knew who he was that wounded Mr.
Harrington; only he was always so cautious of mentioning names: but the Curate did not
know; and the truly honourable Frederic Harrington would tell no one; no, not even his
uncle. The scandal also of having a masquerade at a clergyman's, was inveighed against;
and that most by those who had most enjoyed the entertainment. Lady Caroline, having
no one now to pidgeon, passed her hours of discontented leisure in acrimonious speeches
and remarks to Mrs. Kennedy; which though that lady found convenient to bear with for a


time, so that she might be able to take a journey in the barouche in style, and free of
expence, yet she resolved, when they removed from Eglantine, to remove herself to where
she might be treated with a little more politeness. The Rector again talked nonsense to
Lucy Ringwood, for Mary Marsham was inaccessible. Fashionable cards of enquiry and
condolence arrived every day from the parsonage to Sir Edward Harrington; and in a few
days, the Honourable and Reverend Theodore Leslie left the care of the living to his
worthy Curate: before those few days were expired, Major Raymond received the hand of
his beautiful and dashing Isabella. They hastened back as fast as post-horses could carry them, to Mr. Leslie's rectory
near London, to throw themselves on the mercy of Lady Isabella's relations: she was
received with forgiveness, and some portion of kindness; but the Rector and his lady
peremptorily refused to see Major Raymond. "Pay me, then, the residue of my fortune,
sir," said the spirited lady, "which I suffered, when I became of age, to lie in your hands;
the Major and myself were both of age when we married, and you cannot withhold it from
me: nothing but the tedious delays of the commons in granting licences, and my being so
persecuted with that odious lover of your choosing, the detestable, or as he thinks himself
delectable, Sir Charles Sefton, forced me away; otherwise I need not have taken a
fatiguing and expensive journey, but have been married at home; but I liked the frolic of
it, and was made a wife also by the church of England as I returned from Scotland, the
honest clerk giving me away, and his daughter making her mark, poor girl, as a witness,
because she could not write her name. So now, my good brother and sister, you have the
whole history of Isabella Emerson's marriage, now Lady Isabella Raymond. All I have
now to add, is, that I expect prompt payment of the remainder of my fortune; it will
support me for a little while, as the most dashing officer's wife in Raymond's regiment:
after that, let come what will; a short life and a merry one, is my maxim; and when life is
no longer a scene of pleasure, but, on the contrary, replete only with trouble and
pecuniary difficulties, it is easily laid down." She then, with much haughty indignation,
wished them a good morning, telling the Rector to leave the money for her with her
banker; for in whatever house her Raymond was not allowed to accompany her, never
would she enter again. More thunderstruck at her hasty demand, than at that independent manner, to
which they had been long accustomed, the Reverend Theodore Leslie and his lady
regarded each other: the fortune, they knew, must be paid, and they had taken the fraternal
freedom of borrowing, without asking the possessor, two or three thousand pounds! What
must they do? They agreed, after some little consultation, to see Raymond; put a good
face on the matter; ascribe their anger to the haste only of the moment; give them a
couple of thousands for the present, and tell them the remainder should be forthcoming in
a very short time. But Lady Isabella, once offended, did not so easily forgive; and, with a degree of
mortifying condescension to her sister and brother-in-law, informed them, by letter, she
could wait a few months for the remainder, if they would order her three thousand pounds
immediately, and without again seeing them, or even mentioning husband to them, she
accompanied him to join his regiment, still quartered within a few miles of Eglantine. Major Raymond, as has been said before, was young, handsome, and, pour le
moment, could be very insinuating; but his mind was weak, vain, and wavering; with an


understanding too shallow to continue long the man, according to Lady Isabella's taste,
who, in an husband, certainly looked for a being superior to herself; and no one, but such
a being, could make her endure a state she had always from her heart despised, that of a
wife.-A rash moment of pique against Frederic Harrington, the wish to be rid entirely of
the persecutions of her friends, in regard to Sir Charles Sefton, who became every day
more and more odious to her, particularly since his attachment to Margaret, urged her to
fly to marriage with a man whose person she liked, and whom she admired for the
present, for those mental qualities she thought him possessed of, but which consisted only
in sentimental imitations learnt by rote, and all the acquired accomplishments of
Raymond were the mere flash of the moment, and soon worn out. Though, to answer her
own purpose, Lady Isabella had encouraged Sir Charles in his designs against Margaret,
yet it so shewed to her the depravity of his heart, to pursue such an intrigue, while he was
on the point, as he thought, of leading herself to the altar, and argued such a want of
feeling and principle, that though her own mind was far from correct, yet it was too great
to ally itself to such a compound of fashionable licentiousness. Major Raymond belonged to a regiment in which there were but very few married
men; and the officers' wives were women of remarkably correct and exemplary manners,
not very young, and by no means handsome. Major Raymond waited with ardour and
impatience, when he could shew off his dashing and beautiful wife; and with a very small
fortune, very little more than his military pay, and his wife's three thousand pounds that
he had just received from Mr. Leslie's banker, he commenced living at the rate of five
thousand a year. He obtained on credit a most elegant barouche, and with his captivating partner,
joined the regiment in high style, took a magnificent house and gardens, and furnished his
side-board with massy plate, on the same precarious certainty of paying for it when he
could. Nothing could exceed the splendour of his establishment, nor the expensive and
fashionable parure of her Ladyship: nothing was spoken of but the prodigious fortune of
Lady Isabella Raymond, her beauty and her elegance; but she soon perceived that her
Raymond was not the man formed by love and nature to make her happy; she hated the
state she had embraced; and in a few weeks, Major Raymond perceived, notwithstanding
the playful variety of her attractions, that her beauty was become familiar to him, and no
longer new; he shuddered at the prospect of her expence, and perceived already he had
contracted enormous debts through her means, which he should never be able to pay. In the mean time, she fled to a series of dissipation of the most extravagant kind,
to banish every species of thought, if possible, from her mind, and which dissipation was
so incorrect, that it bordered on licentiousness; yet such was the fascination of her
manners, and such her splendour and expence, that she met with many who imitated her,
more who censured her, and not one who could applaud a conduct which appeared to set
all decorum, all morality and religion at defiance: for Lady Isabella, as a wife, was
infinitely more conspicuous, and apparently indecorous, than in her single state. Leaving Major Raymond to the felicity of his wedded situation, it is time to revert
to the wounded Frederic: hourly did he amend and promise again to bless the fond hopes
of those by whom he was beloved, with his speedy recovery: but as his health increased,


so the ever uncurbed affections of Frederic increased towards Mary, and the unchecked
ardour of his desire to be indissolubly united to such sweetness and amiability. He dreaded, however, to make known the state of his heart to his uncle: for he
knew, that though Sir Edward despised all haughtiness and improper pride, yet that he
was very averse to unsuitable marriages; and also, that he was, like COELEBS, though
not for himself, but for this his dear nephew, in continual "search of a wife," who should
add birth and fortune to accomplishments and virtue. The agitation of Frederic's mind, with the secret buried in his bosom, of his love
to Mary, and eager to disclose itself, brought on a fresh attack of his fever; and, on the
calling in again of Dr. C--, his anxious relative and friends found his life despaired of
by that skilful physician. Frederic intreated, with a firmness which surprised his uncle, (for though he never
doubted his courage, yet he well knew, that firmness was not the leading virtue in the
mind of his nephew,) that the Doctor would not conceal from him, if he thought there
were the least symptoms of danger in his case. Edward Marsham, with christian
preparation only in view, seconded the patient's request. "Yes, worthiest of men," said Frederic, feebly grasping his hand, "I wish to die in
the sacred communion of the church; but I have also other motives which impel me to be
thus earnest with this excellent physician." Dr. Ch-dl-r, in terms the most tender and delicate, though contrary to his
always received opinion, of kindly keeping up the spirits of his patients to the last, by a
flattery the most laudable on the part of a physician, told him there certainly was apparent
danger. Frederic, then turning to his uncle, said, "I have, my dear sir, an independent
fortune, and I wish to make my will." His uncle acquiesced in the mournful, though
proper proposal; but scarcely had he dispatched his orders for the village attorney to
attend, when Frederic said, "Now, sir, I will not die with a secret in my bosom, which has
been some time concealed there from you, which now greatly oppresses and agitates my
mind; and ere I quit this life, I entreat that Mary Marsham may survive me only as my
widow, (until she shall please to bestow her hand elsewhere); and that I may call her
mine, by marriage, before I die." Amazement sat on the countenance of Sir Edward, for he well knew that his
nephew had always an abundant share of pride; and besides, he had felt almost certain
that he was deeply enamoured of Lady Isabella Emerson, and that the report of her
marriage with Major Raymond, which had then reached Eglantine, had increased his
fever: for the immediate and present news of the success of our expedition against
Flushing had been kept from him, lest the anguish of disappointment and regret at being
absent on the glorious occasion, might have endangered and retarded his convalescence. The tremor, however, of Mary, her blushes, and the perfect state in which were the senses
of his nephew, spite of the ardency of his fever, and the severity of his indisposition,
convinced Sir Edward that this predilection had taken place for some time, though totally
unsuspected by him. The request of a dying man was sacred; instant consent was given; and leading the
weeping Mary to the bed-side, Sir Edward joined their hands, and said, "Be blest, my
children! and, oh! may HE, to whom all things are possible, restore you, my beloved


Frederic, to life, that ye may long be happily united by the sweet bonds of mutual
affection!" He then acted the part of a father to Mary, and requested the worthy curate,
Edward Marsham, to bind them in that state, which nought but death can separate; and
the ring which had united him to the mother of Mary, was now put on the finger of her
daughter, who had the sad prospect before her, of being a widow on the day she was made
a bride! After the arrival of the lawyer, Frederic bequeathed all his remaining fortune to
his lovely wife, except a few trifling legacies to her family and his uncle: and much
exhausted with the conflicting scenes of the day, sank back on his pillow, and giving a
deep sigh, faintly exclaimed, "I shall now die most happy!" Mary gave a shriek, and fainted in the arms of Sir Edward, who, from his own
grief and agitation, was scarcely able to afford her his support. "Be not thus alarmed,"
said the worthy doctor, "he is not yet gone; it is, perhaps, a crisis in his disorder, which,
instead of hastening his demise, may, with care and the most delicate caution, restore him
to life: leave him alone with me, and suffer him not to experience the least agitation of the
mind and spirits; if you remain here, that agitation will be so violent, that I cannot answer
for his life another hour. An indescribable terror had seized the mind of Mary during the performance of
the solemn ceremony; nor did it entirely proceed from the mournful idea of her being only
wedded to the man she loved, as he lay at the point of death; no, a fatal presage seemed to
speak conviction to her sinking heart, that should it please the Almighty to work almost a
miracle in her favour, by restoring him to life, she should never know happiness in an
union with Frederic Harrington. Benevolent and good as was his uncle, Sir Edward, she
yet could see a reluctant pride seated on his brow as he gave her away; and though, with
its awe-inspiring circumstances, the event particularly required seriousness, yet the
gravity of her father's countenance was not only tinctured with the grief he must naturally
feel at such a moment, but it was replete with a high degree of vexation and inquietude. Such was the marriage of the interesting Mary, and, too fatally for her future peace, was
verified by her present predictions. To the great joy of Sir Edward, the disorder of his nephew, after an alarming
crisis, took a favourable turn: youth, a naturally excellent constitution, and having the
first and ardent wish of his heart fully satisfied, his recovery was as rapid as it was
astonishing. His youthful bride blamed her fears, imputed them only to nerves, perhaps
debilitated by anxious watchings, and now began to think, in spite of a coolness and
gravity on the part of Sir Edward, which sometimes a little disconcerted her, that no
happiness on earth was equal to hers, in thus being so soon, and so unexpectedly united to
the object of her first and only love. Frederic, for the present, felt rapture unfeigned;
riches, titles, honours, all were despised, all seemed poor when he pressed his Mary to his
bosom; and in those fond moments, he had no other wish than to dwell with her for ever,
amongst the rural scenes of pastoral life; and he then felt, that he could, without a sigh,
resign all the gay scenes of fashion and elegance, to which he was once so devoted, and in
which he had generally taken not only a shining, but a conspicuous part. His uncle purchased, and presented it to Mrs. Harrington, an elegant cottage near
her uncle's farm, till the health of Frederic should be perfectly re-established: but she


could not forbear remarking, in spite of all her happiness, that Sir Edward never
expressed a wish, when her husband's recovery should be complete, to see her in London
the ensuing winter; and that when he took his leave, his parting with her uncle and father
was cold and distant; while he formally took her hand, and just raised it to his lips; an
action which appeared to her feeling mind to have more in it of politeness than cordiality. Her heart was full; the tears mounted to her eyes, but they were soon succeeded by
smiles, and utterly chased away by the tender embrace of her Frederic, as he fondly wiped
them off. Alas! the short hours of bliss are fleeting as the celerity of an arrow, while the
chalice of sorrow, which we are often compelled to empty to the very dregs, is deep as its
draught is bitter! and oh! how frequently is it replenished! When Sir Edward Harrington thought his nephew was lost to him for ever, how
anxious was his every wish, not only to meet, but to prevent those of his beloved
Frederic! When that much loved nephew was out of danger, he thought only of his wounded
honour; his having been superseded in his regiment, for absence without leave; having no
share in the glorious achievements of his countrymen;-and all for the sake of a little
country-girl, whose want of fortune and lack of high connexions, made her by no means a
fit wife for the future Sir Frederic Harrington, whose title was as ancient as the order of
nobility to which he belonged, and whose alliances were of the first in the kingdom. MR.
HARRINGTON, who had been
"The very glass of fashion, the observ'd
"Of all observers;"---------
who had shone in the drawing-room, and glittered in all the splendid scenes of the great
and gay; and who held a distinguished rank in the world, by his birth, fortune, and
expectations, must there introduce an obscure country wife, who, it was true, in the
village where she was born, brought up, and resided, was the paragon of all whom she
might come in competition with; and who, in the friendly parties of the Leslies, where he
had seen her, and where his nephew unfortunately had been first charmed with her, and
whence all restraint was banished, had known how to conduct herself with that
unobtruding ease which rendered her there an interesting and a charming guest: but then
she only excited admiration as a very superior kind of girl, for one entirely brought up in
the country! But what accomplishments could she boast to entitle her to be the wife of his
Frederic? Sir Edward had never heard her sing; he knew not that she was possessed of a
seraphic voice; but he was sure she did not know one note of music, she knew not even
how to beat, with graceful attitudes, the tambourine; she could not draw a common
landscape, much less designs for Egyptian mausoleums, or Grecian statues; neither could
she speak French, Italian, nor one word of German: in short, she did not possess one of
those parts of education so requisite for the wife of a man of high fashion, to have at least
a smattering of; for it was not needful for the wife of Frederic Harrington to know how to
make his shirts; and he had not a doubt but that she would be rustic enough to let out the
secret, that she knew how to spin!-shocking!-
Such were the reflections of Sir Edward Harrington on the marriage of his
nephew; and such are the prejudices of high birth, even in the best of minds. The great


and high-born are like a distinct class of beings from their inferiors; may they ever
continue so; for we know it is impossible that all men can be born equal; but let them not
spurn at an union with exemplary merit, especially where there can be no degradation in
the alliance, nor prefer the frivolous and empty accomplishments of changeful fashion, to
the more solid endowments of the mind. Nothing, we believe, is more hard to eradicate than family pride: the excellent, the
worthy Sir Edward Harrington, was not without an abundant share; and moving only
among those of his own sphere, he was weak enough to think those accomplishments
essential in the education of a lady, which are merely ornamental. He knew not half the natural abilities, or indeed the acquirements of his lovely
niece; nor reflected how young and ductile she was, and how easily she might be taught
some of those futile accomplishments on which fashion sets so high a value. At the
parsonage, where she knew the well-taught and naturally intelligent Lady Isabella
Emerson made all the attainments of education seem poor, when displayed by another in
her presence; Mary then, with her own natural humility, concealed the few which she
possessed. She could not play, it is true, either on the harp, piano-forte, or tambourine; but
she drew with taste, and from nature: her father had made her an excellent French
scholar, though she knew not Italian or German; and with her uncle Charles and her
sister, when at home, she frequently conversed in French, that they might by practice
improve each other; but as she was a proficient in the language, more grammatically by
books than she shone in it by fluency of speech, this acquirement was also unknown to
strangers. Sir Edward Harrington had seen her at her own dwelling, in a sphere the most
humble and domestic; tending the couch of his sick nephew, with all the indefatigable
care and tenderness of a nurse: he would joyfully have given three thousand pounds with
Mary, to have made some worthy Essex farmer happy in such a wife; but he felt very far
from satisfied in seeing her become his own niece! An unjust and illiberal idea shot across his mind and added to his prejudice: he
revolved over many circumstances, all perverted to his falsely-conceived opinion; and he
suffered himself to imbibe the thought, that the father and uncles of this artless girl had
laid plans to effect an union between her and his nephew. Oh! cruel suspicion, how often
thou shewest thy meanness, by not suffering the tongue to utter what thy pernicious
poison implanteth within the breast; how deep are the injuries that are inflicted by thee on
the innocent! for, oft-times, by the silence thou imposest, thou takest only firmer root in
the mind; and the suspected never find an opportunity of pleading their defence. Say, what can ease thy present grief,
Can former joys afford relief? Those former joys, remember'd still,
The more augment the recent ill:
What woes from mortal ills accrue! And what from natural ensue!