"How is this?" said he, "A maid!" "Yes indeed, my lord, you see before you, and in your power, a hapless
maid of noble blood, who set out on a crazy expedition of love, but,
from inexperience, has fallen into your hands." "Then the whole pretended mission to our Scottish court is, it appears,
a fraud, a deep laid imposition of some most dangerous intent, as the
interest that has been used to accomplish it fully demonstrates. You
have subjected yourself and all your followers to military execution;
and the only method by which you can procure a respite, either for
yourself or them, is to make a full confession of the whole plot." "Alas, my lord, I have no plot to confess. Mine was merely a romantic
expedition of youthful love, and, as you are a knight, and a lover
yourself, I beg your clemency, that you will pardon my followers and me. They are innocent; and, save my page, who is likewise a lady, and my own
kinswoman, all the rest are as ignorant who I am, and what I am, as the
child that is unborn." "If you would entertain any hopes of a reprieve, I say, madam, either
for yourself or them, declare here to me instantly your name, lineage,
and the whole of your business in Scotland, and by whose powerful
interest you got this safe conduct made out, for one who, it seems,
knows nothing of it, or who, perhaps, does not exist." "Surely you will not be so ungallant as to insist upon a lady exposing
herself and all her relations? No, my lord, whatever become of me, you
must never attain to the knowledge of my name, rank, or titles. I
entrust myself to your mercy: you can have nothing to fear from the
machinations of a love-lorn damsel." "I am placed in peculiarly hard circumstances, madam; I have enemies
abroad and at home, and have nothing but my own energies to rely on to
save my house and name from utter oblivion, and my dearest hopes from
extinguishment. This expedition of yours, folded as it is in deceit and
forgery, has an ominous and daring appearance. The house of Douglas must
not fall for the tears of a deceitful maiden, the daughter of my enemy. Without a full disclosure of all that I request, every one of you shall
suffer death in the sight of both armies before the going down of the
sun. I will begin with the meanest of your followers, in hopes, for the
sake of your youth and your sex, that you will relent and make a full
disclosure of your name, and all your motives for such an extraordinary
adventure." Lady Jane continued positive and peremptory, as did also her attendant,
who had been thoroughly schooled before-hand, in case of their sex being
discovered, never, on any account, to acknowledge who she was, lest it
should put Musgrave wholly in Douglas' power. The latter, therefore, to
keep up the same system of terror and retribution first practised by his
opponent, caused sound the death knell, and hung out the flag of blood,
to apprise those within the fortress that some of their friends were
shortly to be led to execution. The first that was brought out was a thick-set swarthy yeoman, who said
his name was Edmund Heaton, and that he had been a servant to Belsay,
whom he had followed in the border wars. When told that he was about to
be hanged for a spy and a traitor, he got very angry, even into such a
rage that they could not know what he said, for he had a deep rough burr
in his throat, and spoke a coarse English dialect. "Hang'd? I hang'd? and fogh whot? Domn your abswoghdity! Hang ane mon fogh deying whot his
meastegh beeds him?" --He was told that he had not two minutes to live,
unless he could discover something of the plot in which his employers
were engaged; that it was found he had been accompanying two ladies in
disguise, on some traitorous mission which they would not reveal; and it
was the law of war that he should suffer for the vile crime in which he
was an accomplice. "Nobbit, I tell you that won't dey at all;--n-n-nor it sha'n't dey
neithegh. Do you think you aghe to hang eveghy mon that follows ane
woeman? Domn them, I nevegh knew them lead to oughts but eel! If I had
known they had been woemen--Domn them!" --He was hauled up to the
scaffold, for he refused to walk a foot.--"Wh-wh-why, nobbit speak you
now," cried he in utter desperation; "why n-n-nobbit you aghe not
serious, aghe you?" He was told he should soon find to his experience
that they were quite serious.--"Why, cworse the whole geneghation of
you, the thing is nwot to be bwoghn. I wont swoffegh it--that I woll
not. It is dwonright mworder. Oh, ho, ho!" and he wept, crying as loud
as he could, "Oh-oh! ho: mworder! mworder! Domn eveghy Scwot of
you!" --In this mood, kicking, crying, and swearing, was he turned off,
and hanged in sight of both hosts. The walls of Roxburgh were crowded with spectators. They could not
divine who it was that was suffering; for all kind of communication was
forbid by Musgrave, and it was now become exceedingly difficult. Great
was their wonder and anxiety when they beheld one trooper after another
of their countrymen brought out and hanged like dogs. But it was evident
to every beholder, from the unsettled and perturbed motions of those on
the wall, that something within the fortress was distressing the
besieged. Some hurried to and fro; others stood or moved about in
listless languor; and there were a few that gazed without moving, or
taking their eyes from the spot where they were fixed. Not one flight of
arrows came to disturb the execution, as usual; and it was suspected
that their whole stock of arrows was exhausted. This would have been
good tidings for the Scots, could they have been sure of it, as they
might then have brought their files closer to the walls, and more
effectually ensured a strict blockade. Lady Jane's followers were all executed, and herself and companion sore
threatened in vain. Douglas, however, meant to reserve them for another
purpose than execution,--to ensure to himself the surrender of the
fortress, namely; but of her squires he was glad to be rid, for fear of
a discovery being made to the English that the lady was in his hands,
which might have brought the whole puissance of the realm upon him;
whereas the generality of the nation viewed the siege merely as an
affair of Border chivalry, in which they were little interested, and
deemed Musgrave free from any danger. It was on St Leonard's day that these five Englishmen were executed; and
as a retaliation in part, a Scots fisherman was hanged by the English
from the wall of the castle; one who indeed had been the mean of doing
them a great deal of mischief. And thus stood matters at that period of
the siege; namely, the Earl of Douglas and Mar lay before Roxburgh with
eight thousand hardy veterans, all his own vassals. The Redhough kept a
flying army on the borders of Northumberland, chiefly about the
mountains of Cheviot and Cocket-dale, interrupting all supplies and
communications from that quarter, and doing excellent service to himself
and followers, and more to the Douglas than the latter seemed to admit
of. Whenever he found the English gathering to any head, he did not go
and attack them, but, leaving a flying party of horse to watch their
motions, he instantly made a diversion somewhere else, which drew them
off with all expedition. A numerous army, hastily raised, entered
Scotland on the west border, on purpose to draw off the warden; but they
were surprised and defeated by the Laird of Johnston, who raised the
Annandale people, and attacked the English by night. He followed them
into Cumberland, and fought two sharp battles with them there, in both
of which he had the advantage, and he then fell a spoiling the country. This brought the Northumberland and Durham men into these parts, who
mustered under Sir William Fetherstone to the amount of fifteen thousand
men. Johnston retired, and the Earl of Galloway, to back him, raised
twenty thousand in the west, and came towards the Sarke: So that the
siege of Roxburgh was viewed but as an item in the general convulsion,
though high was the stake for those that played, and ruthless the game
while it lasted. Douglas now looked upon the die as turned in his
favour, as he held pledges that would render the keeping of it of no
avail to his opponent. The lady was in his power at whose fiat Musgrave
had taken and defended the perilous castle so bravely,--but of this no
man knew save the Douglas himself. Sir Richard Musgrave was likewise in
his hand, the captain's youngest, most beloved, and only surviving
brother; and Douglas had threatened, against a certain day, if the keys
of the castle were not surrendered to him, to hang the young hero
publicly, in the view of both hosts; and in all his threats he had never
once broke his word. We must now take a peep within the walls of
Roxburgh, and see how matters are going on there. I cast my net in Largo bay,
      And fishes I caught nine;
    There were three to roast, and three to boil,
      And three to bait the line. _Old Song._

    Saw never man so faynt a levand wycht,
    And na ferlye, for ouir excelland lycht
      Corruptis the witt, and garris the blude awail,
      Until the harte, thocht it na dainger aill,
    Quhen it is smorit memberis wirk not rychte,
      The dreadfulle terrour swa did him assaile. _Pal. of Hon._

Berwick was then in the hands of the English, and commanded by Sir
Thomas Musgrave, the captain of Roxburgh's cousin; so also was Norham,
and all the forts between, on that side of the river. Notwithstanding of
this, the power of the Scots predominated so much in the open field
during that reign, that this chain of forts proved finally of no avail
to Lord Musgrave, (or Sir Philip Musgrave, as he is generally
denominated,) though he had depended on keeping the communication open,
else in victualling Roxburgh he had calculated basely. The garrison were
already reduced to the greatest extremes; they were feeding on their
horses and on salted hides; and, two or three days previous to this,
their only communication with their countrymen had been cut off, they
could not tell how. It was at best only precarious, being carried on in
the following singular way.--The besieged had two communications with
the river, by secret covered ways from the interior of the fortress. In
each of these they had a small windlass, that winded on and let off a
line nearly a mile in length. The lines were very small, being made of
plaited brass wire; and, putting a buoy on a hook at the end of each one
of these, they let them down the water. Their friends knowing the very
spot where they stopped, watched, and put dispatches on the hooks, with
fish, beef, venison, and every kind of convenience, which they pulled up
below the water, sometimes for a whole night together; and though this
proved but a scanty supply for a whole garrison, it was for a long time
quite regular, and they depended a good deal on it. But one night it so chanced that an old fisherman, who fished for the
monastery, had gone out with his coble by night to spear salmon in the
river. He had a huge blaze flaming in a grate that stood exalted over
the prow of his wherry; and with the light of that he pricked the salmon
out of their deep recesses with great acuteness. As he was plying his
task he perceived a fish of a very uncommon size and form scouring up
the river with no ordinary swiftness. At first he started, thinking he
had seen the devil: but a fisher generally strikes at every thing he
sees in the water. He struck it with his barbed spear, called on Tweed a
_leister_, and in a moment had it into his boat. It was an excellent
sirloin of beef. The man was in utter amazement, for it was dead, and
lay without moving, like other butcher meat; yet he was sure he saw it
running up the water at full speed. He never observed the tiny line of
plaited wire, nor the hook, which indeed was buried in the lire; and we
may judge with what surprise he looked on this wonderful fish,--this
phenomenon of all aquatic productions. However, as it seemed to lie
peaceably enough, and looked very well as a piece of beef, he resolved
to let it remain, and betake himself again to his business. Never was
there an old man so bewildered as he was, when he again looked into the
river,--never either on Tweed or any other river on earth. Instead of
being floating _down_ the river peaceably in his boat, as one naturally
expects to do, he discovered that he was running straight against the
stream. He expected to have missed about fifty yards of the river by his
adventure with the beef; but--no!--instead of that he was about the same
distance advanced in his return up the stream. The windlass at the
castle, and the invisible wire line, of which he had no conception,
having been still dragging him gradually up. "Saint Mary, the mother of
God, protect and defend poor Sandy Yellowlees!" cried he; "What can be
the meaning of this? Is the world turned upside down? Aha! our auld
friend, Michael Scott, has some hand i' this! He's no to cree legs wi':
I's be quits wi' him." With that he tumbled his beef again into the
water, which held on its course with great rapidity straight up the
stream, while he and his boat returned quietly in the contrary and
natural direction. "Aye, there it goes," cried Sandy, "straight on for Aikwood! I's warrant
that's for the warlock's an' the deil's dinner the morn. God be praised
I'm free o't, or I should soon have been there too!" Old Sandy fished down the river, but he could kill no more salmon that
night,--for his nerves had got a shock with this new species of fishing
that he could not overcome. He missed one; wounded another on the tail;
and struck a third on the rig-back, where no leister can pierce a fish,
till he made him spring above water. Sandy grew chagrined at himself and
the warlock, Michael Scott, too--for this last was what he called "a
real prime fish," Sandy gripped the leister a little firmer, clenched
his teeth, and drew his bonnet over his eyes to shield them from the
violence of his blaze. He then banned the wizard into himself, and
determined to kill the next fish that made his appearance. But, just as
he was keeping watch in this guise, he perceived another fish something
like the former, but differing in some degree, coming swagging up the
river full speed. "My heart laup to my teeth," said Sandy, "when I saw
it coming, and I heaved the leister, but durstna strike; but I lookit
weel, an' saw plainly that it was either a side o' mutton or venison, I
couldna tell whilk. But I loot it gang, an' shook my head. 'Aha,
Michael, lad,' quo' I, 'ye hae countit afore your host for aince! Auld
Sandy has beguiled ye. But ye weel expeckit to gie him a canter to hell
the night.' I rowed my boat to the side, an' made a' the haste hame I
could, for I thought auld Michael had taen the water to himsel that
night." Sandy took home his few fish, and went to sleep, for all was quiet about
the abbey and the cloisters of his friends, the monks; and when he awoke
next morning he could scarcely believe the evidence of his own senses,
regarding what he had seen during the night. He arose and examined his
fishes, and could see nothing about them that was not about other
salmon. Still he strongly suspected they too might be some connections
of Michael's,--something illusory, if not worse; and took care to eat
none of them himself, delivering them all to the cook of the monastery. The monks ate them, and throve very well; and as Sandy had come by no
bodily harm, he determined to try the fishing once again, and if he met
with any more such fish of passage to examine them a little better. He
went out with his boat, light, and fish-spear as usual; and scarcely had
he taken his station, when he perceived one of a very uncommon nature
approaching. He did not strike at it, but only put his leister-grains
before it as if to stop its course, when he found the pressure against
the leister very strong. On pulling the leister towards him, one of the
barbs laid hold of the line by which the phenomenon was led; and not
being able to get rid of it, he was obliged to pull it into the boat. It
was a small cask of Malmsey wine; and at once, owing to the way it was
drawn out, he discovered the hook and line fastened to the end of it. These he disengaged with some difficulty, the pull being so strong and
constant; and the mystery was thus found out. In a few minutes
afterwards he seized a large sheaf of arrows; and some time after, at
considerable intervals, a number of excellent sides of beef and venison. Sandy Yellowlees saw that he could now fish to some purpose, and formed
a resolution of being the last man in the world to tell his countrymen
of this resource that the enemy had. The thing of which he was most
afraid was a discovery. He knew that the articles would soon be missed,
and that his light would betray him; and then a flight of arrows, or
even a single one, from a lurking foe at the side of the river, would
put an end to his fishing for ever. Such an opportunity was not to be
given up, notwithstanding of this danger; so, after much prying, both by
day and by night, Sanders found that at an abrupt crook in the water,
whatever the line brought up came close to the side, and when the water
was low it even trailed them over a point of level sand-bed quite dry. This was a joyous discovery for Sandy. He had nothing ado but to sail
down in his boat when it grew dark, and lie lurking at this crook in the
water, and make a prey of whatever came within his reach. The very first
night he filled his boat half full of valuable stuff. There was a
necessity for disposing of a part of this, and Sandy was obliged to aver
that he had discovered a hidden store belonging to the English; and,
moreover, he hinted that he could supply the towns of Kelso and
Roxburgh, the abbey of the one and the priory of the other, for some
time to come. Great was the search that was made about the banks of the
river, but no one could find the store; yet Sanders Yellowlees continued
to supply the market with luxuries, tho' no one knew how. Intelligence
was sent down the stream, with the buoys, of the seizure of the
provisions, and of the place where they were taken off, which they knew
from the failure of the weight they were pulling to be always at the
same place. The news also spread of Sandy's stores, and both reached the
secret friends of the English, from whom the provisions were nightly
sent to their besieged friends and benefactors, with all the caution and
secrecy possible, it being given them to understand that on that supply
alone depended the holding out of the fortress. Many schemes were now tried to entrap Sandy, but all without effect; for
the Scots had a strong post surrounding that very point where Sandy
caught all his spoil. It was impossible to reach it but by a boat; and
no boat was allowed on the river but that one that belonged to the
abbey. At length an English trooper undertook to seize this old
depredator. Accordingly, in the dead of the night, when the lines came
down, he seized them both, twisted them into one, and walked silently up
the side of the river until he came nigh to the spot where the Scots
lines on each side joined the stream.