But, whenever a question occurs of reflection, of experience, of judgment,

or of prudential consideration, I shall always listen to your wisdom with undissembled deference. In every thing indifferent, or that can be made so, I shall
obey you with pleasure. And in return I am sure you will consider me as a being to be won with kindness, and not dictated to with the laconic phrase of
authority. "Yet I am sorry, my dear love, that you should marry a woman who has suffered so cruelly as I have done. My father's advice to you was, 'Fleetwood, if you
marry, chuse a girl, whom no disappointments have soured, and no misfortunes have bent to the earth.' Fleetwood, you must not be angry with me, if I
sometimes
recollect that my father, mother, and sisters, all perished together by an untimely and tragical fate. Peaceful and serene as I may appear to you, I bear a
wound in my breast, which may be skinned over, and seem as if it

were cured, but which will occasionally break out afresh, and produce symptoms of fever, impatience and despair. How exquisite are the various charities of
human life! From the most venerable of these, those which are entailed upon us without asking our leave, and are stamped with the highest sanctity, I am cut

off for ever. I am like a being who, by some severe ordination of providence, is destined to stand alone, to know no kindred, to have no alliance or
connection, but what my own election and voluntary engagement may eventually supply. If you should fail me, Fleetwood!---I have faults; you unquestionably
have
faults too. You are difficult to be pleased; I see it; my father told me so; my powers of pleasing, perhaps my inclination to please, have their limits. If
you
should fail me, I have no one to fly to; I shall remain a solitary monument of despair! These

thoughts will sometimes intrude, and make me sad. Other persons lose their relations one by one; they are gradually broken in to their forlorn situation. I was
overwhelmed at once: and never, so long as I shall continue to exist, shall I recover this terrible stroke. "But why do I thus cheat my sorrows, by dwelling in general propositions! If my lost relatives had been otherwise than they were, I could have borne it, I
ought to have borne it. Fleetwood, you knew them! No, never was there such a father, such a mother, such sisters. How we loved each other! How happy we made

each other, and what powers we had of contributing to each other's happiness!---Barbara! Amelia! my father! my mother! If I dwell upon the horrible theme I
shall go distracted! ---Fleetwood, how I wish that I too could commit myself to the mercy of the ocean! When the thought of my

own death rises to my mind, it never comes in so soothing a form as if I imagine it to happen by drowning. Believe me, there is nothing I so earnestly pray
for, as that this may be the means by which I may cease to exist. I should not feel it as death; it would be a reunion to all I love! Life is the desert; life the solitude. This mingles me with all my soul has lov'd:
'Tis to be borne to sisters and to parents;
'Tis to rejoin the stock from which I sprung,
And be again in Nature!" From the church of St. George's, Hanover Square, where the marriage ceremony was performed, we set out for the baths of Matlock in Derbyshire, where we staid
an entire month. This was the happiest month of my life. My dear Mary became placid and cheerful; without forgetting the terrible calamity which the last
autumn had brought upon her, she opened her heart to the gratifications which were before her; she felt that, in the solemn contract she had formed, she had

undertaken in some degree for my satisfaction and tranquillity, and she was determined to watch over her trust. Nor will I be guilty of the false modesty to

insinuate, that she did this merely as the discharge

of a duty; on the contrary, I was so fortunate as to interest and please her. This she manifested by a thousand flattering symptoms, attentions which can flow
only from the heart, and which the head can never supply. Nor let it be forgotten that, though I was now somewhat beyond the meridian of life, I was not
destitute of many advantages, calculated to recommend me to a delicate and refined female companion. My person was pleasing, and my demeanour graceful;
circumstances which had acquired me in Paris the appellation of the handsome Englishman . That very sensibility which constituted the torment of my life,
gave
a feeling sweetness to the tones of my voice, and a gentleness to my attentions, such as are found peculiarly acceptable to the better order of females. If Mary was cheerful and pleased, the happiness I felt is such as cannot be described. What a contrast did there exist between the tumultuous scenes of my Parisian amours, and my relative situation with the accomplished female whom I had now made
my wife! The women I had loved, furiously and distractedly loved, in the early period of my life, I had never esteemed. How could I? They had each a husband;

they had each children. How can a woman discharge the duties of these sacred relations, at the same time that she is amusing herself with the wishes, or
gratifying the appetites, of a lover? The idea is too shocking to be dwelt upon! She puts off the matron, to play the wild and loose-hearted coquette. She
presents to her husband the offspring of her criminal amours, and calls it his. All her life is a cheat, one uninterrupted tissue of falshoods and hypocrisy. Can she tell her thoughts? She, who has not a single thought which, though it may be tolerated

in silence, would not, if uttered in appropriate language, make every one of her acquaintance turn to marble at the sound. Esteem her! She is not worthy to
live; or, if to live, to be confined in some cloister of penitents, where rigid discipline and coarse attire, and scanty fare, might at length purge her of
that ferment in her blood, or that giddy intoxication of thought, which at present renders her the blot of her sex, and the disgrace of the marriage tie! There are persons who sport the opinion, that the pleasure which is gained by stealth, is the genuine pleasure, and that the prohibition which waits upon the
indulgence, gives it its highest zest. It is not so! This opinion is not more pernicious in its tendency, than it is ridiculous in the grounds upon which it

rests. What, is it the consciousness of crime, that makes our pleasure? the fear, which continually haunts us with a

presentiment that we shall be detected? the cowardice, that forces our countenance to fall in the presence of our fellow-men, and makes a hundred accidental
and harmless remarks in conversation or in public, enter like a sword into our vitals? the fearful struggle for ever repeated within us, which leads us to do

the thing we condemn, and repine over our weakness that we do it? No; it is innocence that is the soul of pleasure, with which the sentiment of shame is incompatible. The truly happy man lifts up his face with serenity, and
challenges the eyes of all the world. Without frankness, without a conscience void of offence, without a feeling that the being I love is of a worthy nature,

and that no one can stand up and say "In consulting your own inclination you have done me unmanly wrong," there cannot be the "sunshine of the soul." Most
especially in the connection

of sex with sex, it is necessary to substantial enjoyment, that virtue should spread the couch, and that honour and peace of mind should close the curtains. The kiss of honest love, how rapturous! But the true ingredients in this rapture are, a heart-felt esteem of each other's character, a perception that, while

the eye we see sparkles, and the cheek glows, with affection, the glow is guiltless of any unhallowed and licentious propensity; in fine, the soothing state
of
mind which tells us that, while we freely indulge the impulses of our heart, we are not disgracing, but honouring, the mighty power by which we exist. To
recollect that neither my own character, nor that of the partner of my joys, is injured, but improved, by the scope of our mutual partialities, is the crown
of
social pleasure. To persons thus attached, thus bound in honourable connection, each day may be expected to

add to their enjoyment, and increase the kindness and esteem with which they regard each other. To me the situation was new, was such as I had not anticipated, and was so much the more enchanting to me. I had lived long in the world, and I had lived
alone. My soul panted for a friend, and I had never found such a friend as it demanded, a friend "who should be to me as another self, who should joy in all
my
joys, and grieve in all my sorrows, and whose sympathy should be incapable of being changed by absence into smiles, while my head continued bent to the earth

with anguish." I had not been aware that nature has provided a substitute in the marriage-tie, for this romantic, if not impossible friendship. The love
which
Pythias is said to have borne for Damon, or Theseus for Pirithous, many a married pair have borne

for each other. The difference of sex powerfully assists the intimacy; similarity of character can never unite two parties so closely, as the contrast of
masculine enterprise in one, and a defenceless tenderness in the other. Man and wife, if they love, must love each other vehemently. Their interests are in
almost all cases united. If they have children, these children form a new bond, either party pursues the same end, and has its affections directed towards
the
same object. Independently of this, whatever contributes to the welfare of the one is advantageous to the other, and the calamity or death of either is a
kind
of destruction which overtakes the by-stander. Habit assists the mutual dependence; and very often it happens that, when a wedded pair has lived for a long
series of years together, the death of the feebler of the two is only a signal calling on the

other to be gone, that he survives but a few days, and they are deposited at the same moment in a common grave. Thus does the system of things of which we are a part supply our inherent deficiencies, and conscious, as it were, in how small a degree we are adapted for
sublime virtues, assist, by a sort of mechanical link, in the construction of that vivid and unremitting attachment which the human heart demands. To me, who had been accustomed to live alone with dependents, with acquaintance, and with servants, how delicious were the attentions of a beautiful and
accomplished woman, whose interests were for ever united with my own! A servant dares not, and an acquaintance but coldly performs the ordinary duty of
enquiring after your health, and sending you forth to the occupations of the day crowned with their good wishes. How pleasing to be an object of interest

and concern to the person whom I deeply esteem and fervently love! How delicious the eye that glistens with pleasure to hail my return, and the cheek that
reddens with kindness! It is this which constitutes the unspeakable charm of home. My home is not a fabric of walls which shelters me; is not even the
windows,
the furniture, the elbow-chair, and the mute fire-side, which habit has endeared and hung round with a thousand pleasing associations; it is that there I
find
the countenance that gladdens at my approach, and the heart that welcomes me. The affection of Mary I felt as a charm reconciling me to life; it gave me
value
in my own eyes, to observe her beautiful and well-proportioned presence, her speaking eye, her lucid complexion, and to say, To the soul that inhabits there
I
am of importance; she is cheerful, because I am happy and well; if I perished, she

would feel she had lost every thing! How flattering to the human heart, that there is a being, and a noble one, whom with one accent of my voice I can delight,
with one glance of my eye I can fill with sweet content! My tenants loved me, because I had power; my acquaintance, because I could contribute to their
entertainment; the poor who dwelt near my mansion, for my wealth; but my wife would love me in sickness or in health, in poverty, in calamity, in total
desolation! While we resided at Matlock, we visited the beauties and romantic scenery of Derbyshire. I was familiarly acquainted with the whole before, and I now performed
the office of cicerone and interpreter to Mary. But how different were the sensations with which I now visited each charming, or each wonderful scene! Even a

bright and spirit-stirring morn, did not now stir in me a contemplative

and solitary spirit; it turned my eye on my companion, it awakened us to the interchange of cheerful and affectionate looks, it tipt our tongues with many a
pleasant sally, and many a tender and sympathetic expression. When we looked down upon the rich and fertile plains, when we hung over the jutting and
tremendous precipice, I perceived with inexpressible pleasure, that mine was no longer a morose and unparticipated sensation, but that another human
creature,
capable of feeling all my feelings, rejoiced and trembled along with me. When I retired to my inn after the fatigues and dangers of the day, I did not retire

to a peevish and froward meal among drawers and venal attendants; I sat down with the companion of my heart, and shared the pleasures of idleness, as we had

before shared the pleasures of activity. How many agreeable topics of conversation did the rivers and

the mountains suggest; how many occasions of mutual endearment did they afford! It seemed that the spirit of kindness still gained new strength, as the scene
was perpetually shifted before our eyes, and as we breathed an atmosphere for ever new. After having resided at Matlock some-what more than a month, we set out for Merionethshire. Mary had never before entered my paternal mansion; she had never
been in Wales; and she expressed herself extremely pleased with all she saw. The vast and uncouth forms of the neighbouring mountains were exceedingly
striking. The mansion itself was built in a style of antique magnificence; it had been erected by one of the leaders in the commonwealth of Cromwel; and, to
an
admirer of whatever

is venerable for age, the shining and polished floors, the huge and misshapen tapestry-figures in some of the apartments, and the dark-coloured wainscot with
its diminutive pannels which adorned the rest, were infinitely more gratifying, than all the sumptuousness of modern prodigality. The windows, as well as the

halls and galleries, were large, and almost collegiate. The day on which we entered the house in Merionethshire may be considered in some sense as the first of our marriage. Here we were to make our establishment,
and set up our tabernacle; at Matlock and other places we shifted as we could. Here then was a rock upon which we were in danger to be destroyed. They were
no
trifling and fugitive discussions we had to adjust; I on my part had formed habits, of which it would be difficult for me to divest myself. We arrived in the evening, and were in want of repose. We sat down to the fire-side where I had sat with my father a thousand times; we ate a delicious meal,
while Mary listened with attention to many little anecdotes I related of the deceased, and stories of my boyish exploits and sorrows. The next morning we walked round the apartments. There was a handsome, retired closet, opening into the principal drawing-room and at a short distance from my
bed-chamber, the window of which commanded the most admirable prospect we had. The steeple and roofs of a beautiful village were distinctly visible; the
river,
beset with willows, meandered below; a venerable wood of everlasting oaks grew on one side, beyond which was discovered the silver main; while the other side

was skirted by the crags of the gigantic mountain, that from my infancy I almost

most adored. This closet was my favourite retreat. Here I had been permitted to con my lessons while I was yet of school boy age; and here it had ever since
been my custom to retire with some favourite author, when I wished to feel my mind in its most happy state. In this closet I meditated, I composed, I wrote. If
I wanted an ampler space to move in, I had but to open the door, and the largest drawing-room in the house offered itself for my promenade. By the side of
the
closet was a private staircase, which led me by a short cut to the river, the wood, and the mountain. I preferred this sequestered nook to all the rest of
the
mansion taken together. I entered it now, after a twelvemonth's absence, with a full recollection of all the castles which I had sat there and builded in the

air, the odes, the tragedies and heroic poems which, in the days of visionary childhood, upon that spot I

had sketched and imagined. I turned to Mary, with the purpose of telling her the many ravishing associations which this closet presented to my mind. This is an enchanting closet! said she. It is.---My heart knocked at my bosom, my very soul was full of its little history, as I spoke. Do you know, Fleetwood, I shall take this closet for mine? I will have all my drawings brought here, and arrange my favourite flowers in the window. Will you
give it me? Surely, my love! I am glad it pleases you so much. My sensations at this moment were of a singular and complicated nature. I had been on the point of employing all my eloquence to describe to Mary how I loved
this closet, how unalterably it had fixed its hold upon me as my favourite retreat. For this purpose I had recollected

in rapid succession all the endearments that made it mine, all the delights which, almost from prattling infancy, it had afforded me. In an unlucky moment my
wife pronounced the decree. It shall never be yours again! The decision was unexpected, and my animal spirits were suddenly driven back upon my heart. Yet I call heaven to witness, it was only the suddenness of the blow, and not any intimation of selfishness, that produced this effect. On the contrary, the
moment I had had time to recover myself, my sentiment was, Mary, it is for ever yours! Dear, angelic sweetness, I shall be too happy, to witness your
gratification! Shall I think this too great a sacrifice, who would offer up my life for you? It is no sacrifice! I have more joy in considering the things I

love as yours, than in regarding them as my own. Presently the bell was rung; and the flower-stage, the port-folios, and the drawings, one after another made their appearance. In the midst of the confusion, I
withdrew to have some necessary consultations with my steward. After an absence of three hours, I returned, and visited Mary in her retreat. By this time all her little sources of occupation and amusement were in order. I
observed with delight the arrangements she had made. I gazed on the features of her charming face; she never looked more beautiful, than thus surrounded with

the emblems of the innocence of her mind and the elegance of her taste. My heart exulted in beholding these human graces, associated and set off with a
back-ground of my favourite steeple, mountain and prospect to the neighbouring main. I fed my eyes with the pleasing scene. I sat down by her side, viewed
her
drawings, and admired

the delicate forms and brilliant colouring of the flowers she loved. I turned to the prospect from the window, with the purpose of pointing out to her in
detail the objects of which it consisted. What a fool is man! My own folly, however much I may feel ashamed of it, I have sat down with the purpose to relate. The next morning, and the morning after, I
missed my favourite, my old, my long-accustomed retreat, and sought in vain for a substitute for it. My library was in the other wing of the house, and
answered to the drawing-room I have mentioned. It had a closet in it, built in the fashion of that which had caught Mary's fancy, with no other difference
than
that the prospect from the window, though for the most part the same, was in two or three points essentially inferior. I repaired to this closet; I took two
or
three books from the library, one after another; I tried to

compose myself. It would not do. This, in the days of my boyhood, had been my father's privacy; and, when by his death the use of the whole mansion devolved to
me, I felt the closet which Mary had chosen as already mine, the scene of a thousand remembered pleasures, the object of my love. Discontented here, I resolved to seek the garden. Immediately I missed my private stair-case. I had no resource, but in the public stair-case of the whole
house. I could not get to that part of the garden which led to the river and the mountain, but by a formidable circuit. If I might not resort to my favourite

haunts at perfect liberty, if I could not reach them unseen by any human eye, they were nothing to me. My domestics knew my customary seasons of taking the
air; they watched the variations of my temper; and, when I was pensive and melancholy, were careful that the

shadow of no one of them should obtrude in my path. I will go, and tell Mary what she has done. I will confess to her all my weakness. Nothing could be further from her thought than to occasion me this
disturbance, and it will afford her the purest pleasure to repair it. May I perish, if ever I breathe a syllable on the subject! What, shall I paint me thus pitiful and despicable in her eyes? Shall I tell her, that I love nobody
but myself, and regard her gratifications with indifference? I will not tell her so! I will act so, that, if any one else should affirm it, he shall affirm
the
most impudent falshood. She will never know that I have made this sacrifice at the shrine of love. So much the better. I shall know it. It shall be to my own heart a testimony of my
affection. I do love her: heaven only knows how much. I love her for

her misfortunes and her desolate condition; I love her for the charms of her person, and her unrivalled virtues. The smallest indulgence to her, is dearer to
me than ten thousand gratifications to myself. The generous exultation with which I surrendered my own accommodation in silence was temporary; the want of that accommodation which I had so long enjoyed,
daily and hourly recurred. There is something wonderfully subtle in the operations of the human mind. Do I differ with another, in project for the future, or

judgment on our past conduct? I immediately begin to find a hundred arguments to prove, how absurd and unreasonable he is, how just am I. No man can
completely
put himself in the place of another, and conceive how he would feel, were the circumstances of that other his own: few can do it even in a superficial
degree. We are so familiar

with our own trains of thinking: we revolve them with such complacency: it appears to us, that there is so astonishing a perverseness in not seeing things as
we see them! The step is short and inevitable from complacency in our own views, to disapprobation and distaste toward the views of him by whom we are
thwarted. Mary, Mary, said I sometimes to myself as I recurred to the circumstance, I am afraid you are selfish! and what character can be less promising in social life,
than hers who thinks of no one's gratification but her own? It was true, I could not tell her, This, which you so inconsiderately desire me to give up, is my

favourite apartment. But she should have enquired of my servants. The housekeeper or the steward could have informed her. She should have considered, that a

man, at my time of life, must have fallen upon many methods of

proceeding from which he cannot easily be weaned. The thing of which I could reasonably accuse her, was, at worst, a rapidity of decision incident to her early years. Could she suspect that my practice was, to
leave the closet adjoining to the library, and carry my books to the other end of the house?---I was incapable however of passing a just judgment in the
case,
and the transaction had an unfavourable effect upon my mind. Such was the incident of the first morning of our arrival in Merionethshire. Another question arose. Mary had heard of several respectable families in our
neighbourhood, particularly the Philipses and the Morgans, the female members of which she understood to be agreeable and entertaining; and she was desirous
to
have intercourse with them. For this purpose it was necessary to go in form to our village-church, and to have it given out that there were certain days, on

which mrs. Fleetwood would sit to receive company. In the evening of our first day in Merionethshire my wife entered on the subject. To a person of habits different from mine this circumstance would have been

trivial. To me the idea came with many a painful twinge. I had all my life shrunk from this mummery, this unmeaning intercourse. I had travelled from one side
of Europe to the other, in search of persons whose conversation should be tolerable to me. Mary saw with how ill a grace I received the proposition. My love, said she, act in this matter as you please. Whatever shall be your determination, I promise to be satisfied. I will just mention what occurs to me
concerning it, and will then be silent for ever. We are sitting down in Merionethshire, perhaps for life. Whatever we decide, cannot be reversed; we cannot
repel our neighbours in the present instance, and call them about us again hereafter. Recollect then, my dear Fleetwood, the disadvantages under which I have

hitherto laboured. My dear mother, the best of mothers, and most admirable

of women---And at this recollection she burst into an agony of tears. My dearest creature, interposed I, do not distress yourself with the melancholy recollection! Mary, I love you. There is no honest gratification, no
gratification which you can desire, that I will not be zealous to procure you. Hear me, Fleetwood! said she. Consult the merits of the case, and not the ardour of your kindness.---We had no lady-visitors. I have had no female
acquaintance. Shall it be always thus? The manners of my sex are different from yours; what is graceful in a man would be shocking in a woman, and what would

be becoming in a woman, is effeminate and reproachful in the stronger sex. I am afraid I can never learn, and improve myself in, the genuine female
character,
without the observation of my own sex. "The eye sees not itself, but by reflection from

some other thing." Let me say too, that the society of her own sex is one of the natural consolations of a woman. I can feel a strong and entire affection for
a man; I acknowledge it for you. But there is a certain repose and unbending in the occasional familiarity of woman with woman, of the softer and more
fragile
nature with its like, that powerfully conduces to the healthful and contented condition of the mind.---Fleetwood, I have the greatest reluctance to thwart
you
in any thing. Choose for me. Determine as you will, I swear you shall never find in me, either by word or look, the hint of a reproach. Our discussion terminated in the formal churching, and the commencement of a tremendous series of wedding-visits. Artful hussy! in the way she put it to me
could I refuse? Could I refuse a thing upon which, in this mild and specious temper of mind, her heart appeared

to be set?---I wrong her. There was no art in what she did; it was all the most adorable ingenuousness and sincerity. Or, if I may venture, by a bold allowance
of speech, to call it art, it was that art, with which nature adorns her lovely sex more richly than with all the mines of Golconda, the art of persuasion,
compelling us to feel the impossibility of resisting their honourable desires, and cheerfully to resign the compass of domestic affairs into their hands, to

set us to what point they please. On the two first mornings of our residence in Wales, I made a pleasant excursion, by way of exhibiting to Mary the beauties of the country. In the former I
showed my wife the precipice from which, at the age of fourteen, I had fallen into the bason, then swelled by continual rains into a lake, which forms the
source of the Desunny. She would

climb the acclivity along with me. She made me point out to her the inequalities of the almost perpendicular rock along which the lamb had frisked, while
William pursued. She particularly noted the place from which the peasant and the lamb had been precipitated together. We fancied, as we viewed it, that we
could see the mark among the tufts of grass, where my foot had slipped thirty years before. After having remained a long time on the spot, we took occasion,
by
Mary's desire, to make our way home by the cottage of William and the heroic girl, who had come in her boat to save him. The father had long since been dead:

William and his wife had the appearance, by means of perpetual labour and frequent exposition to the air in all weathers, of an old man and woman. They had
had
a large family of children; but these were all grown up, the girls gone to service, and

the boys to sea; only their youngest child, a robust lad of fifteen, was at home with them. In our mountainous country the use of a carriage is exceedingly limited, and three-fourths. Of the most exquisite points of view in my neighbourhood would have
been lost to my wife, if she had not been an excellent walker. It was with pleasure that I perceived, I could take her a walk of ten or twelve miles in
extent,
or invite her to climb the highest precipices, without her sustaining the smallest injury. When a woman is so unfortunately delicate, or has been so
injudicious brought up, as to be unable to walk more than a mile at a time, this effects a sort of divorce, deciding at once that, in many of the pleasures
most gratifying to her husband's feelings and taste, she can be no partaker. Our excursion of the second day was less adventurous than that of the first,

and we were able to make more use of the carriage. After dinner I proposed reading with Mary a play of my favourite Fletcher. The piece was that admirable one
of a Wife for a Month. Mary seemed to enter strongly into the feelings of the poet; we admired equally the high and generous sentiments of the tragedy, and
the
glorious imagery with which those sentiments are adorned. The character of Valerio particularly riveted her attention. She agreed with me that no poet of
ancient or modern times, as far as her acquaintance with them extended, was able, like the writer before us, to paint with all that body and retinue of
circumstances which give life to a picture, a free, heroic and gallant spirit. We especially commended his style, and coincided in opinion with Dryden, who
confesses himself "apt to believe, that the English language in this

author arrived to its highest perfection; what words have since been taken in being rather superfluous than ornamental." Mary was roused in an extraordinary
degree with the exhortations addressed by the queen to the heroine in the second act, stimulating her to the contempt of tyranny and death, and persuading
her
that by such contempt, she will even subdue the tyrant, and compel him to repent his ungenerous purpose. I read the sentiments of the royal speaker as they
occurred, in the animated eye and glowing cheek of the charmer who sat beside me. She could scarcely help starting from her chair. I was delighted with the effect of my experiment. How exquisite a pleasure may thus be derived from reading with a woman of refined understanding so noble a
composition as that which engaged

us! It is a pleasure that should be husbanded. I have demonstrated to me, at once the acuteness of her taste, and her aptness to conceive and participate the
most virtuous sentiments. I almost adore her for these high and excellent qualities. At the same time we are like instruments tuned to a correspondent pitch,

and the accord that is produced is of the most delightful nature! We communicate with instantaneous flashes, in one glance of the eye, and have no need of
words. When we have recourse to their aid, I instruct at once and am instructed. I see how my companion feels the passages as they succeed; I learn new
decrees
of taste, and am confirmed in the old. Male and female taste are in some respects of different natures; and no decision upon a work of art can be consummate,

till it has been pronounced on by both. Besides, that in such discussions we intermix. Grateful digressions, and solve high dispute
With conjugal caresses: from my lips
Not words alone please her. We proceeded, and came to the scene so wonderfully imagined, in which Valerio is seen dressing on the morning for church, and scorning with inimitable grandeur
and ease the sentence of the tyrant, who had pronounced, that, at the expiration of the first month of his married life, he should lose his head. I had just

read those words of his,
Thou , that hast been a soldier, Menalo,
A noble soldier, and defied all danger---
Wouldst thou live so long, till thy strength forsook thee;
Till thou grew'st only a long, tedious story
Of what thou hadst been; till thy sword hung up,
And lazy spiders fill'd the hilt with cobwebs? when the door opened, and the servant announced a visitor to my wife. It was the boy of fifteen, the son of William

the peasant, whom we had seen in the cottage of his father the day before. I asked the servant somewhat angrily, why he entered, disturbing our afternoon's
tranquillity, to announce a visitor of this class? The boy had come down, he replied, by the appointment of his lady, who had fixed that hour for his attendance. Bless me! replied Mary, and so I did: I had entirely forgotten it. Do you know, my dear, in our stroll along the side of Idris yesterday, I observed two or
three plants of a very rare species, and I thought I would return to them to-day, and take this boy for my guide? I would not trouble you yesterday to
collect
them, for I know you do not like such interruptions. It was true, I had received with pleasure the early lessons of Mary in botany, aided by the beautiful
drawings with which she had illustrated them, and relieved with all the piquancy

of courtship; but, by some fatality, I could never shape my mind to the office of herborisation: it appeared too pinched and minute an object for the tastes I
had formed. I must go: I cannot send the boy away: we will finish with your beloved Fletcher after supper.---And away she tripped. Good bye! Au revoir , Fleetwood! you shall see me again by dusk. All this passed in a minute. Valerio and Evanthe, their perilous situation, and the deep interest my wife seemed to take in their adventures, were
instantaneously banished, as if by the touch of a magic wand. I was too proud to struggle with this unsteadiness, even if there had been a probability that
my
struggle would have been successful, that is, that my wife would have sat down again to our reading with an unconstrained and genuine preference. Before I had time for recollection I found myself alone, with no object to remind me of what had passed, except the volume of Fletcher which lay open upon the
table. The reader must recollect my character, as an old bachelor, as a man endowed with the most irritable structure of nerves, and who from infancy had
always felt contradiction with inexpressible bitterness, to conceive how much I was disturbed with this pelting and pitiful incident. Is this the woman, said I, whom I have taken as the partner of my life, who is more interested in two or three blades of grass, or a wretched specimen of
mosses, than in the most pathetic tale or the noblest sentiments? If she has no respect for the illustrious dead, who cannot feel her contempt, methinks she

might have had some for me, whose heart still beats, and whose blood continues to flow. Oh, it is plain she cares

only for herself, and is prepared to tread, as on an insect, upon every one who stands in the way of her present caprice! A curse on all mosses and botanical
specimens! This was the first sentiment I conceived. Presently however, love almighty love, returned, and I said, God bless you, dear empress of my bosom! Can any taste
be more pure than that which delights in the beauties of nature? How have I sat by her a thousand times, and admired, even in picture, the flowing and
graceful
forms, the soft and delicate surfaces, and the brilliant tints, of the vegetable tribe! What an honest and sincere mind is hers, that soars to admire the
tremendous precipice and the gathering tempest, and can then descend to the frailest and minutest herb which clothes the face of our mother-earth! They are
all
alike the productions of that mysterious power, which is every

where at work, and every where engenders the patterns of grandeur, of majesty, and of grace. Would I destroy in Mary this noble relish, this generous
affection, that embraces all the creatures of God? ---God bless her, even in her caprices! They prove the youth and elasticity of her mind; they mark the
morning of life; they are symbols of that truly feminine character, which so delightfully contrasts with my own sex, and constitutes the crown and essence of

the life of man. I will turn botanist myself! While these reflections passed in my mind, I was almost tempted to pursue Mary, and join her in her herborising excursion.---I know the place to which they are
gone; I shall easily find them. How beautiful will the carnation of her cheeks, and the lilies of her soft fingers, the fairest blossoms creation ever saw,
appear amidst the parterre of wild flowers that skirts the ridge of mount Idris! I

think, I see her now, as she stoops to cull them. I will tell her that I will never have a taste, a pursuit, a gratification, but what is hers.---Saying this,
I put on my hat, I walked out at the halldoor, and hurried along the avenue. No, I will not go to her! She has used me ill. She has wounded me in a point, where I am most alive. Fletcher, my old friend, friend of my boyish days, whose
flights I have taught the echoes of the mountains to repeat, whose pages I have meditated in my favourite closet,
---she has affronted me in thee, Fletcher, and for thee, if not for myself, I will resent it. No, this will not do. I will not be an uxorious, tame, wife-ridden husband. Has she shown any disposition to comply with me? If I begin, I can never continue to sustain this part. In all my life I have

been unused to brook control. The sensitiveness of my temper, will never allow me to bear to be thwarted, crossed, the chain of my sensations snapped and
crumbled to pieces at every moment, with impunity. There is no reciprocity in this commerce. I could be content to yield much to her.---Aye, again I say, God

bless her in her caprices!---But I cannot be content to be reduced to nothing. I must have an existence, a pursuit, a system of my own; and not be a mere
puppy, dangling at her heels, and taught to fetch and carry, as she gives the word. As time glided on, these meditations became less pleasant: they burned at my heart, and were bitter in my mouth. Tediously and heavily dragged along the two
hours of her absence: I could fix on no plan, I could form no conjecture for the future. I could sit down to no occupation or pursuit. I paced the hall

and the avenue with impatient strides. Tired with this exertion, I threw myself indolently in a chair, and reclined my head on my hands upon the table. At the end of two hours, Mary tripped with light and elastic step into the parlour. I have had a delightful walk, cried she.