'I really know not,--you
surprise me, Sir Patrick,--I--'

'Surprise you, my dear soul! How could you expect anything else from
a man of my spirit, after your honest declaration last night?--All I
feared was, that Glenmurray should get the start of me.' Adeline, though alarmed, bewildered, and confounded, had still
recollection enough to know that, whether sane or insane, the words and
looks of Sir Patrick were full of increasing insult. 'I believe, I think
I had better retire', faltered out Adeline. 'Retire!--No, indeed,' exclaimed the baronet; rudely seizing her. This outrage restored Adeline to her usual spirit and self-possession;
and bestowing on him the epithet of 'mean-soul'd ruffian!' she had
almost freed herself from his grasp, when a quick step was heard on the
stairs, and the door was thrown open by Glenmurray. In a moment Adeline,
bursting into tears, threw herself into his arms, as if in search of
protection. Glenmurray required no explanation of the scene before him: the
appearance of the actors in it was explanation sufficient; and while
with one arm he fondly held Adeline to his bosom, he raised the other in
a threatening attitude against Sir Patrick, exclaiming as he did it,
'Base, unmanly villain!' 'Villain!' echoed Sir Patrick--'but it is very well--very well for the
present--Good morning to you, sir!' So saying he hastily withdrew. As soon as he was gone, Glenmurray for the first time declared to
Adeline the ardent passion with which she had inspired him; and she,
with equal frankness, confessed that her heart was irrevocably his. From this interesting tête-à-tête Adeline was summoned to attend a
person on business to her mother; and during her absence Glenmurray
received a challenge from the angry baronet, appointing him to meet him
that afternoon at five o'clock, about two miles from Bath. To this note,
for fear of alarming the suspicions of Adeline, Glenmurray returned only
a verbal message, saying he would answer it in two hours: but as soon as
she returned he pleaded indispensable business; and before she could
mention any fears respecting the consequences of what had passed between
him and Sir Patrick, he had left the room, having, to prevent any alarm,
requested leave to wait on her early the next day. As soon as Glenmurray reached his lodgings, he again revolved in his
mind the propriety of accepting the challenge. 'How can I expect to
influence others by my theories to act right, if my practice sets them
a bad example?' But then again he exclaimed, 'How can I expect to have
any thing I say attended to, when, by refusing to fight, I put it in
the power of my enemies to assert I am a poltroon, and worthy only of
neglect and contempt? No, no; I must fight:--even Adeline herself,
especially as it is on her account, will despise me if I do not:'--and
then, without giving himself any more time to deliberate, he sent an
answer to Sir Patrick, promising to meet him at the time appointed. But after he had sent it he found himself a prey to so much self-reproach,
and after he had forfeited his claims to consistency of conduct, he felt
himself so strongly aware of the value of it, that, had not the time of
the meeting been near at hand, he would certainly have deliberated upon
some means of retracting his consent to it. Being resolved to do as little mischief as he could, he determined on
having no second in the business; and accordingly repaired to the field
accompanied only by a trusty servant, who had orders to wait his master's
pleasure at a distance. Contrary to Glenmurray's expectations, Sir Patrick also came unattended
by a second; while his servant, who was with him, was, like the other,
desired to remain in the back ground. 'I wish, Mr Glenmurray, to do every thing honourable,' said the baronet,
after they had exchanged salutations: 'therefore, Sir, as I concluded
you would find it difficult to get a second, I am come without one, and
I _conclude_ that I _concluded_ right.--Aye, men of your principle can
have but few friends.' 'And men of your practice ought to have none, Sir Patrick,' retorted
Glenmurray: 'but, as I don't think it worth while to explain to you my
reasons for not having a second, as I fear that you are incapable of
understanding them, I must desire you to take your ground.' 'With all my heart,' replied his antagonist; and then taking aim, they
agreed to fire at the same moment. They did so; and the servants, hearing the report of the pistols, ran to
the scene of action, and saw Sir Patrick bleeding in the sword-arm, and
Glenmurray, also wounded, leaning against a tree. 'This is cursed unlucky,' said Sir Patrick coolly: 'you have disabled my
right arm. I can't go on with this business at present; but when I am
well again command me. Your wound, I believe, is as slight as mine; but
as I can walk, and you cannot, and as I have a chaise, and you not, you
shall use it to convey you and your servant home, and I and mine will go
on foot.' To this obliging offer Glenmurray was incapable of giving denial; for he
became insensible from loss of blood, and with the assistance of his
antagonist was carried to the chaise, and supported by his terrified
servant, conveyed back to Bath. It is not to be supposed that an event of this nature should be long
unknown. It was soon told all over the city that Sir Patrick O'Carrol
and Mr Glenmurray had fought a duel, and that the latter was dangerously
wounded; the quarrel having originated in Mr Glenmurray's scoffing at
religion, king, and constitution, before the pious and loyal baronet. This story soon reached the ears of Mrs Mowbray, who, in an agony of
tender sorrow, and in defiance of all decorum, went in person to call
on her admired Sir Patrick; and Adeline, who heard of the affair soon
after, as regardless of appearances as her mother, and more alarmed,
went in person to inquire concerning her wounded Glenmurray. By the time that she had arrived at his lodgings, not only his own
surgeon but Sir Patrick's had seen him, as his antagonist thought it
necessary to ascertain the true state of his wound, that he might know
whether he ought to stay, or fly his country. The account of both the surgeons was, however, so favourable, and
Glenmurray in all respects so well, that Sir Patrick's alarms were soon
quite at an end; and the wounded man was lying on a sofa, lost in no
very pleasant reflections, when Adeline knocked at his door. Glenmurray
at that very moment was saying to himself, 'Well;--so much for principle
and consistency! Now, my next step must be to marry, and then I shall
have made myself a complete fool, and the worst of all fools,--a man
presuming to instruct others by his precepts, when he finds them
incapable of influencing even his own actions.' At this moment his servant came up with Miss Mowbray's compliments, and,
if he was well enough to see her, she would come up and speak to him. In an instant all his self-reproaches were forgotten; and when Adeline
hung weeping and silent on his shoulder, he could not but rejoice in an
affair which had procured him a moment of such heartfelt delight. At
first Adeline expressed nothing but terror at the consequences of his
wound, and pity for his sufferings; but when she found that he was in
no danger, and in very little pain, the tender mistress yielded to the
severe monitress, and she began to upbraid Glenmurray for having acted
not only in defiance of her wishes and principles, but of his own; of
principles laid down by him to the world in the strongest point of view,
and in a manner convincing to every mind. 'Dearest Adeline, consider the provocation,' cried Glenmurray:--'a gross
insult offered to the woman I love!' 'But who ever fought a duel without provocation, Glenmurray? If
provocation be a justification, your book was unnecessary; and did not
you offer an insult to the understanding of the woman you love, in
supposing that she could be obliged to you for playing the fool on her
account?' 'But I should have been called a coward had I declined the challenge;
and though I can bear the world's hatred, I could not its contempt:--I
could not endure the loss of what the world calls honour.' 'Is it possible,' rejoined Adeline, 'that I hear the philosophical
Glenmurray talking thus, in the silly jargon of a man of the world?' 'Alas! I am a man, not a philosopher, Adeline!' 'At least be a sensible one;--consistent I dare not now call you. But
have you forgotten the distinction which, in your volume on the subject
of duels, you so strongly lay down between real and apparent honour? In which of the two classes do you put the honour of which, in this
instance, you were so tenacious? What is there in common between the
glory of risking the life of a fellow-creature, and testimony of an
approving conscience?' 'An excellent observation that of yours, indeed, my sweet monitress,'
said Glenmurray. 'An observation of mine; It is your own,' replied Adeline: 'but see, I
have the book in my muff; and I will punish you for the badness of your
practice, by giving you a dose of your theory.' 'Cruel girl!' cried Glenmurray, 'I am not ordered a sleeping draught!' Adeline was however resolved; and, opening the book, she read argument
after argument with unyielding perseverance, till Glenmurray, who,
like the eagle in the song, saw on the dart that wounded him his own
feathers, cried 'Quarter!' 'But tell me, dear Adeline,' said Glenmurray, a little piqued at her too
just reproofs, 'you, who are so severe on my want of consistency, are
you yourself capable of acting up in every respect to your precepts?' 'After your weakness,' replied Adeline, smiling, 'it becomes me to
doubt my own strength; but I assure you that I make it a scruple of
conscience, to show by my conduct my confidence in the truth of my
opinions.' 'Then, in defiance of the world's opinion, that opinion which I, you
see, had not resolution to brave, you will be mine--not according to the
ties of marriage, but with no other ties or sanction than those of love
and reason?' 'I will,' said Adeline: 'and may He whom I worship' (raising her fine
eyes and white arms to heaven) 'desert me when I desert you!' Who that had seen her countenance and gesture at that moment, could have
imagined she was calling on heaven to witness an engagement to lead a
life of infamy? Rather would they have thought her a sublime enthusiast
breathing forth the worship of a grateful soul. It may be supposed that Glenmurray's heart beat with exultation at this
confession from Adeline, and that he forgot, in the promised indulgence
of his passion, those bounds which strict decorum required. But
Glenmurray did her justice; he beheld her as she was--all purity of
feeling and all delicacy; and, if possible, the slight favours by which
true love is long contented to be fed, though granted by Adeline with
more conscious emotion, were received by him with more devoted respect:
besides, he again felt that mixture of pain with pleasure, on this
assurance of her love, which he had experienced before. For he knew,
though Adeline did not, the extent of the degradation into which the
step which her conscience approved would necessarily precipitate her;
and experience alone could convince him that her sensibility to shame,
when she was for the first time exposed to it, would not overcome her
supposed fortitude and boasted contempt of the world's opinion, and
change all the roses of love into the thorns of regret and remorse. And could he who doted on her;--he, too, who admired her as much for her
consummate purity as for any other of her qualities;--could he bear to
behold this fair creature, whose open eye beamed with the consciousness
of virtue, casting her timid glances to the earth, and shrinking with
horror from the conviction of having in the world's eye forfeited all
pretensions to that virtue which alone was the end of her actions! Would
the approbation of her own mind be sufficient to support her under such
a trial, though she had with such sweet earnestness talked to him of its
efficacy! These reflections had for some time past been continually
occurring to him, and now they came across his mind blighting the
triumphs of successful passion:--nay, but from the dread of incurring
yet more ridicule, on account of the opposition of his practice to his
theory, and perhaps the indignant contempt of Adeline, he could have
thrown himself at her feet, conjuring her to submit to the degradation
of being a wife. But, unknown to Glenmurray, perhaps, another reason prompted him to
desire this concession from Adeline. We are never more likely to be in
reality the slaves of selfishness, than when we fancy ourselves acting
with most heroic disinterestedness.--Egotism loves a becoming dress, and
is always on the watch to hide her ugliness by the robe of benevolence. Glenmurray thought that he was willing to marry Adeline merely for _her_
sake! but I suspect it was chiefly for _his_. The true and delicate
lover is always a monopolizer, always desirous of calling the woman
of his affections his own: it is not only because he considers marriage
as a holy institution that the lover leads his mistress to the altar;
but because it gives him a right to appropriate the fair treasure to
himself,--because it sanctions and perpetuates the dearest of all
monopolies, and erects a sacred barrier to guard his rights,--around
which, all that is respectable in society, all that is most powerful and
effectual in its organization, is proud and eager to rally. But while Glenmurray, in spite of his happiness, was sensible to an
alloy of it, and Adeline was tenderly imputing to the pain of his wound
the occasionally mournful expression of his countenance, Adeline took
occasion to declare that she would live with Glenmurray only on condition
that such a step met with her mother's approbation. 'Then are my hopes for ever at an end,' said Glenmurray:--'or,--or' (and
spite of himself his eyes sparkled as he spoke)--'or we must submit to
the absurd ceremony of marriage.' 'Marriage!' replied the astonished Adeline: 'can you think so meanly
of my mother, as to suppose her practice so totally opposite to her
principles, that she would require her daughter to submit to a ceremony
which she herself regards with contempt?--Impossible. I am sure, when I
solicit her consent to my being yours, she will be pleased to find that
her sentiments and observations have not been thrown away on me.' Glenmurray thought otherwise: however, he bowed and was silent; and
Adeline declared that, to put an end to all doubt on the subject, she
would instantly go in search of Mrs Mowbray and propose the question to
her: and Glenmurray, feeling himself more weak and indisposed than he
chose to own to her, allowed her, though reluctantly, to depart. Mrs Mowbray was but just returned from her charitable visit when Adeline
entered the room. 'And pray, Miss Mowbray, where have you been?' she
exclaimed, seeing Adeline with her hat and cloak on. 'I have been visiting poor Mr Glenmurray,' she replied. 'Indeed!' cried Mrs Mowbray: 'and without my leave! and pray who went
with you?' 'Nobody, ma'am.' 'Nobody!--What! visit a man alone at his lodgings, after the education
which you have received!' 'Indeed, madam,' replied Adeline meekly, 'my education never taught me
that such conduct was improper; nor, as you did the same this afternoon,
could I have dared to think it so.' 'You are mistaken, Miss Mowbray,' replied her mother: 'I did not do the
same; for the terms which I am upon with Sir Patrick made my visiting
him no impropriety at all.' 'If you think I have acted wrong,' replied Adeline timidly, 'no doubt I
have done so; though you were quite right in visiting Sir Patrick, as
the respectability of your age and character, and Sir Patrick's youth,
warranted the propriety of the visit:--but, surely the terms which I am
upon with Mr Glenmurray--'

'The terms which you are upon with Mr Glenmurray! and my age and
character! what can you mean?' angrily exclaimed Mrs Mowbray. 'I hope, my dear mother,' said Adeline tenderly, 'that you had long
ere this guessed the attachment which subsists between Mr Glenmurray
and me;--an attachment cherished by your high opinion of him and his
writings; but which respect has till now made me hesitate to mention to
you.' 'Would to heaven!' replied Mrs Mowbray, 'that respect had made you
for ever silent on the subject! Do you suppose that I would marry my
daughter to a man of small fortune,--but more especially to one who, as
Sir Patrick informs me, is shunned for his principles and profligacy by
all the world?' 'To what Sir Patrick says of Mr Glenmurray I pay no attention,' answered
Adeline; 'nor are you, my dear mother, capable, I am sure, of being
influenced by the prejudices of the world.--But you are quite mistaken
in supposing me so lost to consistency, and so regardless of your
liberal opinions and the books which we have studied, as to think of
_marrying_ Mr Glenmurray.' 'Grant me patience!' cried Mrs Mowbray; 'why, to be sure you do not
think of living with him _without_ being married?' 'Certainly, madam; that you may have the pleasure of beholding one union
founded on rational grounds and cemented by rational ties.' 'How!' cried Mrs Mowbray, turning pale. 'I!--I have pleasure in seeing
my daughter a kept mistress!--You are mad, quite mad.--_I_ approve such
unhallowed connexions!' 'My dearest mother,' replied Adeline, 'your agitation terrifies me,--but
indeed what I say is strictly true; and see here, in Mr Glenmurray's
book, the very passage which I so often have heard you admire.' As she
said this, Adeline pointed to the passage; but in an instant Mrs Mowbray
seized the book and threw it on the fire. Before Adeline had recovered her consternation Mrs Mowbray fell into a
violent hysteric; and long was it before she was restored to composure. When she recovered she was so exhausted that Adeline dared not renew
the conversation; but leaving her to rest, she made up a bed on the
floor in her mother's room, and passed a night of wretchedness and
watchfulness,--the first of the kind which she had ever known.--Would
it had been the last! In the morning Mrs Mowbray awoke, refreshed and calm; and, affected at
seeing the pale cheek and sunk eye of Adeline, indicative of a sleepless
and unhappy night, she held out her hand to her with a look of kindness;
Adeline pressed it to her lips, as she knelt by the bed-side, and
moistened it with tears of regret for the past and alarm for the future. 'Adeline, my dear child,' said Mrs Mowbray in a faint voice, 'I hope you
will no longer think of putting a design in execution so fraught with
mischief to you, and horror to me. Little did I think that you were so
romantic as to see no difference between amusing one's imagination with
new theories and new systems, and acting upon them in defiance of common
custom, and the received usages of society. I admire the convenient
trousers and graceful dress of the Turkish women; but I would not wear
them myself, lest it should expose me to derision.' 'Is there no difference,' thought Adeline, 'between the importance of a
dress and an opinion!--Is the one to be taken up, and laid down again,
with the same indifference as the other!' But she continued silent, and
Mrs Mowbray went on. 'The poetical philosophy which I have so much delighted to study, has
served me to ornament my conversation, and make persons less enlightened
than myself wonder at the superior boldness of my fancy, and the acuteness
of my reasoning powers;--but I should as soon have thought of making
this little gold chain round my neck fasten the hall-door, as act upon
the precepts laid down in those delightful books. No; though I think all
they say is true, I believe the purity they inculcate too much for this
world.' Adeline listened in silent astonishment and consternation. Conscience,
and the conviction of what is right, she then for the first time learned,
were not to be the rule of action; and though filial tenderness made her
resolve never to be the mistress of Glenmurray, she also resolved never
to be his wife, or that of any other man; while, in spite of herself,
the great respect with which she had hitherto regarded her mother's
conduct and opinions began to diminish. 'Would to heaven, my dear mother,' said Adeline, when Mrs Mowbray had
done speaking, 'that you had said all this to me ere my mind had been
indelibly impressed with the truth of these forbidden doctrines; for now
my conscience tells me that I ought to act up to them!' 'How!' exclaimed Mrs Mowbray, starting up in her bed, and in a voice
shrill with emotion, 'are you then resolved to disobey me, and dishonour
yourself?' 'Oh! never, never!' replied Adeline, alarmed at her mother's violence,
and fearful of a relapse. 'Be but the kind affectionate parent that you
have ever been to me; and though I will never marry out of regard to
my own principles, I will also never contract any other union, out
of respect to your wishes,--but will lead with you a quiet, if not a
_happy_ life; for never, never can I forget Glenmurray.' 'There speaks the excellent child I always thought you to be!' replied
Mrs Mowbray; 'and I shall leave it to time and good counsels to convince
you, that the opinions of a girl of eighteen, as they are not founded
on long experience, may possibly be erroneous.' Mrs Mowbray never made a truer observation; but Adeline was not in a
frame of mind to assent to it. 'Besides,' continued Mrs Mowbray, 'had I ever been disposed to accept
of Mr Glenmurray as a son-in-law, it is very unlikely that I should be
so now; as the duel took place not only, I find, from the treasonable
opinions which he put forth, but from some disrespectful language which
he held concerning me.' 'Who could dare to invent so infamous a calumny!' exclaimed Adeline. 'My authority is unquestionable, Miss Mowbray; I speak from Sir Patrick
himself.' 'Then he adds falsehood to his other villanies!' returned Adeline,
almost inarticulate with rage:--'but what could be expected from a man
who could dare to insult a young woman under the roof of her mother with
his licentious addresses?' 'What mean you?' cried Mrs Mowbray, turning pale. 'I mean that Sir Patrick yesterday morning insulted me by the grossest
familiarities, and--'

'My dear child,' replied Mrs Mowbray laughing, 'that is only the usual
freedom of his manner; a manner which your ignorance of the world led
you to mistake. He did not mean to insult you, believe me, I am sure
that, spite of his ardent passion for me, he never, even when alone with
me, hazarded any improper liberty.' 'The ardent passion which he feels for you, madam!' exclaimed Adeline,
turning pale in her turn. 'Yes, Miss Mowbray! What, I suppose you think me too old to inspire
one!--But, I assure you, there are people who think the mother handsomer
than the daughter!' 'No doubt, dear mother, every one ought to think so,--and would to
heaven Sir Patrick were one of those! But he, unfortunately--'

'Is of that opinion,' interrupted Mrs Mowbray angrily: 'and to convince
you--so tenderly does he love me, and so fondly do I return his passion,
that in a few days I shall become his wife.' Adeline, on hearing this terrible information, fell insensible on the
ground. When she recovered she saw Mrs Mowbray anxiously watching by
her, but not with that look of alarm and tenderness with which she had
attended her during her long illness; that look which was always present
to her graceful and affectionate remembrance. No; Mrs Mowbray's eye was
cast down with a half-mournful, half-reproachful, and half-fearful
expression, when it met that of Adeline. The emotion of anguish which her fainting had evinced was a reproach to
the proud heart of Mrs Mowbray, and Adeline felt that it was so; but
when she recollected that her mother was going to marry a man who had
so lately declared a criminal passion for herself, she was very near
relapsing into insensibility. She however struggled with her feelings,
in order to gain resolution to disclose to Mrs Mowbray all that had
passed between her and Sir Patrick. But as soon as she offered to renew
the conversation, Mrs Mowbray sternly commanded her to be silent; and
insisting on her going to bed, she left her to her own reflections, till
wearied and exhausted she fell into a sound sleep: nor, as it was late
in the evening when she awoke, did she rise again till the next morning. Mrs Mowbray entered her room as she was dressing and inquired how she
did, with some kindness. 'I shall be better, dear mother, if you will but hear what I have to say
concerning Sir Patrick,' replied Adeline, bursting into tears. 'You can say nothing that will shake my opinion of him, Miss Mowbray,'
replied her mother coldly: 'so I advise you to reconcile yourself to a
circumstance which it is not in your power to prevent.' So saying, she
left the room: and Adeline, convinced that all she could say would be
vain, endeavoured to console herself, by thinking that, as soon as Sir
Patrick became the husband of her mother, his wicked designs on her
would undoubtedly cease; and that, therefore, in one respect, that
ill-assorted union would be beneficial to her. Sir Patrick, meanwhile, was no less sanguine in his expectations from
his marriage. Unlike the innocent Adeline, he did not consider his union
with the mother as a necessary check to his attempts on the daughter;
but, emboldened by what to him appeared the libertine sentiments of
Adeline, and relying on the opportunities of being with her, which he
must infallibly enjoy under the same roof in the country, he looked on
her as his certain prey. Though he believed Glenmurray to be at that
moment preferred to himself, he thought it impossible that the superior
beauty of his person should not, in the end, have its due weight: as a
passion founded in esteem, and the admiration of intellectual beauty,
could not, in his opinion, subsist: besides, Adeline appeared in his
eyes not a deceived enthusiast, but a susceptible and forward girl,
endeavouring to hide her frailty under fine sentiments and high-sounding
theories. Nor was Sir Patrick's inference an unnatural one. Every man
of the world would have thought the same; and on very plausible
grounds. As Sir Patrick was not 'punctual as lovers to the moment sworn', Mrs
Mowbray resolved to sit down and write immediately to Glenmurray;
flattering herself at the same time, that the letter which was designed
to confound Glenmurray would delight the tender baronet;--for Mrs
Mowbray piqued herself on her talents for letter-writing, and was not a
little pleased with an opportunity of displaying them to a celebrated
author. But never before did she find writing a letter so difficult a
task. Her eager wish of excelling deprived her of the means; and she
who, in a letter to a friend or relation, would have written in a
style at once clear and elegant, after two hours' effort produced the
following specimen of the obscure, the pedantic, and affected.--


       'SIR,

     'The light which cheers and attracts, if we follow its
     guidance, often leads us into bogs and quagmires:--Verbum
     sapienti. Your writings are the lights, and the practice to
     which you advise my deluded daughter is the bog and quagmire. I
     agree with you in all you have said against marriage;--I agree
     with the savage nations in the total uselessness of clothing;
     still I condescend to wear clothes, though neither becoming nor
     useful, because I respect public opinion; and I submit to the
     institution of marriage for reasons equally cogent. Such being
     my sentiments, Sir, I must desire you never to see my daughter
     more. Nor could you expect to be received with open arms by me,
     whom the shafts of your ridicule have pierced, though warded
     off by the shield of love and gallantry;--but for this I thank
     you! Now shall I possess, owing to your baseness, at once a
     declared lover and a tried avenger; and the chains of Hymen
     will be rendered more charming by gratitude's having blown the
     flame, while love forged the fetters. 'But with your writings I continue to amuse my
     imagination.--Lovely is the flower of the nightshade, though
     its berry be poison. Still shall I admire and wonder at you as
     an author, though I avoid and detest you as a man. 'EDITHA MOWBRAY.' This letter was just finished when Sir Patrick arrived, and to him it
was immediately shown. 'Heh! what have we here?' cried he laughing violently as he perused it. 'Here you talk of being pierced by shafts which were warded off. Now,
had I said that, it would have been called a bull. As to the concluding
paragraph--'

'O! that, I flatter myself,' said Mrs Mowbray, 'will tear him with
remorse.' 'He must first understand it,' cried Sir Patrick: 'I can but just
comprehend it, and am sure it will be all botheration to him.' 'I am sorry to find such is your opinion,' replied Mrs Mowbray; 'for I
think that sentence the best written of any.' 'I did not say it was not fine writing,' replied the baronet, 'I only
said it was not to be understood.--But, with your leave, you shall send
the letter, and we'll drop the subject.' So said, so done, to the great satisfaction of Sir Patrick, who felt
that it was for his interest to suffer the part of Mrs Mowbray's letter
which alluded to Glenmurray's supposed calumnies against her to remain
obscurely worded, as he well knew that what he had asserted on this
subject was wholly void of foundation. Glenmurray did not receive it with equal satisfaction. He was indignant
at the charge of having advised Adeline to become his mistress rather
than his wife; and as so much of the concluding passage as he could
understand seemed to imply that he had calumniated her mother, to remain
silent a moment would have been to confess himself guilty: he therefore
answered Mrs Mowbray's letter immediately. The answer was as follows:--


       'MADAM,

     'To clear myself from the charge of having advised Miss Mowbray
     to a step contrary to the common customs, however erroneous,
     of society at this period, I appeal to the testimony of Miss
     Mowbray herself; and I here repeat to you the assurance which
     I made to her, that I am willing to marry her when and where
     she chooses. I love my system and my opinions, but the
     respectability of the woman of my affections _more_. Allow me,
     therefore, to make you a little acquainted with my situation in
     life:

     'To you it is well known, madam, that wealth, honours, and
     titles have no value in my eyes; and that I reverence talents
     and virtues, though they wear the garb of poverty, and are born
     in the most obscure stations. But you, or rather those who are
     so fortunate as to influence your determinations, may consider
     my sentiments on this subject as romantic and absurd.