My bosom swelled, as if it could no longer contain its fraught. I looked at him with eyes of affection. I sobbed out, God bless
you! God bless you! God bless you!---and burst out of the room. The moment I was alone, I cried, This is the triumph of innocence! No;

it is impossible such expressions, such accents, could be forced from a guilty bosom!---I was beside myself with joy. ---Happy, happy Fleetwood! said I: I will
make ample amends to both these injured angels, for my misconstruction! ---I wished to revoke the orders I had given for the journey of the ensign. But, no;

part of the amends I owed, was to bury for ever so dishonourable a suspicion in my own breast. I returned to Kenrick. I poured out to him the torrent of my
feelings. Go, my sweet lad, said I, object of my dearest love! Wherever you are, my heart goes with you. You are the honestest fellow that ever wore the human form. There is no resisting the eloquence of your emotions. Depend upon it, from me you never shall experience any thing but kindness! Thank you, thank you, uncle! You

have taken a thousand weight from my breast.---But, uncle, you were angry with me? Do not talk of it! It is all a mistake. God bless you! Farewel!---We parted. Kenrick took a most affectionate leave of his brother. This is the first time, said he, we have ever been together, since I was quite a child. Do not think
however I have forgotten your kindness to me then! You have borne me in your arms a thousand times. You brought me apples and dainties; and defended me
against
playmates who wished to injure me. But now, Gifford, we know each other. I do not now like you, because you have procured me pleasure, but because I read
your
brotherly heart. I shall never, I am afraid, be so sagacious and clear-sighted as you are; but I shall always remember, how anxious you have been to employ
those talents for my benefit. Let us now exchange

the engagements of an everlasting friendship! I can never be of the use to you, that you always have been, and ever will be, to me. Never mind that! My heart
will beat as warmly to you, as heart of brother ever did; and I know your good-nature will accept that as frankly, as if it brought the Indies along with it. My interests will be safe in your protection; and you will never allow me to lose ground in the affections of my kind uncle in absence. Gifford was not behind his brother in protestations of attachment; and solemnly prayed that he might so prosper in the journey of life, as he should prove, on
every momentous occasion, the vindicator and advocate of his friend. Tears embellished the instant of their separation. Kenrick had but one spare hour. That hour Mary and he spent in a sociable walk. I felt no displeasure that they did

so. No; I had sworn that suspicion should never again pollute my bosom. I however thought it somewhat remarkable; and with an unspotted curiosity determined to
watch their steps. They went toward the Abbey-churchyard. There a plain slab was affixed against the wall, to mark the place where the ashes of the elder
Kenrick reposed. They approached it together. Satisfied as I was, that there could be nothing very private in such a conference, I made a small circuit, and

joined them as if by accident. Uncle, said Kenrick, I am glad you are come. Many a pilgrimage have I made to this unornamented spot; and my aunt insisted that, before I left Bath, I should
lead her to my father's grave. Look at that stone! The name and surname inscribed there, and the register of birth and death, are to me the most eloquent
epicedium that ever was penned. I do not know whether I at all remember my father; the images I have of him are mixed up with the descriptions I have heard from his kindred; I was only three
years old when he died. Nobody speaks of him in Montgomeryshire without enthusiasm; the moment they mention his name, the guardian genius of the departed
seems
to descend upon them, and to utter the words of saintlike praise by their humble organs. They never speak of him, but their eyes emit sparkles of fire. Never

man, according to them, was so consummate in a knowledge and skill, almost supernatural. His flesh was macerated, and his complexion blanched, with
indefatigable research; and he never came forth from his retreat, but to dispense health and scatter benefits all around him. But what they speak of with
most
admiration, is his temper, so innocent, so sweet, so affectionate; his mild eye, beaming with

goodness to the whole world. The tongue of my father never held acquaintance with a falshood; duplicity and artifice never coloured an action of his life. You
cannot think, aunt, you cannot think, uncle, what good it does me to remember my father! I never hear the honest people talk about him, but I feel his blood

stirring in my veins. Yes; I may do a thousand imprudent and foolish deeds; but the son of Kenrick can never commit an act of lying or treachery. The honest eulogium of the poor ensign drew tears from both his auditors. I was astonished at myself that I could have distrusted so gallant and singleminded a
youth. I resolved that this should be a lesson to me, how I ever again admitted suspicion into my bosom. Yet there lay, in apparent repose, the embers of
jealousy, the communications of my unknown informer, and the remarks

of Gifford upon what he had seen at the Rooms; liable to be called up into a blaze, whenever new fuel should be brought to the spark within me. The whole
family attended Kenrick as he mounted his horse: in going through the passage, he pressed the hand of Mary to his lips, and said, Remember! He was out of
sight
in a moment. The temper by which I was actuated, and which had made me all my life no less eager and exemplary to repair wrong, than I was sometimes rash to commit it,
directed me on this occasion. I could not bear to think that I had misconstrued the guileless and generous heart of my military cousin. I could not sleep in
my
bed, till I had atoned to the extent of my power for the injury I had done him. I procured for him an exchange of his colours for a lieutenancy, and added to

it the lucrative appointment of paymaster to his regiment. I inclosed this

double commission in the following letter. "DEAR EDWARD,
"You thought I parted from you in anger. You must not think so. Perhaps you are too flighty and full of spirits for such a grave fellow as I am. But, if I ever
felt that, it was my infirmity, and not yours, that I accused of unreasonableness. I know your heart, and I would trust my life and all that is dear to me,
to
its integrity. Go on as you have done: you cannot alter, but for the worse. Your light and lively carriage adorns the rectitude of your sentiments, often
makes
you amusing, and never leads you to any thing vicious. I inclose you a little Christmas remembrance. Be assured of the unalterable affection of your faithful

friend,
"CASIMIR FLEETWOOD." To this letter I received an answer,

full of gratitude and the ingenuous phrases of regard. The same turn of thought which rendered me thus friendly to Kenrick, inspired me with a more than usual degree of kindness to my wife. Though she was
unacquainted with the wrong I had done her, it did not the less haunt my remembrance: and, as is perhaps always the case with a generous spirit, the innocent

person whom I had injuriously treated, appeared more lovely, and worthy of esteem in my eyes, than ever. The departure of Kenrick gave a little more
sedateness
to our domestic economy. Mary seemed to have got the better, both of the alarming depression she had suffered at the equinox, and the hardly less alarming
levity which had succeeded. She appeared to me scarcely to have a fault. We had never been so happy. I was all solicitude for the gratification

of her desires and inclinations. I anticipated her wishes; I attended her, wherever she went. But, what was most pleasing to her, I sympathised in all her
feelings, and was cheerful or serious, as her countenance gave me the signal to be one or the other. While I procured the advancement of Kenrick, I was also

employed in negotiating an appointment for Gifford. At no time of my life had I been so perfectly in good humour with my own thoughts. I could at least
congratulate myself on being instrumental to the advantage and happiness of every member of my family. I said, Macneil, you were in the right; you are no
less
infallible than the oracles of antiquity were fabled to be; your advices deserve to be written in letters of gold, and placed on the front of the Pantheon of

the human race! Gifford congratulated me upon the

satisfaction I had obtained to all my doubts. He reminded me, how constantly he had been on the side which I had now happily embraced, how, under every
unfavourable appearance, he had pledged himself for the innocence of both the suspected parties. In reality, he witnessed the triumph of truth on this occasion, with the sentiments of a demon. Deep as the thought himself in plotting, and consummate in the
arts of hypocrisy, he saw all his webs swept away in a moment, merely through the frank and ingenuous carriage of his destined prey. The innuendoes and
subornation of a whole month were destroyed. His own practices were turned against him. Kenrick stood higher in my favour than ever; my wife was restored to
my
confidence; and, for aught that appeared, my unborn heir might make his entrance into the world, without having the circumstances of his birth

tarnished with the blasts of suspicion and calumny. Shortly after the time when the honest ensign took his leave of us, I hired for myself a convenient residence, near the town of Newbury in Berkshire. I have
already mentioned that I had a particular antipathy to the city of Bath. I thought myself fortunate, in being able to impute the uneasiness and ill-humour I

had sometimes betrayed while I suffered under the practices of Gifford, to this antipathy. Mary was now become the pattern of reason and accommodation; our
harmony was unmingled and entire; she cheerfully concurred in, and even promoted, my removal, though it was yet the depth of winter; being desirous, as she
said, to make some compensation for the repeated causes of uneasiness she had administered to me. One other circumstance made this change of scene not
ungratifying to her. Mr. Scarborough,

the father of a young lady for whom my wife had conceived a strong affection at Bath, had a seat within two short miles of the house I had fixed upon; and he,
about this time, summoned his daughter to quit Bath, and return home. Mr. Scarborough himself was disliked by his neighbours, and many calumnious stories
were
propagated to his disadvantage; but his daughter was every where regarded with affection. Poets have been most ambitious to describe the beauties of nature, as they are seen in the freshness of spring, or the luxuriance of autumn. I know not whether
it was any depravity of taste in me, that I viewed her with almost equal pleasure in the desolation of winter. Strange sensations of grandeur are always
produced in my heart, when I behold the leafless trees, and hear the blustering of the north-wind. At times when the whole world, both land and water,

is bound up in iron, and every branch and shoot are fringed with the congealed moisture which the frost expels from them, I am filled with admiration at the
extraordinary scene, so unlike that universal pregnancy and growth which form our most familiar idea of the globe we inhabit. What can be more magnificent
than
a snow-storm, when ten thousand flakes are whirled in circling eddies, and drifts are formed, that might almost bury an army in their capacious bosom? The
sad-moving cattle, which just serve to spot the unbounded scene, make me feel that the world is not yet robbed of all living inhabitants, and remind me that

there is still a power which cares for the creatures it has made. When the whole heavens are blackened with congregated clouds, I have the sublime sensations

of a friendless and deserted adventurer

cast alone upon an unknown shore, without the terrible anticipations which fill his heart with anguish: and if at any time, in the midst of this ungenial
season, the sun bursts forth with ten-fold glory, and seems to diffuse a more resplendent beam than autumn ever knew, I feel that the human species has one
friend left, a friend that may gladden the heart, and animate the countenance, of all sadness but despair. We had not been long in Berkshire, before Gifford set his machinations fresh at work. Ignorant as I was of my true interest, of who loved and who hated me, I
could not easily command the resolution to part with his society. I carried on certain negociations for obtaining him an advantageous situation in the navy. In
this pursuit repeated difficulties started up, that procrastinated our success. To say truth, Gifford himself did not appear anxious about the prosperity of
my
application. He had projects, in the event of which his guileful heart was more interested, that required his presence at home. It was on the day preceding the festival of Christmas, that I happened to

pass through my wife's dressing-room, about half an hour after she had set out in the carriage upon a morning-visit to the friend and neighbour I have
mentioned. By seeming accident, the corner of a letter caught my eye, which jetted out from one of the toilet-boxes that formed a portion of the furniture of

this apartment. The first undesigning glance I caught of it, suggested to me the idea, It is the hand-writing of Kenrick. I could not refrain from examining

the superscription. Beyond a doubt it was the pen of the ensign that had written it. It was directed to my wife. I started at the circumstance. This is not well, cried I. I am satisfied of the innocence of your sentiments: yet why correspond? why carry on a clandestine correspondence, of which I have
never received the least intimation? Most assuredly this discovery would not have made the smallest unfavourable

impression upon me, but for the incidents and insinuations which had been thrust on my notice at Bath. What if my wife corresponded with my kinsman? What harm
was there in that? What if these letters had never been communicated to me? Did I demand that Mary should give me an account of all her steps? There was no
true generosity in such a demand. There can be no genuine love, love that derives its nurture from the plenteous storehouse of esteem, where a large reliance

is not placed on the discretion of the person loved. A thousand actions, not modelled by the laws of hoary-headed vigilance, here are graceful. "Where virtue

is, these are most virtuous." How was I to conduct myself? Was I to pass on, and not deign to notice what I saw? Was I to say, I will give an attentive heed to events as they arise, but I
never will be indebted for knowledge,

either of a gratifying or distressing nature, to any indirect proceeding? This mode of acting was most agreeable to what was moral and decorous; but I had not
fortitude enough for this. Should I determine to gratify my curiosity by the most generous means? Should I avow to Mary the fact, that I had met with the superscription of the letter by
accident, and request her to acquaint me with its contents, and the circumstances that had given birth to it? Neither was my fortitude equal to this. By
applying to Mary in person, I put myself in the power of the offender. I should be exciting, almost compelling her, if guilty, to invent a plausible story,
by
which my understanding might be duped. All these views of the subject passed through my mind with the utmost perturbation, and I snatched up the letter, resolved not to defer a moment longer

the satisfaction of my doubts. I tore it open. I glanced my eyes over the contents. The first words that presented themselves were those of love, "impatience
of absence," and amorous complaints that the writer's "ardour had not obtained a like return." The paper dropped from my hand. It is all over, I said; and I am a wretch for ever! This was indeed a thunder-stroke to me. The reports of what passed at the rooms at Bath depended for their meaning upon the fidelity of the reporter, and at
worst were ambiguous, admitting of a variety of interpretations. Here was the hand-writing of one of the parties, witnessing to the offences of both. Was it the hand-writing of Kenrick? It would be idiotism to doubt it! The conviction that it was, did not rest upon my infirmity of temper. I had perceived it
at once, when I was far from being

aware of the guilty contents of the writing within. No, no; never again will I confide in the integrity of a human creature! Kenrick, did your countenance and tones cure me of all my doubts? That countenance was
the steadiness of a villain; those tones were the glossiness of a hypocrite. How unheard-of a wretch! I threw myself into his arms; that did not move him. I

wrote him a letter burning with words of affection; I told him, I would trust my life in his hands. He returned me an answer, echoing and mimicking back to
me
the emotions of my heart. That did not disturb him; he did not suspend for a moment his traitor-machinations. He put the certificate containing my liberal
benefactions into his writing-box; he took out at the same instant the sheet of paper which he has scrabbled over with stimulants of lust and adultery to my

wife! I took it up to examine it more minutely. Such a paper, I said, may be conclusive against the writer; does it with the same certainty involve the condemnation
of the receiver? Kenrick, thou art a villain! Thou hast subscribed thyself such! Half my confidence in the human species is subverted for ever. But what mean

thy complaints? What means the expression, of an "ardour that is not returned with a correspondent ardour?" Miserable wretch! what straws are these at which I catch to preserve myself from despair! The natural sense of the phrase is, You love me little; you burn for
me with a fervour not altogether equal to that which pervades my bosom. Would he have written of love, would he have avowed a lover's impatience of absence,
to
one who had never heard and acquiesced in a similar language from his lips? Where is the profligate so

hardened, that would dare to insult a matron's purity with such an address? And what did she, when she received the villainous billet? Did she communicate to
me the insult which had been put upon her, and expose the unnatural viper in the manner he deserved? Did she at least send back the envenomed scrowl to him
from whom it came, and by her noble indignation convince him how much she disdained his criminal suggestions? No, no; none of these. She receives it in all
tranquillity, as a matter of course, as a matter well corresponding with the temper of her mind, and at which she conceives neither surprise nor resentment. She thrusts it carelessly into an open casket, so little does her heart regard it as the horrible thing which it is. Gracious God, to what a height of impudence and remorseless crime must this woman have attained! It is the concluding

stage of guilt, that takes no precautions against discovery. She who offends for the first time against the laws of chastity and God, with how confused and
fearful a mind does she do it! How does she dread the encounter of every eye! In what tenfold mystery does she envelop this deed of darkness! And Mary
scatters
about her at random, and without advertence, the evidences of her guilt! In this terrible state of my thoughts, I sought relief in the conversation of Gifford. I put into his hands the letter I had found. I fixed my eyes upon his
countenance as he read it. He betrayed successive tokens of the deepest consternation. He folded it up, with a slow and dejected motion. It is all over! said

he. She shall not sleep another night under my roof! I cried, with a voice frantic with rage and despair. Gifford started.---What do you mean? Mean? said I. Do you think I will bear the presence of an adultress? Do you think I will not make them both an example for terror to all future offenders? Take care, sir, take care! This is evidence only against one of the parties. One! Did she not receive it? Did she not receive it in silence? Has she not kept it in her possession, instead of returning it to the accursed writer? It is too true! I can no longer attempt to vindicate either. How much has your worthy and noble nature been abused! Wretched brother! No, no longer my
brother!---Yet still, sir, this is not evidence, either for a court of justice, or for an unmoved and cold-blooded bystander. If you proceed against mrs.
Fleetwood on no stronger grounds, the world will condemn you. What care I for the world? Dear sir, in so solemn a transaction, let me intreat you to go on the surest proofs. You may wish you had done so, when it is too late. I would have evidences,
that none could refute or question, that should shut up the mouths of the transgressors themselves, that should entitle you, if you think proper, to strip
her
of the name she has dishonoured, by due process of law. A letter! a mere love-letter, written at random, that may have been a pure experiment, that may be
pretended to have been designed for another, that was never answered so far as we can tell, that was never acted upon! Fie, sir, fie! These are not things,
to
annihilate the peace of families, and to dissolve the most sacred ties religion itself can frame! What would you have me do? Return the letter to the very place in which you found it. Well! Hold yourself upon the alert! A short time will no doubt produce further proofs. A short time! Perhaps not! Time may weaken, instead of corroborate, the proof in my hand. And what shall I do with this short time? Unhappily, alas! Mary and I
have been for some weeks on better and more affectionate terms than ever. Barbarous, remorseless crocodile! ---Shall I for this short time personate the fond

lover, the confident, secure, transported husband? Yes; and, if no new proofs arise, I suppose I am to set all my fears at rest, and confess that this is
exemplarily virtuous! This letter is probably not the only one that has passed between them. There may be others in her possession,

which speak of the sort of answers she has returned to her correspondent. That shall be known! I will break open, and search every repository she has! And suppose you find nothing? May there not be a quieter and less violent way of proceeding? I will steal her keys from her to-night, as she sleeps. Thus we concerted every thing with a view to the completely confounding the guilty parties: I resolved not to see Mary again, till I had completed the search I
designed. I took horse, and rode over into Hampshire, leaving word at home, that I should not return till late. This was unusual; the days were short; Mary
was
alarmed. She and Gifford dined together. The remarks of this conspirator did not tend to calm her spirits. He told her I had gone out, apparently in much
disturbance. She enquired of the servants: no letter or message had been brought me, to account for this. All this struck her as of evil augury. She recollected the
impatience and unreasonableness of my temper, and was appalled. Gifford artfully turned the conversation upon the dark imaginations of jealous husbands, and

the sufferings of the innocent victims of their suspicion. He left her early, and left her in tears. Gifford took his leave of my wife, under pretence of retiring to his chamber to look over some accounts which I had desired him to inspect; but in reality to
meet me according to appointment, at a small inn in the neighbourhood. I had passed a joyless and oppressive day. Winter no longer conveyed to me, as it did
on
my first arrival in Berkshire, sensations of delight. The weather was flagging, sombrous and melancholy. It mutually gave colour to, and received

it from, what passed within me. I dismissed my servant, after a few miles riding, and bade him return home. I could not bear to be subjected to the observation
of a human creature. I did not flatter myself with the hope that my wife was innocent. I have before this called myself a misanthrope; but I never felt the
bitterness of misanthropy invade, and lord it triumphant over my breast, till now. I saw Kenrick, as he stood at the tomb of his father, and in his parting
embrace; I recollected his letter of thanks on his late promotion, the devotedness of heart that breathed in every line of it. No; I defy the whole world to

draw a picture of hypocrisy, to be compared with that which my recent discovery had brought home to my mind! When I thought of my wife, the case was still worse. Till this hour, I never knew how much I had loved her. The

passion I had felt for the ladies of quality who had been my mistresses in France, young as I then was, and full of the ardour and enthusiasm of beginning
life, was nothing. I had entertained for her so perfect an esteem! My passion beginning in the instinct of the sexes, had been consecrated by sentiments so
generous, so elevated, so spiritual! We had lived together. He that has never experienced, can form no idea of the effects of sitting together continually at

the same hearth on terms of entire equality and cordiality. It had made the partner of my roof flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone. Recent as our union
had
been, I could no more form a distinct idea of living without her, than without any of those vital parts, which were born with me, and which together made me

man. The very infirmities of her delicate frame had rendered her dearer to me; I was her shelter, her bed-side

watch, the physician of her soul. I wanted such an object to engage my care; she stood in need of such a guardian. My last Parisian mistress had driven me out among the wilds of mount Jura, more a maniac than a man. What was I now? I had pistols with me! As I strayed
without a path on one of the heaths of Hampshire, I grasped them in my hand. I applied one of them to my head. I dashed it upon the ground. I whirled the
other
with the whole force of my arm to a distance from me. Vengeance! vengeance! I cried. I will not die like a dog; I will have vengeance! I dismounted from my
horse; the bridle dropped from my hand. The beast stood pensive and faithful beside me. I threw myself on the ground. I wallowed and roared aloud, as I
measured my length on the earth. Let my fellow-being look upon me in this abject condition,

and despise me! He that despises me, is no man! How ridiculous are all other stories of adultery compared to mine! The adulterer is no Kenrick! The accursed minion is not the surviving daughter of Macneil! They are not two persons, selected out of all countries and ages of the earth, to laugh at future professions of sincerity, to make it impossible that the
word
Honesty should ever again be pronounced among the children of men. One sees how they came together. One sees their despicable politics and manoeuvres, with
what shallow gestures they pretended to be sober, with what flimsy outsides they veiled their pollution. One of the parties is practised in guilt; the other
is
of so idiot and imbecile a character, as to seem to have waited only for the occurrence of temptation. They are not, like my betrayers, in the full bloom of

innocence, with every virtuous

sentiment, and every just principle, beaming from their eyes. If ever angels fell from the majestic purity of heaven, this at least was the first time that
such a scene had been realised on earth. I returned toward my own house in a delightful mood for the investigation of matron innocence. I met Gifford. He told me how my wife had conducted herself,
that, on the mere intelligence of my absence, she had been greatly alarmed, that she had passed the evening in tears, and that, fatigued with the anxiety of

her thoughts, she had retired early to bed. I grasped his hand.---I cannot bear her tears! Are they not the witnesses of her guilt? Who told her you suspected her? What is it that has thus whispered her to anticipate accusation? Gifford, you are my friend! You do

not attempt to excuse her. I may pity her; my friend cannot. We entered the house with cautious and wary steps. We stole along softly to my apartment. I felt that we trod the galleries carefully, like conspirators going
to commit a murder. We had come home late. I said, I can have patience no longer.