Upon my soul, madam, if you will send him to prison, you may go for an

officer yourself. I will have nothing to do with it. For my part, I wonder what your heart is made of, to think of such a thing. Go, you are a fool!---Well, let him get out of my house! Let him tramp, as fast as his ten toes can carry him! If ever I catch him again, I will have no more
mercy upon him, than I would upon the claw of a lobster!---Be gone, you gallows little rascal! Off with you! I took advice of the relentings of the good woman, and decamped. I know not why however, I was by no means eager to leave the street in which she lived. I felt
as if in her house I had left behind me that property, which had been so essential to my projects. I began to suspect that, notwithstanding her loudness and

apparent fury, the mention of the conciergerie was a trick, and that all her aim had been to get me out of her territories. This however, if true, would

by no means mend the case: it was impossible that I should obtain redress. It was well for me that I lingered in my pace. I had not departed above two minutes, before I felt some one tap me upon the shoulder. It was my friend, Betty,
the bar-maid. She held in her hand a pretty substantial roll of bread ready buttered, which she presented to me. She chucked me under the chin; and, after an

expressive God bless you, my brave lad! she tripped away by the path by which she came. The offerings of gold, frankincense and myrrh, presented by the wise men of the East, were not more acceptable to the mother of Jesus, than this homely roll
and butter were to me at this moment. Yet I was not hungry by sensation; my heart was too full of the crosses I had sustained: but I was hungry by
reflection. This is a distinction that will be perfectly intelligible to every

one, however heart-full, who shall suppose himself alone for the first time in an immense metropolis, without a morsel of bread, or the means of procuring
it. Poor Betty's roll and butter proved to me nectar and ambrosia in one. I did not eat it immediately; but, in proportion as I did, I felt my spirit revive within
me. To have been left without comfort and without food at this critical period, might have been fatal to me. But the courage of a child, the sunshine of his

soul, is easily called back; and, when the animal feeling of inanition was extinguished within me, something friendly seemed to whisper to me not to despair. I
had conquered the greatest part of the distance; I was only twelve miles from Versailles. A walk of four hours would bring me to that place, which I had
regarded as the assured goal of my lasting prosperity. No sooner did the thought occur to me, than I resolved to lose no time to realise it. I arrived at Versailles about the middle of a very hot day, broiling with
the sun, and covered with dust. I immediately entered the park; and, having gained a favourable situation for viewing the palace, protected by the shadow of

overhanging trees, I threw myself upon the grass. The first idea that struck me was, Versailles is infinitely grander and more magnificent than
Fontainebleau. With my eye I measured the piles, surveyed the architecture, and remarked the moveable and immoveable objects around me. Shortly however I forgot myself, and fell asleep. Yes, arrived at my haven,

and with every thing for which I had panted apparently within my ken, I fell asleep! Heat and fatigue contributed to this; but I apprehend I should not have
been thus overtaken, if it had not been for the misfortunes which that morning had overtaken me. A mitigated and familiar sorrow blunts the faculties, and
disposes to lethargy. I had not slept long before I was roused from my oblivion by the sound of a fife, and the passing along of a file of soldiers. This was to me a most agreeable
moment. I shook myself, and gazed intently upon the men as they passed. I recognised in them, as I stood still to view, the physiognomy of my native country. While I lived at home in the canton of Uri, I was unaware of the existence of this physiognomy; the particulars which distinguished the persons around me
from
each other, were more remarked by me, than those in

which they resembled. But my residence at Lyons had sharpened my perceptions in this respect. Every man loves his native soil; and the Swiss are said to have
more of this sentiment than any other people. I had myself been in a state of banishment, and, as I may phrase it, a state of solitary imprisonment. Whenever
I
met a Swiss in the streets of Lyons, my little heart leaped within my bosom, and I could not help hailing him as a brother in the peculiar phraseology of my

country. My salutation never failed to call forth a cheerful and affectionate response from the person to whom it was addressed. This was usually all that
occurred: we mutually bade each other Good-day; and passed on. Yet this kind of encounter often furnished me with an intellectual feast for a whole day; it
made the sun shine upon me through the opake windows of the silk-mill, and cheered my

soul as I stood at the swifts. An accident of this nature did not fail to happen to me twenty times during my abode at Lyons, and perhaps with as many
different persons. It had been one of the motives that secretly stimulated me in my project upon the king of France, that I knew that the favourite guards of his court were
Swiss, and that, when I came there, I should feel so much the less a stranger, as I should be able to speak, and address my enquiries, to my own countrymen. To
a poor, destitute and pennyless vagabond, it was at this moment like heaven, to gaze upon the countenances of a little cluster of my countrymen, at the same

time that I recollected that I was four hundred miles distant from my native home. It was like Macbeth gazing upon the descendants of Banquo, except that,
though the view in each instance was pregnant with emotion,

my emotions were of a nature opposite to his: every countenance, as it passed in series and succession before me, gave new sting to my pleasure, and elevated
my heart an inch the higher. I said to myself, These men will surely be my friends; removed as we are from the spot where nature produced us, they will feel

that here I belong to them; they will not leave a poor Swiss child to perish for hunger within their quarters.---It was a restoration from death to life. As they proceeded along in a sort of parade, I dared not on this occasion address them with my customary salutation. I resolved to wait, till I could meet with
one of them not upon duty, and alone. It was not necessary for me to wait long. As I strayed about the park, I met with a respectable looking man, a private,

with an infant in his arms. I saluted him, and we entered

into conversation. He seemed surprised at seeing me there, and asked me whether I belonged to any of the companies on duty at Versailles. I told him nearly the
same particulars of my story, as I had communicated to the mayor of Dijon. I said, I was the son of a Swiss, and that I was born at home. My parents had
brought me up in ease and opulence; but they were now dead, and, having left me, their only child, to the care of an uncle, this treacherous guardian had
turned me adrift upon the world. Agreeably to my former resolution, I did not mention Lyons, and I abstained from violating the secret which my uncle had so

tremendously enjoined me. I concluded however with my adventure of that morning, and the loss of all that I had. The honest Swiss believed my story. He seated me by him on a bench, and put the child on his knee; and, in token

of his sympathy with my adventures, took me affectionately by the hand, when I had concluded my little narrative. He uttered several exclamations, and made
several remarks, upon the particulars as I related them; but, as his remarks were those of a common soldier, and his understanding, as I presently perceived,

was in no respect superior to his station, they are not worth mentioning. He observed, that he was afraid I had not eaten that day. Not a morsel, except the roll and butter given me by Betty, the bar-maid. God bless you, my boy! exclaimed he with some emotion, come home along with me, and you shall at least partake of the fare, such as it is, that I have provided
for my wife and children. I willingly accepted his invitation, and we went together. As we entered the little apartment of his family, My love, said he, here is a poor Swiss boy,
just

come from his own country, and without a penny in his pocket: you must give him a little supper, and he shall stay with us to-night. The wife was no less
prompt in exercising this small hospitality than her husband. They had three sons, beside the infant; and we sat round a cheerful board together. I seized this opportunity of asking the soldier a variety of questions concerning the king, which he regarded probably as the mere curiosity of a stranger. He
told me, that the king was not at present at Versailles, but had been for some days at Marli, which place he principally frequented for the diversion of
hunting. I enquired into the situation of this place, and was pleased to find that it was only four or five miles from Versailles. I set off for Marli early

the next morning. When I arrived, I found the king had gone forth already to his hunt, and probably would not return till the day was

considerably advanced. A Swiss soldier gave me my breakfast at Marli, as the private at Versailles had entertained me the evening before. This man was a being
of more reflection than the former; and, when I had owned that I was without money, pressed me to inform him what was my errand at Marli, and what prospects
I
had for the future. This generous anxiety and forecast warmed my heart: the deliberating benevolence of an ordinary soldier, however narrow may be his power,

is not less interesting to the feelings, than that of a lord. I begged him however to excuse me; I intreated him to give himself no concern about me; and
assured him that, though I was destitute now, I had means of speedily putting an end to my distress. I broke away from this man as soon as I decently could, and wandered about the park and gardens. I saw him two

or three times in the course of the day, and once passed so near a sentry-box where he was on duty, that he had an opportunity in a low voice to desire me to
come again to his hut, when his business of the day should be over. At length I heard the sound of clarinets and horns, the signal of the return from
hunting. I saw the hounds, and heard the trampling of horses; and presently the cavalcade appeared. The sound and the sight were cheerful, and my bosom was in
tumults. Suddenly I recollected myself, and started away for the door, of which I had previously gained information, where the king was to alight. Several attendants

and lacqueys pressed to the same spot. I saw the persons on horseback alight, and, coming up to one of them, cried with earnestness and enthusiasm, Sire,
hear
what I have to say, and listen to my prayer! In the confusion of my mind, I had mistaken the individual,

in spite of my precaution of the portrait: it was not the king. The nobleman to whom I spoke, exclaimed, What, what is all this? the lacqueys hurried me out of
the circle; the king alighted, and the scene was closed. I know not whether it will appear incredible that a child as I was should have been capable of this daring. It was in reality perhaps because I was a child,
that I was capable of it. I understood very imperfectly the distinctions of rank in artificial society. I was wholly ignorant of the forms and fences which
are
set up to separate one man from the rest of his brethren. A king to the imagination of a child is but a man; and I was accustomed, as perhaps all boys are
accustomed, to meet him in fancy in the fields and the highways, and to conceive him a guest in my father's house. The first time I ever beheld a peacock's
feather, I found something royal in it; and

a man wearing a peacock's feather upon his bosom would to me have been a king. Add to which, I had never disclosed my plan to a human creature. Timidity is the
child of experience or of admonition. I was not without timidity in the present instance; I understood the degree of presumption there was in addressing a
gentleman and a stranger; and I understood no more. If I set out in my project with these notions, my courage was considerably reinforced as I proceeded. I had meditated my project perpetually, till enthusiasm
supplied the place of intrepidity. I had so often acted the scene over in my fancy that the whole was become perfectly familiar: it was like some situations

which perhaps every man has encountered in life, new and extraordinary in themselves, but which feel like recollections, and he exclaims, This is my dream! Recollect, in addition to

these things, the urgency of my condition, the desperateness of my fortune, my hatred to the silk-mills of Lyons, the long journey I had performed, the hard
adventures I had encountered, the emptiness of my purse, the immediate cravings of nature. All these things goaded me forward, and made me look upon the
ignominy of deliberation as the worst of evils. In the evening the king walked upon the terrace in the gardens. I informed myself exactly of his appearance and insignia, that I might make no second mistake. There was a flight of about fifty steps that led up to the terrace; and guards were placed upon a landing- place in the middle, and at the bottom. These
guards
were not Swiss, but French. I had reflected, and found this spot the most favourable in the world for the execution of my project. The king, I was told,
usually walked here for an

hour, and conversed familiarly with a variety of persons. I approached to ascend, but was stopped by the soldiers. My garb was mean, and they told me, a boy of
my appearance could not go up there! I was filled with impatience. There was a similar flight of steps at the other end of the terrace; I burst away from
these
persons, and hastened to the second flight. Here I was stopped again. Repeated disappointments now made me desperate, and I struggled with the soldiers, in
the
vain hope to pass in spite of their efforts. An attendant who passed by, recognised me for the child who had endeavoured to speak with the king before
dinner. This circumstance induced them to conduct me to the guard-house. A child, as I was, they took for granted could not be a dangerous intruder; but it was their

business to keep off impertinence, and prevent his majesty from being disturbed. The soldier who took me under his care asked me, with some degree of kindness, What I wanted, and what purpose I had in view in speaking to the king? But I was
now grown sullen, and would only answer in gloomy monosyllables. After some time, I was conducted to the gate of the park, and thrust out into the high road. The soldiers left me, and I sat down upon a stone. Here my reflections were sufficiently melancholy. I would have returned, if I had been able, to the hut of the centinel who had invited me; but that was
unfortunately within the inclosure. What was I to do? I was by no means cured of my project of speaking to the king. How bitter were my rage and indignation

against the villain who had stripped me of the trifling sum of money on which I had depended! I wanted, I thought, but a little time; but how was I to gain
time, when I was without food? The objection I had heard made against me, was the meanness of my clothing: if my money had not been taken from me, I could
have
removed this objection. My ruminations were inexpressibly melancholy. As I sat, several gentlemen passed me, who had probably made part of the company in the royal promenade. I must endeavour to obtain from some one the means of
appeasing the demands of hunger. Should I apply to these? There was nothing in their appearance that invited me. Moved by my experience of the past, I was
inclined to wait till I could see a soldier and a fellow- countryman. Yet of what avail was the relief I could so obtain? I had not come hither to subsist
upon
the precarious charity of daily bread! Far different views had animated my steps in a course of three hundred miles! What was I to do to-morrow? At Marli I
should find myself marked, and watched, and thwarted in all my attempts. When would the king return to Versailles? Those of the persons who passed me and were on foot, passed me by twos and threes. Others went in carriages and on

horseback. At length one gentleman came alone. He looked at me, and advanced to the place where I sat. My boy, said he, are not you the little fellow that attempted to speak to the king? I looked up at the gentleman. He was beyond the middle period of human life. I thought I had never seen so benign a countenance. Besides, there was something
in him that struck me with a remarkable similarity to my own father. I am, sir, answered I with a sigh. And what could you want to say to the king? I am friendless: I have nobody to take care of me: I wanted to tell him that. Was your father a military man? Did he wear the croix de St. Louis ? My father was no military man: he was never in France in his life. Good God!---And who told you to apply to the king? Nobody told me. The scheme is all my own. I have come three hundred miles to execute it. The stranger became interested in my artless story. Will you come to my lodgings to-morrow morning? I shall sleep at Marli.---And he gave me his address. I will, sir, replied I. But---but---
But what, my little man? I am very hungry! Every new circumstance I mentioned astonished him the more. He perceived, as he afterward told me, that I was by no means without education, and a certain
refinement. To have formed such a project, to have come three hundred miles to complete it, and to be here without a penny,---! He was determined to be more

fully acquainted with so strange story!---He took out his purse. Do you know, my boy, how to procure yourself accommodations for the night? I have not travelled three hundred miles for nothing. Well, take care of yourself to-night, and come to me in the morning. I looked at the address. The name on the card was Ambrose Fleetwood. The generous man who accosted me in my desolate condition was your grandfather. This was
the first time I had ever seen the name of Fleetwood; and, till this pulse ceases to throb, the occasion that brought us together will never be forgotten! This
is the foundation of the friendly alliance of Fleetwood and Ruffigny.---Upon what a precipice was I then placed! Even at the distance of so many years, I
cannot recollect it, without feeling my head turn giddy. For what did my destiny seem to reserve me? For beggary, for hunger,---to perish

for want of food; or, if not, without guide or protector, and with no means of present subsistence, to become the associate of the worthless and the vile, the
only persons, probably speaking, who would court such an associate. Oh, how infinitely worse would this have been, than the most unpitied death!--- The king
of
France!---was ever poor wretch misled by such an ignis faluus ? did ever condemned criminal brave the fury of the ocean in such a cockle-shell? I repaired at the appointed hour to the residence of my new protector. He asked me a number of questions; and I gave him the same answers, but with more of
detail than I had given on previous occasions. He was urgent in his enquiries; he spoke to me in the most friendly and soothing manner; I was on the brink of

discovering my secret; I intreated him however to spare

me: I had been robbed by my uncle; but I did not dare to tell, where and who he was. The generous Englishman perceived that I gasped and turned pale, as I
touched on this tremendous subject. He became deeply interested in my behalf. Will you go with me to my own country? said he. Oh, no, no! If you are so much my friend as to be willing to take me thither, then---pray, pray, sir!---do for me the thing I want; enable me to change these
clothes for others more suitable to my projects. I raved of the king of France. The scheme of applying to him had been my favourite contemplation for months. I had had his picture so often before me! The
thought of him had soothed my weary steps, and comforted me under all my disasters. I could not give up my plan. I could not divest myself of the

sort of robe of nobility with which my fancy had clothed me, and descend into the vale of ordinary life. I intreated my benefactor with miraculous and
unpacified importunity that he would direct all his assistance to this end. Enthusiasm is always an interesting spectacle. When it expresses itself with an honest and artless eloquence, it is difficult to listen to it, and not in some
degree to catch the flame. Particularly at my age it was so extraordinary in itself, and so impetuous in its way of manifesting itself, that it was
impossible
to contemplate it without sympathy. There are so many ways in which the heart of man conceals itself from man! Beside the thousand motives which impel us to

suppress one thing, and to be reserved respecting another, it is necessary that the human mind should be put into motion in order to its being seen. Speak,
that I may see thee! said the ancient

philosopher. He might have added, Speak upon some subject, respecting which your feelings are spontaneous and strong. The soul of man is one of those subtle
and evanescent substances, that, as long as they remain still, the organ of sight does not remark; it must be agitated, to become visible. All together, Mr.

Fleetwood grew exceedingly anxious respecting my welfare. On this account he condescended to a certain degree of artifice and temporising. He observed to me that I had ruined my own project at Marli, and that it would
be ten days before the king removed to Versailles. He invited me to spend this time with him at Paris, during which I should be clothed and equipped more
suitably to the great person I designed to address. He promised me that I should have the earliest intelligence of the removal of the court. In how new a situation was I now unexpectedly

placed! I had not heard the accents of genuine kindness for almost two years; not since the calamitous moment, when my father uttered his expiring breath. Mr.
Fleetwood, almost from the first, conceived for me the affection of a father. He did not treat me as a vagabond whom he had taken up out of charity, and keep

me at a distance from him. I saw him, morning, noon and night. His accents were those of friendly solicitude; the looks I cast upon him were those of
affection. My spirit was softened within me: my new situation took away from me the heart of stone, and gave me a heart of flesh. It was this heart of stone, if you will allow me so to express myself, that led me to the king of France. It was the sentiment of despair: I had sent my
enquiring glances round the world, and had not found a friend. Methodically and slowly I had worked myself up to

the resolution I had adopted, and I could not immediately abandon it. It was a sort of frenzy, a high pitch of the soul, foreign to its natural temper. Kindness, the perpetual attention and interest of a real friend, in no long time brought me back to myself. It is impossible to express what comfort, what a

delicious relaxation and repose of spirit, was produced by this revolution. Mr. Fleetwood gradually led me to consider the scheme I had formed, as wild,
senseless and impracticable. His expostulations were so gentle, benignant and humane, that, while they confuted, they had not the effect of mortifying me. He

took me with him to England. I have been thus minute in the description of my condition at Lyons, and of the manner of my deserting it, that I might the better demonstrate to you the
infinite value of the kindness your grandfather bestowed on me. If I had not

been the most unfortunate, the most abused, and the most deserted of my species, the favours I received would not have had a tithe of the value they actually
possessed. I cannot recollect the situation I deserted, or that upon which I threw myself, without a horror bordering on despair. The generous and admirable

mortal that then interposed for my relief, I must ever regard as my guardian genius, and my better angel. How distinctly have I passed over in my mind ten
thousand times the stone upon which I sat at the gate of the park of Marli, and the gesture and countenance with which my preserver approached me! The day
was
declining, the landscape had assumed the grave and uniform hues of evening, and there was that sadness in the air which wakes up the tone of sensibility in
the
soul. The circumstances in which I was placed, sufficiently prepared me to be deeply affected. The first

word that Ambrose Fleetwood uttered went to my heart. I had occasionally perhaps been treated during my journey with gentleness and civility: but it was the
difference between the voice that tells you which turn you are to take in the road from Auxerre to Sens, and the voice that tells you by implication that the

speaker is interested that you shall go right in the road of happiness and life.---With what considerate wisdom did this noble Englishman soothe me in the
midst of the exalted and enthusiastic fervour which had brought me to Versailles and Marli! How patiently did he wean me from the wild plan upon which my
heart
was bent! And all this to an unknown and pennyless vagabond! There is perhaps more merit in this temper, that listened to all my extravagancies without
anger,
and did not suffer itself to be discouraged

by my tenaciousness and stubbornness, than in the gift of thousands. In our journey to England, I was so fortunate as continually to advance in your grandfather's good graces. He thought me, as he afterward told me, a youth of
very extraordinary qualifications, and well-deserving of his care. He sent me to proper schools, and had me taught every thing which he believed it would be

important for me to know. He was an English merchant, and he determined to provide for me in some of those departments, in which commerce opens the road to
competence and wealth. It was not till after a very long time, that I could prevail upon myself to unfold my heart to my benefactor, respecting my extraction, and the way in which I
had been driven to the deplorable situation in which he found me. Your grandfather

often enquired of me what were the condition in which I was born, and the prospects which my birth had opened to me; but I manifested such a shrinking of the
soul, such a convulsive kind of terror, whenever the subject was started, that for some time he forbore all mention of it. The alarm had been impressed on me

early, and had taken deep root in my breast. While I was at Lyons, it formed the peculiarity of my situation, and I cherished it with a strange and mingled
sentiment, something between horror and delight. Every human creature loves perhaps to think that there is something extraordinary about him, and dwells with

complacency upon that which makes him different from all his race. I felt like an exiled sovereign, or a prince who roams about the world in disguise. I
firmly
believe that it was partly to both these notions, of self-complacency, and of terror, that I was indebted,

for the habit of regarding the names of my father and my uncle as the most inviolable of secrets. At length I became convinced by the unaltered kindnesses of my benefactor, that my secret would be no less safely reposed in his keeping, than in the recesses
of my own soul. I told him the whole. He was astonished at the terror with which I had looked forward to the disclosure, and proposed immediately to take
such
measures as should operate to compel my uncle to resign his ill-gotten wealth. I intreated him that he would engage in no proceedings of that sort; I
reminded
him of his promise that my secret should never be communicated to a third person without my consent. My uncle, however deeply he had injured me, was still
the
brother of my father, and in that quality I could not but feel reluctance at the idea of exposing him to public

ignominy. The menaces with which he had so emphatically dismissed me, were still impressed on my heart; they gave me a horrible anticipation of the event which
would attend my hostile return to my native land; and I could not help apprehending that that event would be miserable to me, no less than to him. I implored

your grandfather that he would suffer the question to remain unopened, at least till I had arrived at a mature age. He had often assured me that, having only

one son, he did not regard the expences I brought on him as a burthen; but, if he did, I did not desire the situation he provided for me, or the advantages
he
bestowed; the tithe of his benefits would amply satisfy my ambition and my wishes. To occasion an entire revolution in the fortunes and situation of my
family,
was a very serious consideration; it might be the most important transaction of my life; and I

earnestly intreated that in such a transaction I might be allowed to consult the ripest decisions of my own understanding. Your grandfather generously yielded
to these representations. The principal friend I had in England, after my original benefactor, was your father. We were nearly of an age, and your grandfather brought us up together. I
saw in him the image of the man who had rescued me from utter destruction, and loved him accordingly. Your father was acquainted with my situation, and knew

that I had no claim either of blood or alliance upon my preserver: he saw me brought up with himself, and enjoying the same advantages; yet he never repined
at
the favour in which I was held. Not only while we were children together, he regarded me as a brother; but this sentiment never altered in him as he advanced

in judgment and years. He never looked upon me as an intruder;

never considered the large sums your grandfather laid out to procure me a respectable footing in life; nor even enquired whether, as I equally shared the
bounties of my benefactor at present, he might not make a distribution of his property at death no less impartial. Could I help loving so disinterested and
noble-minded a companion? Having been perfectly initiated in the principles of commerce in the country where they are best understood, it happened that, about the time when it was
proper I should be launched in the world, a proposition was made to the elder Fleetwood, respecting a banking-house which it was in contemplation to set up
at
Lisbon. A countryman of my own was the principal in the project; but his capital was not sufficient for the undertaking as it had been chalked out, and he
designed taking in one or two other persons as partners with him in the

concern. Provided he could enter upon the affair in the way which had been delineated, he had the promise of being immediately installed as banker to the court
of Portugal. Your grandfather was an opulent London merchant, and had no inclination to extend his concerns. His son he destined for his successor in the
business in which he was himself engaged. Under these circumstances he thought of embracing the proposal in my behalf. I was never more surprised than when the idea was suggested to me. The money necessary to be advanced, was more than three times the amount which my father's
property would have produced, if it had been all sold immediately on the event of his death. I was suffocated with the thought of so incredible a generosity

exercised toward me. I told my benefactor that I was as far from the expectation as the wish of becoming

opulent, and that, independently of a secret feeling which led me to the hope of one day settling in my native fields, I could be contented to remain for ever
the first clerk in my preserver's counting-house. Your grandfather answered me, that he much disapproved of a character deficient in enterprise, and asked, how the humility of the views I at present professed,
accorded with the ardour which had formerly led me to throw myself at the feet of the sovereign of France? He said, I had with my own consent passed through

all the stages of a commercial education, and that therefore it seemed but reasonable, that whatever enterprise I possessed, should be directed into that
channel. He expatiated upon the uses of wealth, and observed that, however limited might be my desire of indulgences for myself, I ought by no means to
forget
the great public works which an

opulent man might forward for the benefit of his species, or how extensive was his power of relieving distress, of exciting industry, of developing talents, of
supplying the means of improvement to those who panted for, but could not obtain them, and of removing the innumerable difficulties which often surrounded
the
virtuous and the admirable, which impeded their progress, and struck despair into their hearts. My benefactor recommended to me to make myself perfectly easy, as to the money necessary to be advanced, to launch me in the undertaking proposed. He could
spare it without the smallest inconvenience. If my views in life were unsuccessful, it should never be repaid, and he should then have the satisfaction of
having exerted himself liberally to establish in life a youth, whom he loved no less than his own son. But he had no doubt that the undertaking would be

prosperous; and then he consented, if that would be any gratification to me, that I should repay the present loan, only upon one condition, that the first
installment of the repayment should not commence till that day seven years, counting from the day of my landing in Lisbon: young men, who entered upon
business
with a borrowed capital, had often received a fatal check in the midst of the fairest prospects, by a premature repayment of the loan which had originally
set
them afloat on the ocean of life. Ruffigny, continued your grandfather, what miserably narrow notions are these which you seem to have fostered in your bosom! Are all the kindnesses of the
human heart to be shut up within the paltry limits of consanguinity? My son will have enough; and I am sure he will not repine, that you should be made a
partaker of the opulence with which providence has blessed me. If you will,

we will ask him, and I will do nothing for you that has not his entire and undissembled approbation. Why should I not set up two persons in the world, instead
of one? Thirty-six princes, we are told, erected each of them a pillar in the temple of Diana at Ephesus: why should I not erect two pillars in the edifice
of
human happiness, and prepare two persons, instead of one, to be benefactors of their species? You are my son, a son whom the concourse of sublunary events
has
given me, no less dear to me than the heir of my body. I found in you various estimable qualities, which won my attachment in the first hour I saw you; and I

trust, those qualities have lost nothing in the cultivation I have given them. You belonged to me, because you belonged to no one else. This is the great
distribution of human society; every one who stands in need of assistance appertains to some one individual,

upon whom he has a stronger claim than upon any other of his fellow-creatures. My son belongs to me, because I was the occasion of his coming into existence;
you belong to me, because you were hungry and I fed you, because you wanted education and a protector and have found them in me. You are now arrived at man's

estate, and I regard you as the creature of my vigilance and of my cares. Will you not acknowledge me for a father? I was convinced by the arguments of my preserver; I was moved by the feelings he expressed: my beloved companion, the brother of my heart, declared most warmly
his consent to the arrangement. I resided twenty-one years at Lisbon; and in that time, by honourable and just traffic, made a fortune infinitely beyond the

most sanguine of my wishes. I faithfully repaid to my benefactor, at the time he had himself limited, the capital

he advanced to me. During the period of my residence at Lisbon, I several times came over to England, and visited the two persons whom I reasonably regarded as
the most generous of mortals; and in one of these visits, after I had been ten years engaged as a principal in my commercial undertaking, I witnessed the
expiring breath of my original benefactor. Never perhaps did I love a human creature, as I loved that man. My father, good and kind and affectionate as he
had
been, was to my mind a sort of air-drawn vision, the recollection as it were of a preexistent state. My youthful companion and sworn confident, no less
generous than my preserver, was inexpressibly dear to me; but the sentiment I felt for him was altogether different. Nature has formed us to the love of the

venerable. Filial affection is an instinct twined with the very fibres of our heart. For the

grey hairs of your grandfather I had a mystical and religious awe; and age had softened his features into an expression of such calm benignity, that, if I were
an adherent of the sect of the anthropomorphites, I should take from his countenance my idea of the object of my worship. I should have told you that, about the time of my original departure for Lisbon, your grandfather settled with my consent a correspondence with a citizen of
Zurich, upon whose integrity and discretion he could perfectly rely: he observed that, whatever forbearance I might think proper to exercise toward my uncle

and his family, it was but reasonable that I should obtain from time to time information of his affairs, and learn which of the family were living and dead. I
have already said that my uncle had been unprosperous in all his undertakings: the estate of my father which he so wickedly seized, by no means introduced a

better fortune into his affairs. One by one his children died; he survived them, but survived not long; and the estate fell in the

twentieth year of my residence at Lisbon (for it was understood that I was dead, and my uncle procured vouchers to establish the fact) to a distant branch of
my father's family. Circumstances were now sufficiently favourable to the project upon which my wishes were bent, of returning to my native country, and spending the remainder of
my days in the valley which had given me birth. I communicated my purpose to my correspondent at Zurich; but I was somewhat divided in my mind, whether I
should purchase my paternal estate, and live upon it as a stranger, or should openly claim it as my rightful inheritance. What inclined me to the former was,

that by this expedient I should avoid casting any slur upon the memory of my false guardian. Our family had always ranked among the most patriotic families
of
the Union, and had never sustained any dishonour, except in

the person of my uncle. On the other hand, I could not bear the idea of appearing as a foreigner in my own country: this was but a half-restoration. Why did I
love my country? Not merely for that its scenes had been familiar to my infancy; but that the human mind irresistibly wishes to connect itself with
something.