Why am I reserved for this? Why the tainted wether of the flock, am I not struck to earth among the first? It is hard, very hard,
for one of woman born to endure all that I endure!" Hitherto, with an undaunted spirit, and an high feeling of duty and worth, Adrian had fulfilled his self-
imposed task. I had contemplated him with reverence, and a fruitless desire of imitation. I now
offered a few words of encouragement and sympathy. He hid his face in his hands, and while he
strove to calm himself, he ejaculated, "For a few months, yet for a few months more, let not, O God,
my heart fail, or my courage be bowed down; let not sights of intolerable misery madden this half-
crazed brain, or cause this frail heart to beat against its prison-bound, so that it burst. I have believed
it to be my destiny to guide and rule the last of the race of man, till death extinguish my government;
and to this destiny I submit. "Pardon me, Verney, I pain you, but I will no longer complain. Now I am myself again, or rather I am
better than myself. You have known how from my childhood aspiring thoughts and high desires have
warred with inherent disease and overstrained sensitiveness, till the latter became victors. You know
how I placed this wasted feeble hand on the abandoned helm of human government. I have been
visited at times by intervals of fluctuation; yet, until now, I have felt as if a superior and indefatigable
spirit had taken up its abode within me or rather incorporated itself with my weaker being. The holy
visitant has for a time slept, perhaps to show me how powerless I am without its inspiration. Yet, stay
for a while, O Power of goodness and strength; disdain not yet this rent shrine of fleshly mortality, O
immortal Capability! While one fellow creature remains to whom aid can be afforded, stay by and
prop your shattered, falling engine!" His vehemence, and voice broken by irrepressible sighs, sunk to my heart; his eyes gleamed in the
gloom of night like two earthly stars; and, his form dilating, his countenance beaming, truly it almost
seemed as if at his eloquent appeal a more than mortal spirit entered his frame, exalting him above
humanity. He turned quickly towards me, and held out his hand. "Farewell, Verney," he cried,
"brother of my love, farewell; no other weak expression must cross these lips, I am alive again: to our
tasks, to our combats with our unvanquishable foe, for to the last I will struggle against her." He grasped my hand, and bent a look on me, more fervent and animated than any smile; then
turning his horse's head, he touched the animal with the spur, and was out of sight in a moment. A man last night had died of the plague. The quiver was not emptied, nor the bow unstrung. We
stood as marks, while Parthian Pestilence aimed and shot, insatiated by conquest, unobstructed by
the heaps of slain. A sickness of the soul, contagious even to my physical mechanism, came over me. My knees knocked together, my teeth chattered, the current of my blood, clotted by sudden cold,
painfully forced its way from my heavy heart. I did not fear for myself, but it was misery to think that
we could not even save this remnant. That those I loved might in a few days be as clay-cold as Idris in
her antique tomb; nor could strength of body or energy of mind ward off the blow. A sense of
degradation came over me. Did God create man, merely in the end to become dead earth in the
midst of healthful vegetating nature? Was he of no more account to his Maker, than a field of corn
blighted in the ear? Were our proud dreams thus to fade? Our name was written "a little lower than
the angels;" and, behold, we were no better than ephemera. We had called ourselves the "paragon
of animals," and, lo! we were a "quint-essence of dust." We repined that the pyramids had outlasted
the embalmed body of their builder. Alas! the mere shepherd's hut of straw we passed on the road,
contained in its structure the principle of greater longevity than the whole race of man. How
reconcile this sad change to our past aspirations, to our apparent powers! Sudden an internal voice, articulate and clear, seemed to say:-Thus from eternity, it was decreed:
the steeds that bear Time onwards had this hour and this fulfilment enchained to them, since the
void brought forth its burthen. Would you read backwards the unchangeable laws of Necessity? Mother of the world! Servant of the Omnipotent! eternal, changeless Necessity! who with busy
fingers sittest ever weaving the indissoluble chain of events!-I will not murmur at thy acts. If my
human mind cannot acknowledge that all that is, is right; yet since what is, must be, I will sit amidst
the ruins and smile. Truly we were not born to enjoy, but to submit, and to hope. Will not the reader tire, if I should minutely describe our long-drawn journey from Paris to Geneva? If, day by day, I should record, in the form of a journal, the thronging miseries of our lot, could my
hand write, or language afford words to express, the variety of our woe; the hustling and crowding of
one deplorable event upon another? Patience, oh reader! whoever thou art, wherever thou dwellest,
whether of race spiritual, or, sprung from some surviving pair, thy nature will be human, thy
habitation the earth; thou wilt here read of the acts of the extinct race, and wilt ask wonderingly, if
they, who suffered what thou findest recorded, were of frail flesh and soft organization like thyself. Most true, they were- weep therefore; for surely, solitary being, thou wilt be of gentle disposition;
shed compassionate tears; but the while lend thy attention to the tale, and learn the deeds and
sufferings of thy predecessors. Yet the last events that marked our progress through France were so full of strange horror and
gloomy misery, that I dare not pause too long in the narration. If I were to dissect each incident,
every small fragment of a second would contain an harrowing tale, whose minutest word would
curdle the blood in thy young veins. It is right that I should erect for thy instruction this monument of
the foregone race; but not that I should drag thee through the wards of an hospital, nor the secret
chambers of the charnel-house. This tale, therefore, shall be rapidly unfolded. Images of destruction,
pictures of despair, the procession of the last triumph of death, shall be drawn before thee, swift as
the rack driven by the north wind along the blotted splendour of the sky. Weed-grown fields, desolate towns, the wild approach of riderless horses had now become habitual
to my eyes; nay, sights far worse, of the unburied dead, and human forms which were strewed on
the road side, and on the steps of once frequented habitations, where,
  Through the flesh that wastes away
  Beneath the parching sun, the whitening bones
  Start forth, and moulder in the sable dust. Sights like these had become-ah, woe the while! so familiar, that we had ceased to shudder, or spur
our stung horses to sudden speed, as we passed them. France in its best days, at least that part of
France through which we travelled, had been a cultivated desert, and the absence of enclosures, of
cottages, and even of peasantry, was saddening to a traveller from sunny Italy, or busy England. Yet
the towns were frequent and lively, and the cordial politeness and ready smile of the wooden-shoed
peasant restored good humour to the splenetic. Now, the old woman sat no more at the door with
her distaff-the lank beggar no longer asked charity in courtier-like phrase; nor on holidays did the
peasantry thread with slow grace the mazes of the dance. Silence, melancholy bride of death, went
in procession with him from town to town through the spacious region. We arrived at Fontainebleau, and speedily prepared for the reception of our friends. On mustering
our numbers for the night, three were found missing. When I enquired for them, the man to whom I
spoke, uttered the word "plague," and fell at my feet in convulsions; he also was infected. There
were hard faces around me; for among my troop were sailors who had crossed the line times
unnumbered, soldiers who, in Russia and far America, had suffered famine, cold and danger, and
men still sterner-featured, once nightly depredators in our over-grown metropolis; men bred from
their cradle to see the whole machine of society at work for their destruction. I looked round, and
saw upon the faces of all horror and despair written in glaring characters. We passed four days at Fontainebleau. Several sickened and died, and in the mean time neither
Adrian nor any of our friends appeared. My own troop was in commotion; to reach Switzerland, to
plunge into rivers of snow, and to dwell in caves of ice, became the mad desire of all. Yet we had
promised to wait for the Earl; and he came not. My people demanded to be led forward- rebellion,
if so we might call what was the mere casting away of straw-formed shackles, appeared manifestly
among them. They would away on the word without a leader. The only chance of safety, the only
hope of preservation from every form of indescribable suffering, was our keeping together. I told
them this; while the most determined among them answered with sullenness, that they could take
care of themselves, and replied to my entreaties with scoffs and menaces. At length, on the fifth day, a messenger arrived from Adrian, bearing letters, which directed us to
proceed to Auxerre, and there await his arrival, which would only be deferred for a few days. Such
was the tenor of his public letters. Those privately delivered to me, detailed at length the difficulties
of his situation, and left the arrangement of my future plans to my own discretion. His account of the
state of affairs at Versailles was brief, but the oral communications of his messenger filled up his
omissions, and shewed me that perils of the most frightful nature were gathering around him. At first
the re-awakening of the plague had been concealed; but the number of deaths encreasing, the secret
was divulged, and the destruction already achieved, was exaggerated by the fears of the survivors. Some emissaries of the enemy of mankind, the accursed Impostors, were among them instilling their
doctrine that safety and life could only be ensured by submission to their chief; and they succeeded
so well, that soon, instead of desiring to proceed to Switzerland, the major part of the multitude,
weak-minded women, and dastardly men, desired to return to Paris, and, by ranging themselves
under the banners of the so called prophet, and by a cowardly worship of the principle of evil, to
purchase respite, as they hoped, from impending death. The discord and tumult induced by these
conflicting fears and passions, detained Adrian. It required all his ardour in pursuit of an object, and
his patience under difficulties, to calm and animate such a number of his followers, as might
counterbalance the panic of the rest, and lead them back to the means from which alone safety
could be derived. He had hoped immediately to follow me; but, being defeated in this intention, he
sent his messenger urging me to secure my own troop at such a distance from Versailles, as to
prevent the contagion of rebellion from reaching them; promising, at the same time, to join me the
moment a favourable occasion should occur, by means of which he could withdraw the main body of
the emigrants from the evil influence at present exercised over them. I was thrown into a most painful state of uncertainty by these communications. My first impulse was
that we should all return to Versailles, there to assist in extricating our chief from his perils. I
accordingly assembled my troop, and proposed to them this retrograde movement, instead of the
continuation of our journey to Auxerre. With one voice they refused to comply. The notion circulated
among them was, that the ravages of the plague alone detained the Protector; they opposed his
order to my request; they came to a resolve to proceed without me, should I refuse to accompany
them. Argument and adjuration were lost on these dastards. The continual diminution of their own
numbers, effected by pestilence, added a sting to their dislike of delay; and my opposition only
served to bring their resolution to a crisis. That same evening they departed towards Auxerre. Oaths,
as from soldiers to their general, had been taken by them: these they broke. I also had engaged
myself not to desert them; it appeared to me inhuman to ground any infraction of my word on theirs. The same spirit that caused them to rebel against me, would impel them to desert each other; and
the most dreadful sufferings would be the consequence of their journey in their present unordered
and chiefless array. These feelings for a time were paramount; and, in obedience to them, I
accompanied the rest towards Auxerre. We arrived the same night at Villeneuve-la-Guiard, a town at
the distance of four posts from Fontainebleau. When my companions had retired to rest, and I was
left alone to revolve and ruminate upon the intelligence I received of Adrian's situation, another view
of the subject presented itself to me. What was I doing, and what was the object of my present
movements? Apparently I was to lead this troop of selfish and lawless men towards Switzerland,
leaving behind my family and my selected friend, which, subject as they were hourly to the death
that threatened to all, I might never see again. Was it not my first duty to assist the Protector, setting
an example of attachment and duty? At a crisis, such as the one I had reached, it is very difficult to
balance nicely opposing interests, and that towards which our inclinations lead us, obstinately
assumes the appearance of selfishness, even when we meditate a sacrifice. We are easily led at such
times to make a compromise of the question; and this was my present resource. I resolved that very
night to ride to Versailles; if I found affairs less desperate than I now deemed them, I would return
without delay to my troop; I had a vague idea that my arrival at that town, would occasion some
sensation more or less strong, of which we might profit, for the purpose of leading forward the
vacillating multitude-at least no time was to be lost-I visited the stables, I saddled my favourite
horse, and vaulting on his back, without giving myself time for further reflection or hesitation,
quitted Villeneuve-la-Guiard on my return to Versailles. I was glad to escape from my rebellious troop, and to lose sight for a time, of the strife of evil with
good, where the former for ever remained triumphant. I was stung almost to madness by my
uncertainty concerning the fate of Adrian, and grew reckless of any event, except what might lose or
preserve my unequalled friend. With an heavy heart, that sought relief in the rapidity of my course, I
rode through the night to Versailles. I spurred my horse, who addressed his free limbs to speed, and
tossed his gallant head in pride. The constellations reeled swiftly by, swiftly each tree and stone and
landmark fled past my onward career. I bared my head to the rushing wind, which bathed my brow in
delightful coolness. As I lost sight of Villeneuve-la-Guiard, I forgot the sad drama of human misery;
methought it was happiness enough to live, sensitive the while of the beauty of the verdure-clad
earth, the star-bespangled sky, and the tameless wind that lent animation to the whole. My horse
grew tired-and I, forgetful of his fatigue, still as he lagged, cheered him with my voice, and urged
him with the spur. He was a gallant animal, and I did not wish to exchange him for any chance beast I
might light on, leaving him never to be refound. All night we went forward; in the morning he
became sensible that we approached Versailles, to reach which as his home, he mustered his flagging
strength. The distance we had come was not less than fifty miles, yet he shot down the long
Boulevards swift as an arrow; poor fellow, as I dismounted at the gate of the castle, he sunk on his
knees, his eyes were covered with a film, he fell on his side, a few gasps inflated his noble chest, and
he died. I saw him expire with an anguish, unaccountable even to myself, the spasm was as the
wrenching of some limb in agonizing torture, but it was brief as it was intolerable. I forgot him, as I
swiftly darted through the open portal, and up the majestic stairs of this castle of victories-heard
Adrian's voice-O fool! O woman nurtured, effeminate and contemptible being-I heard his voice,
and answered it with convulsive shrieks; I rushed into the Hall of Hercules, where he stood
surrounded by a crowd, whose eyes, turned in wonder on me, reminded me that on the stage of the
world, a man must repress such girlish extacies. I would have given worlds to have embraced him; I
dared not-Half in exhaustion, half voluntarily, I threw myself at my length on the ground- dare I
disclose the truth to the gentle offspring of solitude? I did so, that I might kiss the dear and sacred
earth he trod. I found everything in a state of tumult. An emissary of the leader of the elect, had been so worked up
by his chief, and by his own fanatical creed, as to make an attempt on the life of the Protector and
preserver of lost mankind. His hand was arrested while in the act of poignarding the Earl; this
circumstance had caused the clamour I heard on my arrival at the castle, and the confused assembly
of persons that I found assembled in the Salle d'Hercule. Although superstition and demoniac fury
had crept among the emigrants, yet several adhered with fidelity to their noble chieftain; and many,
whose faith and love had been unhinged by fear, felt all their latent affection rekindled by this
detestable attempt. A phalanx of faithful breasts closed round him; the wretch, who, although a
prisoner and in bonds, vaunted his design, and madly claimed the crown of martyrdom, would have
been torn to pieces, had not his intended victim interposed. Adrian, springing forward, shielded him
with his own person, and commanded with energy the submission of his infuriate friends-at this
moment I had entered. Discipline and peace were at length restored in the castle; and then Adrian went from house to
house, from troop to troop, to soothe the disturbed minds of his followers, and recall them to their
ancient obedience. But the fear of immediate death was still rife amongst these survivors of a world's
destruction; the horror occasioned by the attempted assassination, past away; each eye turned
towards Paris. Men love a prop so well, that they will lean on a pointed poisoned spear; and such was
he, the impostor, who, with fear of hell for his scourge, most ravenous wolf, played the driver to a
credulous flock. It was a moment of suspense, that shook even the resolution of the unyielding friend of man. Adrian
for one moment was about to give in, to cease the struggle, and quit, with a few adherents, the
deluded crowd, leaving them a miserable prey to their passions, and to the worse tyrant who excited
them. But again, after a brief fluctuation of purpose, he resumed his courage and resolves, sustained
by the singleness of his purpose, and the untried spirit of benevolence which animated him. At this
moment, as an omen of excellent import, his wretched enemy pulled destruction on his head,
destroying with his own hands the dominion he had erected. His grand hold upon the minds of men, took its rise from the doctrine inculcated by him, that those
who believed in, and followed him, were the remnant to be saved, while all the rest of mankind were
marked out for death. Now, at the time of the Flood, the omnipotent repented him that he had
created man, and as then with water, now with the arrows of pestilence, was about to annihilate all,
except those who obeyed his decrees, promulgated by the ipse dixit prophet. It is impossible to say
on what foundations this man built his hopes of being able to carry on such an imposture. It is likely
that he was fully aware of the lie which murderous nature might give to his assertions, and believed
it to be the cast of a die, whether he should in future ages be reverenced as an inspired delegate
from heaven, or be recognized as an impostor by the present dying generation. At any rate he
resolved to keep up the drama to the last act. When, on the first approach of summer, the fatal
disease again made its ravages among the followers of Adrian, the impostor exultingly proclaimed
the exemption of his own congregation from the universal calamity. He was believed; his followers,
hitherto shut up in Paris, now came to Versailles. Mingling with the coward band there assembled,
they reviled their admirable leader, and asserted their own superiority and exemption. At length the
plague, slow-footed, but sure in her noiseless advance, destroyed the illusion, invading the
congregation of the elect, and showering promiscuous death among them. Their leader endeavoured
to conceal this event; he had a few followers, who, admitted into the arcana of his wickedness, could
help him in the execution of his nefarious designs. Those who sickened were immediately and quietly
withdrawn, the cord and a midnight-grave disposed of them for ever; while some plausible excuse
was given for their absence. At last a female, whose maternal vigilance subdued even the effects of
the narcotics administered to her, became a witness of their murderous designs on her only child. Mad with horror, she would have burst among her deluded fellow-victims, and, wildly shrieking, have
awaked the dull ear of night with the history of the fiend-like crime; when the Impostor, in his last act
of rage and desperation, plunged a poignard in her bosom. Thus wounded to death, her garments
dripping with her own life-blood, bearing her strangled infant in her arms, beautiful and young as she
was, Juliet, (for it was she) denounced to the host of deceived believers, the wickedness of their
leader. He saw the aghast looks of her auditors, changing from horror to fury-the names of those
already sacrificed were echoed by their relatives, now assured of their loss. The wretch with that
energy of purpose, which had borne him thus far in his guilty career, saw his danger, and resolved to
evade the worst forms of it-he rushed on one of the foremost, seized a pistol from his girdle, and
his loud laugh of derision mingled with the report of the weapon with which he destroyed himself. They left his miserable remains even where they lay; they placed the corpse of poor Juliet and her
babe upon a bier, and all, with hearts subdued to saddest regret, in long procession walked towards
Versailles. They met troops of those who had quitted the kindly protection of Adrian, and were
journeying to join the fanatics. The tale of horror was recounted-all turned back; and thus at last,
accompanied by the undiminished numbers of surviving humanity, and preceded by the mournful
emblem of their recovered reason, they appeared before Adrian, and again and for ever vowed
obedience to his commands, and fidelity to his cause. THESE events occupied so much time, that June had numbered more than half its days, before we
again commenced our long-protracted journey. The day after my return to Versailles, six men, from
among those I had left at Villeneuve-la-Guiard, arrived, with intelligence, that the rest of the troop
had already proceeded towards Switzerland. We went forward in the same track. It is strange, after an interval of time, to look back on a period, which, though short in itself,
appeared, when in actual progress, to be drawn out interminably. By the end of July we entered
Dijon; by the end of July those hours, days, and weeks had mingled with the ocean of forgotten time,
which in their passage teemed with fatal events and agonizing sorrow. By the end of July, little more
than a month had gone by, if man's life were measured by the rising and setting of the sun: but, alas! in that interval ardent youth had become grey-haired; furrows deep and uneraseable were trenched
in the blooming cheek of the young mother; the elastic limbs of early manhood, paralyzed as by the
burthen of years, assumed the decrepitude of age. Nights passed, during whose fatal darkness the
sun grew old before it rose; and burning days, to cool whose baleful heat the balmy eve, lingering far
in eastern climes, came lagging and ineffectual; days, in which the dial, radiant in its noon-day
station, moved not its shadow the space of a little hour, until a whole life of sorrow had brought the
sufferer to an untimely grave. We departed from Versailles fifteen hundred souls. We set out on the eighteenth of June. We made
a long procession, in which was contained every dear relationship, or tie of love, that existed in
human society. Fathers and husbands, with guardian care, gathered their dear relatives around
them; wives and mothers looked for support to the manly form beside them, and then with tender
anxiety bent their eyes on the infant troop around. They were sad, but not hopeless. Each thought
that someone would be saved; each, with that pertinacious optimism, which to the last characterized
our human nature, trusted that their beloved family would be the one preserved. We passed through France, and found it empty of inhabitants. Some one or two natives survived in
the larger towns, which they roamed through like ghosts; we received therefore small encrease to
our numbers, and such decrease through death, that at last it became easier to count the scanty list
of survivors. As we never deserted any of the sick, until their death permitted us to commit their
remains to the shelter of a grave, our journey was long, while every day a frightful gap was made in
our troop-they died by tens, by fifties, by hundreds. No mercy was shewn by death; we ceased to
expect it, and every day welcomed the sun with the feeling that we might never see it rise again. The nervous terrors and fearful visions which had scared us during the spring, continued to visit our
coward troop during this sad journey. Every evening brought its fresh creation of spectres; a ghost
was depicted by every blighted tree; and appalling shapes were manufactured from each shaggy
bush. By degrees these common marvels palled on us, and then other wonders were called into
being. Once it was confidently asserted, that the sun rose an hour later than its seasonable time;
again it was discovered that he grew paler and paler; that shadows took an uncommon appearance. It was impossible to have imagined, during the usual calm routine of life men had before
experienced, the terrible effects produced by these extravagant delusions: in truth, of such little
worth are our senses, when unsupported by concurring testimony, that it was with the utmost
difficulty I kept myself free from the belief in supernatural events, to which the major part of our
people readily gave credit. Being one sane amidst a crowd of the mad, I hardly dared assert to my
own mind, that the vast luminary had undergone no change-that the shadows of night were
unthickened by innumerable shapes of awe and terror; or that the wind, as it sung in the trees, or
whistled round an empty building, was not pregnant with sounds of wailing and despair. Sometimes
realities took ghostly shapes; and it was impossible for one's blood not to curdle at the perception of
an evident mixture of what we knew to be true, with the visionary semblance of all that we feared. Once, at the dusk of the evening, we saw a figure all in white, apparently of more than human
stature, flourishing about the road, now throwing up its arms, now leaping to an astonishing height
in the air, then turning round several times successively, then raising itself to its full height and
gesticulating violently. Our troop, on the alert to discover and believe in the supernatural, made a
halt at some distance from this shape; and, as it became darker, there was something appalling even
to the incredulous, in the lonely spectre, whose gambols, if they hardly accorded with spiritual
dignity, were beyond human powers. Now it leapt right up in the air, now sheer over a high hedge,
and was again the moment after in the road before us. By the time I came up, the fright experienced
by the spectators of this ghostly exhibition, began to manifest itself in the flight of some, and the
close huddling together of the rest. Our goblin now perceived us; he approached, and, as we drew
reverentially back, made a low bow. The sight was irresistibly ludicrous even to our hapless band, and
his politeness was hailed by a shout of laughter;-then, again springing up, as a last effort, it sunk to
the ground, and became almost invisible through the dusky night. This circumstance again spread
silence and fear through the troop; the more courageous at length advanced, and, raising the dying
wretch, discovered the tragic explanation of this wild scene. It was an opera-dancer, and had been
one of the troop which deserted from Villeneuve-la-Guiard: falling sick, he had been deserted by his
companions; in an access of delirium he had fancied himself on the stage, and, poor fellow, his dying
sense eagerly accepted the last human applause that could ever be bestowed on his grace and
agility. At another time we were haunted for several days by an apparition, to which our people gave the
appellation of the Black Spectre. We never saw it except at evening, when his coal black steed, his
mourning dress, and plume of black feathers, had a majestic and awe-striking appearance; his face,
one said, who had seen it for a moment, was ashy pale; he had lingered far behind the rest of his
troop, and suddenly at a turn in the road, saw the Black Spectre coming towards him; he hid himself
in fear, and the horse and his rider slowly past, while the moonbeams fell on the face of the latter,
displaying its unearthly hue. Sometimes at dead of night, as we watched the sick, we heard one
galloping through the town; it was the Black Spectre come in token of inevitable death. He grew giant
tall to vulgar eyes; an icy atmosphere, they said, surrounded him; when he was heard, all animals
shuddered, and the dying knew that their last hour was come. It was Death himself, they declared,
come visibly to seize on subject earth, and quell at once our decreasing numbers, sole rebels to his
law. One day at noon, we saw a dark mass on the road before us, and, coming up, beheld the Black
Spectre fallen from his horse, lying in the agonies of disease upon the ground. He did not survive
many hours; and his last words disclosed the secret of his mysterious conduct. He was a French noble
of distinction, who, from the effects of plague, had been left alone in his district; during many
months, he had wandered from town to town, from province to province, seeking some survivor for
a companion, and abhorring the loneliness to which he was condemned. When he discovered our
troop, fear of contagion conquered his love of society. He dared not join us, yet he could not resolve
to lose sight of us, sole human beings who besides himself existed in wide and fertile France; so he
accompanied us in the spectral guise I have described, till pestilence gathered him to a larger
congregation, even that of Dead Mankind. It had been well, if such vain terrors could have distracted our thoughts from more tangible evils. But
these were too dreadful and too many not to force themselves into every thought, every moment, of
our lives. We were obliged to halt at different periods for days together, till another and yet another
was consigned as a clod to the vast clod which had been once our living mother. Thus we continued
travelling during the hottest season; and it was not till the first of August, that we, the emigrants,-
reader, there were just eighty of us in number,-entered the gates of Dijon. We had expected this moment with eagerness, for now we had accomplished the worst part of our
drear journey, and Switzerland was near at hand. Yet how could we congratulate ourselves on any
event thus imperfectly fulfilled? Were these miserable beings, who, worn and wretched, passed in
sorrowful procession, the sole remnants of the race of man, which, like a flood, had once spread over
and possessed the whole earth? It had come down clear and unimpeded from its primal mountain
source in Ararat, and grew from a puny streamlet to a vast perennial river, generation after
generation flowing on ceaselessly. The same, but diversified, it grew, and swept onwards towards the
absorbing ocean, whose dim shores we now reached. It had been the mere plaything of nature,
when first it crept out of uncreative void into light; but thought brought forth power and knowledge;
and, clad with these, the race of man assumed dignity and authority. It was then no longer the mere
gardener of earth, or the shepherd of her flocks; "it carried with it an imposing and majestic aspect; it
had a pedigree and illustrious ancestors; it had its gallery of portraits, its monumental inscriptions, its
records and titles." This was all over, now that the ocean of death had sucked in the slackening tide, and its source was
dried up. We first had bidden adieu to the state of things which having existed many thousand years,
seemed eternal; such a state of government, obedience, traffic, and domestic intercourse, as had
moulded our hearts and capacities, as far back as memory could reach. Then to patriotic zeal, to the
arts, to reputation, to enduring fame, to the name of country, we had bidden farewell. We saw
depart all hope of retrieving our ancient state-all expectation, except the feeble one of saving our
individual lives from the wreck of the past. To preserve these we had quitted England-England, no
more; for without her children, what name could that barren island claim? With tenacious grasp we
clung to such rule and order as could best save us; trusting that, if a little colony could be preserved,
that would suffice at some remoter period to restore the lost community of mankind. But the game is up! We must all die; nor leave survivor nor heir to the wide inheritance of earth. We
must all die! The species of man must perish; his frame of exquisite workmanship; the wondrous
mechanism of his senses; the noble proportion of his godlike limbs; his mind, the throned king of
these; must perish. Will the earth still keep her place among the planets; will she still journey with
unmarked regularity round the sun; will the seasons change, the trees adorn themselves with leaves,
and flowers shed their fragrance, in solitude? Will the mountains remain unmoved, and streams still
keep a downward course towards the vast abyss; will the tides rise and fall, and the winds fan
universal nature; will beasts pasture, birds fly, and fishes swim, when man, the lord, possessor,
perceiver, and recorder of all these things, has passed away, as though he had never been? O, what
mockery is this! Surely death is not death, and humanity is not extinct; but merely passed into other
shapes, unsubjected to our perceptions. Death is a vast portal, an high road to life: let us hasten to
pass; let us exist no more in this living death, but die that we may live! We had longed with inexpressible earnestness to reach Dijon, since we had fixed on it, as a kind of
station in our progress. But now we entered it with a torpor more painful than acute suffering. We
had come slowly but irrevocably to the opinion, that our utmost efforts would not preserve one
human being alive. We took our hands therefore away from the long grasped rudder; and the frail
vessel on which we floated, seemed, the government over her suspended, to rush, prow foremost,
into the dark abyss of the billows. A gush of grief, a wanton profusion of tears, and vain laments, and
overflowing tenderness, and passionate but fruitless clinging to the priceless few that remained, was
followed by languor and recklessness. During this disastrous journey we lost all those, not of our own family, to whom we had particularly
attached ourselves among the survivors. It were not well to fill these pages with a mere catalogue of
losses; yet I cannot refrain from this last mention of those principally dear to us. The little girl whom
Adrian had rescued from utter desertion, during our ride through London on the twentieth of
November, died at Auxerre. The poor child had attached herself greatly to us; and the suddenness of
her death added to our sorrow. In the morning we had seen her apparently in health-in the
evening, Lucy, before we retired to rest, visited our quarters to say that she was dead. Poor Lucy
herself only survived, till we arrived at Dijon. She had devoted herself throughout to the nursing the
sick, and attending the friendless. Her excessive exertions brought on a slow fever, which ended in
the dread disease whose approach soon released her from her sufferings. She had throughout been
endeared to us by her good qualities, by her ready and cheerful execution of every duty, and mild
acquiescence in every turn of adversity. When we consigned her to the tomb, we seemed at the
same time to bid a final adieu to those peculiarly feminine virtues conspicuous in her; uneducated
and unpretending as she was, she was distinguished for patience, forbearance, and sweetness. These, with all their train of qualities peculiarly English, would never again be revived for us. This
type of all that was most worthy of admiration in her class among my countrywomen, was placed
under the sod of desert France; and it was as a second separation from our country to have lost sight
of her for ever. The Countess of Windsor died during our abode at Dijon. One morning I was informed that she
wished to see me. Her message made me remember, that several days had elapsed since I had last
seen her. Such a circumstance had often occurred during our journey, when I remained behind to
watch to their close the last moments of some one of our hapless comrades, and the rest of the
troop past on before me. But there was something in the manner of her messenger, that made me
suspect that all was not right. A caprice of the imagination caused me to conjecture that some ill had
occurred to Clara or Evelyn, rather than to this aged lady. Our fears, for ever on the stretch,
demanded a nourishment of horror; and it seemed too natural an occurrence, too like past times, for
the old to die before the young. I found the venerable mother of my Idris lying on a couch, her tall
emaciated figure stretched out; her face fallen away, from which the nose stood out in sharp profile,
and her large dark eyes, hollow and deep, gleamed with such light as may edge a thunder cloud at
sun-set. All was shrivelled and dried up, except these lights; her voice too was fearfully changed, as
she spoke to me at intervals. "I am afraid," said she, "that it is selfish in me to have asked you to visit
the old woman again, before she dies: yet perhaps it would have been a greater shock to hear
suddenly that I was dead, than to see me first thus." I clasped her shrivelled hand: "Are you indeed so ill?" I asked. "Do you not perceive death in my face," replied she, "it is strange; I ought to have expected this, and
yet I confess it has taken me unaware. I never clung to life, or enjoyed it, till these last months, while
among those I senselessly deserted: and it is hard to be snatched immediately away. I am glad,
however, that I am not a victim of the plague; probably I should have died at this hour, though the
world had continued as it was in my youth." She spoke with difficulty, and I perceived that she regretted the necessity of death, even more than
she cared to confess. Yet she had not to complain of an undue shortening of existence; her faded
person shewed that life had naturally spent itself. We had been alone at first; now Clara entered; the
Countess turned to her with a smile, and took the hand of this lovely child; her roseate palm and
snowy fingers, contrasted with relaxed fibres and yellow hue of those of her aged friend; she bent to
kiss her, touching her withered mouth with the warm, full lips of youth. "Verney," said the Countess,
"I need not recommend this dear girl to you, for your own sake you will preserve her. Were the world
as it was, I should have a thousand sage precautions to impress, that one so sensitive, good, and
beauteous, might escape the dangers that used to lurk for the destruction of the fair and excellent. This is all nothing now. "I commit you, my kind nurse, to your uncle's care; to yours I entrust the dearest relic of my better
self. Be to Adrian, sweet one, what you have been to me-enliven his sadness with your sprightly
sallies; sooth his anguish by your sober and inspired converse, when he is dying; nurse him as you
have done me." Clara burst into tears; "Kind girl," said the Countess, "do not weep for me. Many dear friends are left
to you." "And yet," cried Clara, "you talk of their dying also. This is indeed cruel -how could I live, if they
were gone? If it were possible for my beloved protector to die before me, I could not nurse him; I
could only die too." The venerable lady survived this scene only twenty-four hours. She was the last tie binding us to the
ancient state of things. It was impossible to look on her, and not call to mind in their wonted guise,
events and persons, as alien to our present situation as the disputes of Themistocles and Aristides, or
the wars of the two roses in our native land. The crown of England had pressed her brow; the
memory of my father and his misfortunes, the vain struggles of the late king, the images of Raymond,
Evadne, and Perdita, who had lived in the world's prime, were brought vividly before us. We
consigned her to the oblivious tomb with reluctance; and when I turned from her grave, Janus veiled
his retrospective face; that which gazed on future generations had long lost its faculty. After remaining a week at Dijon, until thirty of our number deserted the vacant ranks of life, we
continued our way towards Geneva. At noon on the second day we arrived at the foot of Jura. We
halted here during the heat of the day. Here fifty human beings-fifty, the only human beings that
survived of the food-teeming earth, assembled to read in the looks of each other ghastly plague, or
wasting sorrow, desperation, or worse, carelessness of future or present evil. Here we assembled at
the foot of this mighty wall of mountain, under a spreading walnut tree; a brawling stream refreshed
the green sward by its sprinkling; and the busy grasshopper chirped among the thyme. We clustered
together a group of wretched sufferers. A mother cradled in her enfeebled arms the child, last of
many, whose glazed eye was about to close for ever. Here beauty, late glowing in youthful lustre and
consciousness, now wan and neglected, knelt fanning with uncertain motion the beloved, who lay
striving to paint his features, distorted by illness, with a thankful smile. There an hard-featured,
weather-worn veteran, having prepared his meal, sat, his head dropped on his breast, the useless
knife falling from his grasp, his limbs utterly relaxed, as thought of wife and child, and dearest
relative, all lost, passed across his recollection. There sat a man who for forty years had basked in
fortune's tranquil sunshine; he held the hand of his last hope, his beloved daughter, who had just
attained womanhood; and he gazed on her with anxious eyes, while she tried to rally her fainting
spirit to comfort him. Here a servant, faithful to the last, though dying, waited on one, who, though
still erect with health, gazed with gasping fear on the variety of woe around. Adrian stood leaning against a tree; he held a book in his hand, but his eye wandered from the pages,
and sought mine; they mingled a sympathetic glance; his looks confessed that his thoughts had
quitted the inanimate print, for pages more pregnant with meaning, more absorbing, spread out
before him. By the margin of the stream, apart from all, in a tranquil nook, where the purling brook
kissed the green sward gently, Clara and Evelyn were at play, sometimes beating the water with large
boughs, sometimes watching the summer-flies that sported upon it. Evelyn now chased a butterfly-
now gathered a flower for his cousin; and his laughing cherub-face and clear brow told of the light
heart that beat in his bosom. Clara, though she endeavoured to give herself up to his amusement,
often forgot him, as she turned to observe Adrian and me. She was now fourteen, and retained her
childish appearance, though in height a woman; she acted the part of the tenderest mother to my
little orphan boy; to see her playing with him, or attending silently and submissively on our wants,
you thought only of her admirable docility and patience; but, in her soft eyes, and the veined curtains
that veiled them, in the clearness of her marmoreal brow, and the tender expression of her lips,
there was an intelligence and beauty that at once excited admiration and love. When the sun had sunk towards the precipitate west, and the evening shadows grew long, we
prepared to ascend the mountain. The attention that we were obliged to pay to the sick, made our
progress slow. The winding road, though steep, presented a confined view of rocky fields and hills,
each hiding the other, till our farther ascent disclosed them in succession. We were seldom shaded
from the declining sun, whose slant beams were instinct with exhausting heat. There are times when
minor difficulties grow gigantic -times, when as the Hebrew poet expressively terms it, "the
grasshopper is a burthen;" so was it with our ill fated party this evening. Adrian, usually the first to
rally his spirits, and dash foremost into fatigue and hardship, with relaxed limbs and declined head,
the reins hanging loosely in his grasp, left the choice of the path to the instinct of his horse, now and
then painfully rousing himself, when the steepness of the ascent required that he should keep his
seat with better care. Fear and horror encompassed me. Did his languid air attest that he also was
struck with contagion? How long, when I look on this matchless specimen of mortality, may I
perceive that his thought answers mine? how long will those limbs obey the kindly spirit within? how
long will light and life dwell in the eyes of this my sole remaining friend? Thus pacing slowly, each hill
surmounted, only presented another to be ascended; each jutting corner only discovered another,
sister to the last, endlessly. Sometimes the pressure of sickness in one among us, caused the whole
cavalcade to halt; the call for water, the eagerly expressed wish to repose; the cry of pain, and
suppressed sob of the mourner-such were the sorrowful attendants of our passage of the Jura. Adrian had gone first. I saw him, while I was detained by the loosening of a girth, struggling with the
upward path, seemingly more difficult than any we had yet passed. He reached the top, and the dark
outline of his figure stood in relief against the sky. He seemed to behold something unexpected and
wonderful; for, pausing, his head stretched out, his arms for a moment extended, he seemed to give
an All Hail! to some new vision. Urged by curiosity, I hurried to join him. After battling for many
tedious minutes with the precipice, the same scene presented itself to me, which had wrapt him in
extatic wonder. Nature, or nature's favourite, this lovely earth, presented her most unrivalled beauties in resplendent
and sudden exhibition. Below, far, far below, even as it were in the yawning abyss of the ponderous
globe, lay the placid and azure expanse of lake Leman; vine-covered hills hedged it in, and behind
dark mountains in cone-like shape, or irregular cyclopean wall, served for further defence. But
beyond, and high above all, as if the spirits of the air had suddenly unveiled their bright abodes,
placed in scaleless altitude in the stainless sky, heaven-kissing, companions of the unattainable ether,
were the glorious Alps, clothed in dazzling robes of light by the setting sun. And, as if the world's
wonders were never to be exhausted, their vast immensities, their jagged crags, and roseate
painting, appeared again in the lake below, dipping their proud heights beneath the unruffled
waves-palaces for the Naiads of the placid waters. Towns and villages lay scattered at the foot of
Jura, which, with dark ravine, and black promontories, stretched its roots into the watery expanse
beneath. Carried away by wonder, I forgot the death of man, and the living and beloved friend near
me. When I turned, I saw tears streaming from his eyes; his thin hands pressed one against the other,
his animated countenance beaming with admiration; "Why," cried he, at last, "Why, oh heart,
whisperest thou of grief to me? Drink in the beauty of that scene, and possess delight beyond what a
fabled paradise could afford." By degrees, our whole party surmounting the steep, joined us, not one among them, but gave visible
tokens of admiration, surpassing any before experienced. One cried, "God reveals his heaven to us;
we may die blessed." Another and another, with broken exclamations, and extravagant phrases,
endeavoured to express the intoxicating effect of this wonder of nature. So we remained awhile,
lightened of the pressing burthen of fate, forgetful of death, into whose night we were about to
plunge; no longer reflecting that our eyes now and for ever were and would be the only ones which
might perceive the divine magnificence of this terrestrial exhibition. An enthusiastic transport, akin
to happiness, burst, like a sudden ray from the sun, on our darkened life. Precious attribute of woe-
worn humanity! that can snatch extatic emotion, even from under the very share and harrow, that
ruthlessly ploughs up and lays waste every hope. This evening was marked by another event. Passing through Ferney in our way to Geneva,
unaccustomed sounds of music arose from the rural church which stood embosomed in trees,
surrounded by smokeless, vacant cottages. The peal of an organ with rich swell awoke the mute air,
lingering along, and mingling with the intense beauty that clothed the rocks and woods, and waves
around. Music-the language of the immortals, disclosed to us as testimony of their existence-
music, "silver key of the fountain of tears," child of love, soother of grief, inspirer of heroism and
radiant thoughts, O music, in this our desolation, we had forgotten thee! Nor pipe at eve cheered us,
nor harmony of voice, nor linked thrill of string; thou camest upon us now, like the revealing of other
forms of being; and transported as we had been by the loveliness of nature, fancying that we beheld
the abode of spirits, now we might well imagine that we heard their melodious communings. We
paused in such awe as would seize on a pale votarist, visiting some holy shrine at midnight; if she
beheld animated and smiling, the image which she worshipped. We all stood mute; many knelt. In a
few minutes however, we were recalled to human wonder and sympathy by a familiar strain. The air
was Haydn's "New-Created World," and, old and drooping as humanity had become, the world yet
fresh as at creation's day, might still be worthily celebrated by such an hymn of praise. Adrian and I
entered the church; the nave was empty, though the smoke of incense rose from the altar, bringing
with it the recollection of vast congregations, in once thronged cathedrals; we went into the loft. A
blind old man sat at the bellows; his whole soul was ear; and as he sat in the attitude of attentive
listening, a bright glow of pleasure was diffused over his countenance; for, though his lack-lustre eye
could not reflect the beam, yet his parted lips, and every line of his face and venerable brow spoke
delight. A young woman sat at the keys, perhaps twenty years of age. Her auburn hair hung on her
neck, and her fair brow shone in its own beauty; but her drooping eyes let fall fast-flowing tears,
while the constraint she exercised to suppress her sobs, and still her trembling, flushed her else pale
cheek; she was thin; languor, and alas! sickness, bent her form. We stood looking at the pair,
forgetting what we heard in the absorbing sight; till, the last chord struck, the peal died away in
lessening reverberations. The mighty voice, inorganic we might call it, for we could in no way
associate it with mechanism of pipe or key, stilled its sonorous tone, and the girl, turning to lend her
assistance to her aged companion, at length perceived us. It was her father; and she, since childhood, had been the guide of his darkened steps. They were
Germans from Saxony, and, emigrating thither but a few years before, had formed new ties with the
surrounding villagers.