But what rendered the event of his death, in my opinion, the more
remarkable, was, that I considered with him the last remnant of the old
practice of managing the concerns of the town came to a period. For now
that he is dead and gone, and also all those whom I found conjunct with
him, when I came into power and office, I may venture to say, that things
in yon former times were not guided so thoroughly by the hand of a
disinterested integrity as in these latter years. On the contrary, it
seemed to be the use and wont of men in public trusts, to think they were
free to indemnify themselves in a left-handed way for the time and
trouble they bestowed in the same. But the thing was not so far wrong in
principle as in the hugger-muggering way in which it was done, and which
gave to it a guilty colour, that, by the judicious stratagem of a right
system, it would never have had. In sooth to say, through the whole
course of my public life, I met with no greater difficulties and trials
than in cleansing myself from the old habitudes of office. For I must in
verity confess, that I myself partook, in a degree, at my beginning, of
the caterpillar nature; and it was not until the light of happier days
called forth the wings of my endowment, that I became conscious of being
raised into public life for a better purpose than to prey upon the leaves
and flourishes of the commonwealth. So that, if I have seemed to speak
lightly of those doings that are now denominated corruptions, I hope it
was discerned therein that I did so rather to intimate that such things
were, than to consider them as in themselves commendable. Indeed, in
their notations, I have endeavoured, in a manner, to be governed by the
spirit of the times in which the transactions happened; for I have lived
long enough to remark, that if we judge of past events by present
motives, and do not try to enter into the spirit of the age when they
took place, and to see them with the eyes with which they were really
seen, we shall conceit many things to be of a bad and wicked character
that were not thought so harshly of by those who witnessed them, nor even
by those who, perhaps, suffered from them. While, therefore, I think it
has been of a great advantage to the public to have survived that method
of administration in which the like of Bailie M'Lucre was engendered, I
would not have it understood that I think the men who held the public
trusts in those days a whit less honest than the men of my own time. The
spirit of their own age was upon them, as that of ours is upon us, and
their ways of working the wherry entered more or less into all their
trafficking, whether for the commonality, or for their own particular
behoof and advantage. I have been thus large and frank in my reflections anent the death of the
bailie, because, poor man, he had outlived the times for which he was
qualified; and, instead of the merriment and jocularity that his wily by-
hand ways used to cause among his neighbours, the rising generation began
to pick and dab at him, in such a manner, that, had he been much longer
spared, it is to be feared he would not have been allowed to enjoy his
earnings both with ease and honour. However, he got out of the world
with some respect, and the matters of which I have now to speak, are
exalted, both in method and principle, far above the personal
considerations that took something from the public virtue of his day and
generation. It was in the course of the winter, after the decease of Bailie M'Lucre,
that the great loss of lives took place, which every body agreed was one
of the most calamitous things that had for many a year befallen the town. Three or four vessels were coming with cargoes of grain from Ireland;
another from the Baltic with Norawa deals; and a third from Bristol,
where she had been on a charter for some Greenock merchants. It happened that, for a time, there had been contrary winds, against
which no vessel could enter the port, and the ships, whereof I have been
speaking, were all lying together at anchor in the bay, waiting a change
of weather. These five vessels were owned among ourselves, and their
crews consisted of fathers and sons belonging to the place, so that, both
by reason of interest and affection, a more than ordinary concern was
felt for them; for the sea was so rough, that no boat could live in it to
go near them, and we had our fears that the men on board would be very
ill off. Nothing, however, occurred but this natural anxiety, till the
Saturday, which was Yule. In the morning the weather was blasty and
sleety, waxing more and more tempestuous till about mid-day, when the
wind checked suddenly round from the nor-east to the sou-west, and blew a
gale as if the prince of the powers of the air was doing his utmost to
work mischief. The rain blattered, the windows clattered, the
shop-shutters flapped, pigs from the lum-heads came rattling down like
thunder-claps, and the skies were dismal both with cloud and carry. Yet,
for all that, there was in the streets a stir and a busy visitation
between neighbours, and every one went to their high windows, to look at
the five poor barks that were warsling against the strong arm of the
elements of the storm and the ocean. Still the lift gloomed, and the wind roared, and it was as doleful a
sight as ever was seen in any town afflicted with calamity, to see the
sailors' wives, with their red cloaks about their heads, followed by
their hirpling and disconsolate bairns, going one after another to the
kirkyard, to look at the vessels where their helpless breadwinners were
battling with the tempest. My heart was really sorrowful, and full of a
sore anxiety to think of what might happen to the town, whereof so many
were in peril, and to whom no human magistracy could extend the arm of
protection. Seeing no abatement of the wrath of heaven, that howled and
roared around us, I put on my big-coat, and taking my staff in my hand,
having tied down my hat with a silk handkerchief, towards gloaming I
walked likewise to the kirkyard, where I beheld such an assemblage of
sorrow, as few men in situation have ever been put to the trial to
witness. In the lea of the kirk many hundreds of the town were gathered together;
but there was no discourse among them. The major part were sailors'
wives and weans, and at every new thud of the blast, a sob rose, and the
mothers drew their bairns closer in about them, as if they saw the
visible hand of a foe raised to smite them. Apart from the multitude, I
observed three or four young lasses standing behind the Whinnyhill
families' tomb, and I jealoused that they had joes in the ships; for they
often looked to the bay, with long necks and sad faces, from behind the
monument. A widow woman, one old Mary Weery, that was a lameter, and
dependent on her son, who was on board the Louping Meg, (as the Lovely
Peggy was nicknamed at the shore,) stood by herself, and every now and
then wrung her hands, crying, with a woeful voice, "The Lord giveth and
the Lord taketh away, blessed be the name of the Lord;"--but it was
manifest to all that her faith was fainting within her. But of all the
piteous objects there, on that doleful evening, none troubled my thoughts
more than three motherless children, that belonged to the mate of one of
the vessels in the jeopardy. He was an Englishman that had been settled
some years in the town, where his family had neither kith nor kin; and
his wife having died about a month before, the bairns, of whom the eldest
was but nine or so, were friendless enough, though both my gudewife, and
other well-disposed ladies, paid them all manner of attention till their
father would come home. The three poor little things, knowing that he
was in one of the ships, had been often out and anxious, and they were
then sitting under the lea of a headstone, near their mother's grave,
chittering and creeping closer and closer at every squall. Never was
such an orphan-like sight seen. When it began to be so dark that the vessels could no longer be discerned
from the churchyard, many went down to the shore, and I took the three
babies home with me, and Mrs Pawkie made tea for them, and they soon
began to play with our own younger children, in blythe forgetfulness of
the storm; every now and then, however, the eldest of them, when the
shutters rattled and the lum-head roared, would pause in his innocent
daffing, and cower in towards Mrs Pawkie, as if he was daunted and
dismayed by something he knew not what. Many a one that night walked the sounding shore in sorrow, and fires were
lighted along it to a great extent; but the darkness and the noise of the
raging deep, and the howling wind, never intermitted till about midnight:
at which time a message was brought to me, that it might be needful to
send a guard of soldiers to the beach, for that broken masts and tackle
had come in, and that surely some of the barks had perished. I lost no
time in obeying this suggestion, which was made to me by one of the
owners of the Louping Meg; and to show that I sincerely sympathized with
all those in affliction, I rose and dressed myself, and went down to the
shore, where I directed several old boats to be drawn up by the fires,
and blankets to be brought, and cordials prepared, for them that might be
spared with life to reach the land; and I walked the beach with the
mourners till the morning. As the day dawned, the wind began to abate in its violence, and to wear
away from the sou-west into the norit, but it was soon discovered that
some of the vessels with the corn had perished; for the first thing seen,
was a long fringe of tangle and grain along the line of the highwater
mark, and every one strained with greedy and grieved eyes, as the
daylight brightened, to discover which had suffered. But I can proceed
no further with the dismal recital of that doleful morning. Let it
suffice here to be known, that, through the haze, we at last saw three of
the vessels lying on their beam-ends with their masts broken, and the
waves riding like the furious horses of destruction over them. What had
become of the other two was never known; but it was supposed that they
had foundered at their anchors, and that all on board perished. The day being now Sabbath, and the whole town idle, every body in a
manner was down on the beach, to help and mourn as the bodies, one after
another, were cast out by the waves. Alas! few were the better of my
provident preparation, and it was a thing not to be described, to see,
for more than a mile along the coast, the new-made widows and fatherless
bairns, mourning and weeping over the corpses of those they loved. Seventeen bodies were, before ten o'clock, carried to the desolated
dwelling of their families; and when old Thomas Pull, the betheral, went
to ring the bell for public worship, such was the universal sorrow of the
town, that Nanse Donsie, an idiot natural, ran up the street to stop him,
crying, in the voice of a pardonable desperation, "Wha, in sic a time,
can praise the Lord?" The calamity of the storm opened and disposed the hearts of the whole
town to charity; and it was a pleasure to behold the manner in which the
tide of sympathy flowed towards the sufferers. Nobody went to the church
in the forenoon; but when I had returned home from the shore, several of
the council met at my house to confer anent the desolation, and it was
concerted among us, at my suggestion, that there should be a meeting of
the inhabitants called by the magistrates, for the next day, in order to
take the public compassion with the tear in the eye--which was
accordingly done by Mr Pittle himself from the pulpit, with a few
judicious words on the heavy dispensation. And the number of folk that
came forward to subscribe was just wonderful. We got well on to a
hundred pounds in the first two hours, besides many a bundle of old
clothes. But one of the most remarkable things in the business was done
by Mr Macandoe. He was, in his original, a lad of the place, who had
gone into Glasgow, where he was in a topping line; and happening to be on
a visit to his friends at the time, he came to the meeting and put down
his name for twenty guineas, which he gave me in bank-notes--a sum of
such liberality as had never been given to the town from one individual
man, since the mortification of fifty pounds that we got by the will of
Major Bravery that died in Cheltenham, in England, after making his
fortune in India. The sum total of the subscription, when we got my
lord's five-and-twenty guineas, was better than two hundred pounds
sterling--for even several of the country gentlemen were very generous
contributors, and it is well known that they are not inordinately
charitable, especially to town folks--but the distribution of it was no
easy task, for it required a discrimination of character as well as of
necessities. It was at first proposed to give it over to the session. I
knew, however, that, in their hands, it would do no good; for Mr Pittle,
the minister, was a vain sort of a body, and easy to be fleeched, and the
bold and the bardy with him would be sure to come in for a better share
than the meek and the modest, who might be in greater want.