










I AM the native of a sea-surrounded nook, a cloud-enshadowed land, which, when the surface of the
globe, with its shoreless ocean and trackless continents, presents itself to my mind, appears only as
an inconsiderable speck in the immense whole; and yet, when balanced in the scale of mental power,
far outweighed countries of larger extent and more numerous population. So true it is, that man's
mind alone was the creator of all that was good or great to man, and that Nature herself was only his
first minister. England, seated far north in the turbid sea, now visits my dreams in the semblance of a
vast and well-manned ship, which mastered the winds and rode proudly over the waves. In my
boyish days she was the universe to me. When I stood on my native hills, and saw plain and
mountain stretch out to the utmost limits of my vision, speckled by the dwellings of my countrymen,
and subdued to fertility by their labours, the earth's very centre was fixed for me in that spot, and
the rest of her orb was as a fable, to have forgotten which would have cost neither my imagination
nor understanding an effort. My fortunes have been, from the beginning, an exemplification of the power that mutability may
possess over the varied tenor of man's life. With regard to myself, this came almost by inheritance. My father was one of those men on whom nature had bestowed to prodigality the envied gifts of wit
and imagination, and then left his bark of life to be impelled by these winds, without adding reason
as the rudder, or judgment as the pilot for the voyage. His extraction was obscure; but circumstances
brought him early into public notice, and his small paternal property was soon dissipated in the
splendid scene of fashion and luxury in which he was an actor. During the short years of thoughtless
youth, he was adored by the high-bred triflers of the day, nor least by the youthful sovereign, who
escaped from the intrigues of party, and the arduous duties of kingly business, to find never-failing
amusement and exhilaration of spirit in his society. My father's impulses, never under his own
controul, perpetually led him into difficulties from which his ingenuity alone could extricate him; and
the accumulating pile of debts of honour and of trade, which would have bent to earth any other,
was supported by him with a light spirit and tameless hilarity; while his company was so necessary at
the tables and assemblies of the rich, that his derelictions were considered venial, and he himself
received with intoxicating flattery. This kind of popularity, like every other, is evanescent: and the difficulties of every kind with which
he had to contend, increased in a frightful ratio compared with his small means of extricating
himself. At such times the king, in his enthusiasm for him, would come to his relief, and then kindly
take his friend to task; my father gave the best promises for amendment, but his social disposition,
his craving for the usual diet of admiration, and more than all, the fiend of gambling, which fully
possessed him, made his good resolutions transient, his promises vain. With the quick sensibility
peculiar to his temperament, he perceived his power in the brilliant circle to be on the wane. The
king married; and the haughty princess of Austria, who became, as queen of England, the head of
fashion, looked with harsh eyes on his defects, and with contempt on the affection her royal husband
entertained for him. My father felt that his fall was near; but so far from profiting by this last calm
before the storm to save himself, he sought to forget anticipated evil by making still greater sacrifices
to the deity of pleasure, deceitful and cruel arbiter of his destiny. The king, who was a man of excellent dispositions, but easily led, had now become a willing disciple
of his imperious consort. He was induced to look with extreme disapprobation, and at last with
distaste, on my father's imprudence and follies. It is true that his presence dissipated these clouds;
his warm-hearted frankness, brilliant sallies, and confiding demeanour were irresistible: it was only
when at a distance, while still renewed tales of his errors were poured into his royal friend's ear, that
he lost his influence. The queen's dextrous management was employed to prolong these absences,
and gather together accusations. At length the king was brought to see in him a source of perpetual
disquiet, knowing that he should pay for the short-lived pleasure of his society by tedious homilies,
and more painful narrations of excesses, the truth of which he could not disprove. The result was,
that he would make one more attempt to reclaim him, and in case of ill success, cast him off for ever. Such a scene must have been one of deepest interest and high-wrought passion. A powerful king,
conspicuous for a goodness which had heretofore made him meek, and now lofty in his admonitions,
with alternate entreaty and reproof, besought his friend to attend to his real interests, resolutely to
avoid those fascinations which in fact were fast deserting him, and to spend his great powers on a
worthy field, in which he, his sovereign, would be his prop, his stay, and his pioneer. My father felt
this kindness; for a moment ambitious dreams floated before him; and he thought that it would be
well to exchange his present pursuits for nobler duties. With sincerity and fervour he gave the
required promise: as a pledge of continued favour, he received from his royal master a sum of money
to defray pressing debts, and enable him to enter under good auspices his new career. That very
night, while yet full of gratitude and good resolves, this whole sum, and its amount doubled, was lost
at the gaming-table. In his desire to repair his first losses, my father risked double stakes, and thus
incurred a debt of honour he was wholly unable to pay. Ashamed to apply again to the king, he
turned his back upon London, its false delights and clinging miseries; and, with poverty for his sole
companion, buried himself in solitude among the hills and lakes of Cumberland. His wit, his bon
mots, the record of his personal attractions, fascinating manners, and social talents, were long
remembered and repeated from mouth to mouth. Ask where now was this favourite of fashion, this
companion of the noble, this excelling beam, which gilt with alien splendour the assemblies of the
courtly and the gay-you heard that he was under a cloud, a lost man; not one thought it belonged
to him to repay pleasure by real services, or that his long reign of brilliant wit deserved a pension on
retiring. The king lamented his absence; he loved to repeat his sayings, relate the adventures they
had had together, and exalt his talents-but here ended his reminiscence. Meanwhile my father, forgotten, could not forget. He repined for the loss of what was more
necessary to him than air or food-the excitements of pleasure, the admiration of the noble, the
luxurious and polished living of the great. A nervous fever was the consequence; during which he was
nursed by the daughter of a poor cottager, under whose roof he lodged. She was lovely, gentle, and,
above all, kind to him; nor can it afford astonishment, that the late idol of high-bred beauty should,
even in a fallen state, appear a being of an elevated and wondrous nature to the lowly cottage-girl. The attachment between them led to the ill-fated marriage, of which I was the offspring. Notwithstanding the tenderness and sweetness of my mother, her husband still deplored his
degraded state. Unaccustomed to industry, he knew not in what way to contribute to the support of
his increasing family. Sometimes he thought of applying to the king; pride and shame for a while
withheld him; and, before his necessities became so imperious as to compel him to some kind of
exertion, he died. For one brief interval before this catastrophe, he looked forward to the future, and
contemplated with anguish the desolate situation in which his wife and children would be left. His
last effort was a letter to the king, full of touching eloquence, and of occasional flashes of that
brilliant spirit which was an integral part of him. He bequeathed his widow and orphans to the
friendship of his royal master, and felt satisfied that, by this means, their prosperity was better
assured in his death than in his life. This letter was enclosed to the care of a nobleman, who, he did
not doubt, would perform the last and inexpensive office of placing it in the king's own hand. He died in debt, and his little property was seized immediately by his creditors. My mother,
pennyless and burthened with two children, waited week after week, and month after month, in
sickening expectation of a reply, which never came. She had no experience beyond her father's
cottage; and the mansion of the lord of the manor was the chiefest type of grandeur she could
conceive. During my father's life, she had been made familiar with the name of royalty and the
courtly circle; but such things, ill according with her personal experience, appeared, after the loss of
him who gave substance and reality to them, vague and fantastical. If, under any circumstances, she
could have acquired sufficient courage to address the noble persons mentioned by her husband, the
ill success of his own application caused her to banish the idea. She saw therefore no escape from
dire penury: perpetual care, joined to sorrow for the loss of the wondrous being, whom she
continued to contemplate with ardent admiration, hard labour, and naturally delicate health, at
length released her from the sad continuity of want and misery. The condition of her orphan children was peculiarly desolate. Her own father had been an emigrant
from another part of the country, and had died long since: they had no one relation to take them by
the hand; they were outcasts, paupers, unfriended beings, to whom the most scanty pittance was a
matter of favour, and who were treated merely as children of peasants, yet poorer than the poorest,
who, dying, had left them, a thankless bequest, to the close-handed charity of the land. I, the elder of the two, was five years old when my mother died. A remembrance of the discourses of
my parents, and the communications which my mother endeavoured to impress upon me concerning
my father's friends, in slight hope that I might one day derive benefit from the knowledge, floated
like an indistinct dream through my brain. I conceived that I was different and superior to my
protectors and companions, but I knew not how or wherefore. The sense of injury, associated with
the name of king and noble, clung to me; but I could draw no conclusions from such feelings, to serve
as a guide to action. My first real knowledge of myself was as an unprotected orphan among the
valleys and fells of Cumberland. I was in the service of a farmer; and with crook in hand, my dog at
my side, I shepherded a numerous flock on the near uplands. I cannot say much in praise of such a
life; and its pains far exceeded its pleasures. There was freedom in it, a companionship with nature,
and a reckless loneliness; but these, romantic as they were, did not accord with the love of action
and desire of human sympathy, characteristic of youth. Neither the care of my flock, nor the change
of seasons, were sufficient to tame my eager spirit; my out-door life and unemployed time were the
temptations that led me early into lawless habits. I associated with others friendless like myself; I
formed them into a band, I was their chief and captain. All shepherd-boys alike, while our flocks were
spread over the pastures, we schemed and executed many a mischievous prank, which drew on us
the anger and revenge of the rustics. I was the leader and protector of my comrades, and as I
became distinguished among them, their misdeeds were usually visited upon me. But while I
endured punishment and pain in their defence with the spirit of an hero, I claimed as my reward
their praise and obedience. In such a school my disposition became rugged, but firm. The appetite for admiration and small
capacity for self-controul which I inherited from my father, nursed by adversity, made me daring and
reckless. I was rough as the elements, and unlearned as the animals I tended. I often compared
myself to them, and finding that my chief superiority consisted in power, I soon persuaded myself
that it was in power only that I was inferior to the chiefest potentates of the earth. Thus untaught in
refined philosophy, and pursued by a restless feeling of degradation from my true station in society, I
wandered among the hills of civilized England as uncouth a savage as the wolf-bred founder of old
Rome. I owned but one law, it was that of the strongest, and my greatest deed of virtue was never to
submit. Yet let me a little retract from this sentence I have passed on myself. My mother, when dying, had, in
addition to her other half-forgotten and misapplied lessons, committed, with solemn exhortation,
her other child to my fraternal guardianship; and this one duty I performed to the best of my ability,
with all the zeal and affection of which my nature was capable. My sister was three years younger
than myself; I had nursed her as an infant, and when the difference of our sexes, by giving us various
occupations, in a great measure divided us, yet she continued to be the object of my careful love. Orphans, in the fullest sense of the term, we were poorest among the poor, and despised among the
unhonoured. If my daring and courage obtained for me a kind of respectful aversion, her youth and
sex, since they did not excite tenderness, by proving her to be weak, were the causes of numberless
mortifications to her; and her own disposition was not so constituted as to diminish the evil effects of
her lowly station. She was a singular being, and, like me, inherited much of the peculiar disposition of our father. Her
countenance was all expression; her eyes were not dark, but impenetrably deep; you seemed to
discover space after space in their intellectual glance, and to feel that the soul which was their soul,
comprehended an universe of thought in its ken. She was pale and fair, and her golden hair clustered
on her temples, contrasting its rich hue with the living marble beneath. Her coarse peasant-dress,
little consonant apparently with the refinement of feeling which her face expressed, yet in a strange
manner accorded with it. She was like one of Guido's saints, with heaven in her heart and in her look,
so that when you saw her you only thought of that within, and costume and even feature were
secondary to the mind that beamed in her countenance. Yet though lovely and full of noble feeling, my poor Perdita (for this was the fanciful name my sister
had received from her dying parent), was not altogether saintly in her disposition. Her manners were
cold and repulsive. If she had been nurtured by those who had regarded her with affection, she
might have been different; but unloved and neglected, she repaid want of kindness with distrust and
silence. She was submissive to those who held authority over her, but a perpetual cloud dwelt on her
brow; she looked as if she expected enmity from every one who approached her, and her actions
were instigated by the same feeling. All the time she could command she spent in solitude. She
would ramble to the most unfrequented places, and scale dangerous heights, that in those unvisited
spots she might wrap herself in loneliness. Often she passed whole hours walking up and down the
paths of the woods; she wove garlands of flowers and ivy, or watched the flickering of the shadows
and glancing of the leaves; sometimes she sat beside a stream, and as her thoughts paused, threw
flowers or pebbles into the waters, watching how those swam and these sank; or she would set
afloat boats formed of bark of trees or leaves, with a feather for a sail, and intensely watch the
navigation of her craft among the rapids and shallows of the brook. Meanwhile her active fancy wove
a thousand combinations; she dreamt "of moving accidents by flood and field"-she lost herself
delightedly in these self-created wanderings, and returned with unwilling spirit to the dull detail of
common life. Poverty was the cloud that veiled her excellencies, and all that was good in her seemed
about to perish from want of the genial dew of affection. She had not even the same advantage as I
in the recollection of her parents; she clung to me, her brother, as her only friend, but her alliance
with me completed the distaste that her protectors felt for her; and every error was magnified by
them into crimes. If she had been bred in that sphere of life to which by inheritance the delicate
framework of her mind and person was adapted, she would have been the object almost of
adoration, for her virtues were as eminent as her defects. All the genius that ennobled the blood of
her father illustrated hers; a generous tide flowed in her veins; artifice, envy, or meanness, were at
the antipodes of her nature; her countenance, when enlightened by amiable feeling, might have
belonged to a queen of nations; her eyes were bright; her look fearless. Although by our situation and dispositions we were almost equally cut off from the usual forms of
social intercourse, we formed a strong contrast to each other. I always required the stimulants of
companionship and applause. Perdita was all-sufficient to herself. Notwithstanding my lawless
habits, my disposition was sociable, hers recluse. My life was spent among tangible realities, hers was
a dream. I might be said even to love my enemies, since by exciting me they in a sort bestowed
happiness upon me; Perdita almost disliked her friends, for they interfered with her visionary moods. All my feelings, even of exultation and triumph, were changed to bitterness, if unparticipated;
Perdita, even in joy, fled to loneliness, and could go on from day to day, neither expressing her
emotions, nor seeking a fellow-feeling in another mind. Nay, she could love and dwell with
tenderness on the look and voice of her friend, while her demeanour expressed the coldest reserve. A sensation with her became a sentiment, and she never spoke until she had mingled her
perceptions of outward objects with others which were the native growth of her own mind. She was
like a fruitful soil that imbibed the airs and dews of heaven, and gave them forth again to light in
loveliest forms of fruits and flowers; but then she was often dark and rugged as that soil, raked up,
and new sown with unseen seed. She dwelt in a cottage whose trim grass-plat sloped down to the waters of the lake of Ulswater; a
beech wood stretched up the hill behind, and a purling brook gently falling from the acclivity ran
through poplar-shaded banks into the lake. I lived with a farmer whose house was built higher up
among the hills: a dark crag rose behind it, and, exposed to the north, the snow lay in its crevices the
summer through. Before dawn I led my flock to the sheep-walks, and guarded them through the day. It was a life of toil; for rain and cold were more frequent than sunshine; but it was my pride to
contemn the elements. My trusty dog watched the sheep as I slipped away to the rendezvous of my
comrades, and thence to the accomplishment of our schemes. At noon we met again, and we threw
away in contempt our peasant fare, as we built our fire-place and kindled the cheering blaze destined
to cook the game stolen from the neighbouring preserves. Then came the tale of hair-breadth
escapes, combats with dogs, ambush and flight, as gipsey-like we encompassed our pot. The search
after a stray lamb, or the devices by which we elude or endeavoured to elude punishment, filled up
the hours of afternoon; in the evening my flock went to its fold, and I to my sister. It was seldom indeed that we escaped, to use an old-fashioned phrase, scot free. Our dainty fare was
often exchanged for blows and imprisonment. Once, when thirteen years of age, I was sent for a
month to the county jail. I came out, my morals unimproved, my hatred to my oppressors encreased
tenfold. Bread and water did not tame my blood, nor solitary confinement inspire me with gentle
thoughts. I was angry, impatient, miserable; my only happy hours were those during which I devised
schemes of revenge; these were perfected in my forced solitude, so that during the whole of the
following season, and I was freed early in September, I never failed to provide excellent and
plenteous fare for myself and my comrades. This was a glorious winter. The sharp frost and heavy
snows tamed the animals, and kept the country gentlemen by their firesides; we got more game than
we could eat, and my faithful dog grew sleek upon our refuse. Thus years passed on; and years only added fresh love of freedom, and contempt for all that was not
as wild and rude as myself. At the age of sixteen I had shot up in appearance to man's estate; I was
tall and athletic; I was practised to feats of strength, and inured to the inclemency of the elements. My skin was embrowned by the sun; my step was firm with conscious power. I feared no man, and
loved none. In after life I looked back with wonder to what I then was; how utterly worthless I should
have become if I had pursued my lawless career. My life was like that of an animal, and my mind was
in danger of degenerating into that which informs brute nature. Until now, my savage habits had
done me no radical mischief; my physical powers had grown up and flourished under their influence,
and my mind, undergoing the same discipline, was imbued with all the hardy virtues. But now my
boasted independence was daily instigating me to acts of tyranny, and freedom was becoming
licentiousness. I stood on the brink of manhood; passions, strong as the trees of a forest, had already
taken root within me, and were about to shadow with their noxious overgrowth, my path of life. I panted for enterprises beyond my childish exploits, and formed distempered dreams of future
action. I avoided my ancient comrades, and I soon lost them. They arrived at the age when they were
sent to fulfil their destined situations in life; while I, an outcast, with none to lead or drive me
forward, paused. The old began to point at me as an example, the young to wonder at me as a being
distinct from themselves; I hated them, and began, last and worst degradation, to hate myself. I
clung to my ferocious habits, yet half despised them; I continued my war against civilization, and yet
entertained a wish to belong to it. I revolved again and again all that I remembered my mother to have told me of my father's former
life; I contemplated the few relics I possessed belonging to him, which spoke of greater refinement
than could be found among the mountain cottages; but nothing in all this served as a guide to lead
me to another and pleasanter way of life. My father had been connected with nobles, but all I knew
of such connection was subsequent neglect. The name of the king,-he to whom my dying father had
addressed his latest prayers, and who had barbarously slighted them, was associated only with the
ideas of unkindness, injustice, and consequent resentment. I was born for something greater than I
was-and greater I would become; but greatness, at least to my distorted perceptions, was no
necessary associate of goodness, and my wild thoughts were unchecked by moral considerations
when they rioted in dreams of distinction. Thus I stood upon a pinnacle, a sea of evil rolled at my
feet; I was about to precipitate myself into it, and rush like a torrent over all obstructions to the
object of my wishes- when a stranger influence came over the current of my fortunes, and changed
their boisterous course to what was in comparison like the gentle meanderings of a meadow-
encircling streamlet. I LIVED far from the busy haunts of men, and the rumour of wars or political changes came worn to a
mere sound, to our mountain abodes. England had been the scene of momentous struggles, during
my early boyhood. In the year 2073, the last of its kings, the ancient friend of my father, had
abdicated in compliance with the gentle force of the remonstrances of his subjects, and a republic
was instituted. Large estates were secured to the dethroned monarch and his family; he received the
title of Earl of Windsor, and Windsor Castle, an ancient royalty, with its wide demesnes were a part
of his allotted wealth. He died soon after, leaving two children, a son and a daughter. The ex-queen, a princess of the house of Austria, had long impelled her husband to withstand the
necessity of the times. She was haughty and fearless; she cherished a love of power, and a bitter
contempt for him who had despoiled himself of a kingdom. For her children's sake alone she
consented to remain, shorn of regality, a member of the English republic. When she became a
widow, she turned all her thoughts to the educating her son Adrian, second Earl of Windsor, so as to
accomplish her ambitious ends; and with his mother's milk he imbibed, and was intended to grow up
in the steady purpose of re-acquiring his lost crown. Adrian was now fifteen years of age. He was
addicted to study, and imbued beyond his years with learning and talent: report said that he had
already begun to thwart his mother's views, and to entertain republican principles. However this
might be, the haughty Countess entrusted none with the secrets of her family-tuition. Adrian was
bred up in solitude, and kept apart from the natural companions of his age and rank. Some unknown
circumstance now induced his mother to send him from under her immediate tutelage; and we
heard that he was about to visit Cumberland. A thousand tales were rife, explanatory of the Countess
of Windsor's conduct; none true probably; but each day it became more certain that we should have
the noble scion of the late regal house of England among us. There was a large estate with a mansion attached to it, belonging to this family, at Ulswater. A large
park was one of its appendages, laid out with great taste, and plentifully stocked with game. I had
often made depredations on these preserves; and the neglected state of the property facilitated my
incursions. When it was decided that the young Earl of Windsor should visit Cumberland, workmen
arrived to put the house and grounds in order for his reception. The apartments were restored to
their pristine splendour, and the park, all disrepairs restored, was guarded with unusual care. I was beyond measure disturbed by this intelligence. It roused all my dormant recollections, my
suspended sentiments of injury, and gave rise to the new one of revenge. I could no longer attend to
my occupations; all my plans and devices were forgotten; I seemed about to begin life anew, and
that under no good auspices. The tug of war, I thought, was now to begin. He would come
triumphantly to the district to which my parent had fled broken-hearted; he would find the ill-fated
offspring, bequeathed with such vain confidence to his royal father, miserable paupers. That he
should know of our existence, and treat us, near at hand, with the same contumely which his father
had practised in distance and absence, appeared to me the certain consequence of all that had gone
before. Thus then I should meet this titled stripling-the son of my father's friend. He would be
hedged in by servants; nobles, and the sons of nobles, were his companions; all England rang with his
name; and his coming, like a thunderstorm, was heard from far: while I, unlettered and unfashioned,
should, if I came in contact with him, in the judgment of his courtly followers, bear evidence in my
very person to the propriety of that ingratitude which had made me the degraded being I appeared. With my mind fully occupied by these ideas, I might be said as if fascinated, to haunt the destined
abode of the young Earl. I watched the progress of the improvements, and stood by the unlading
waggons, as various articles of luxury, brought from London, were taken forth and conveyed into the
mansion. It was part of the Ex-Queen's plan, to surround her son with princely magnificence. I beheld
rich carpets and silken hangings, ornaments of gold, richly embossed metals, emblazoned furniture,
and all the appendages of high rank arranged, so that nothing but what was regal in splendour
should reach the eye of one of royal descent. I looked on these; I turned my gaze to my own mean
dress.-Whence sprung this difference? Whence but from ingratitude, from falsehood, from a
dereliction on the part of the prince's father, of all noble sympathy and generous feeling. Doubtless,
he also, whose blood received a mingling tide from his proud mother-he, the acknowledged focus
of the kingdom's wealth and nobility, had been taught to repeat my father's name with disdain, and
to scoff at my just claims to protection. I strove to think that all this grandeur was but more glaring
infamy, and that, by planting his gold-enwoven flag beside my tarnished and tattered banner, he
proclaimed not his superiority, but his debasement. Yet I envied him. His stud of beautiful horses, his
arms of costly workmanship, the praise that attended him, the adoration, ready servitor, high place
and high esteem,-I considered them as forcibly wrenched from me, and envied them all with novel
and tormenting bitterness. To crown my vexation of spirit, Perdita, the visionary Perdita, seemed to awake to real life with
transport, when she told me that the Earl of Windsor was about to arrive. "And this pleases you?" I observed, moodily. "Indeed it does, Lionel," she replied; "I quite long to see him; he is the descendant of our kings, the
first noble of the land: every one admires and loves him, and they say that his rank is his least merit;
he is generous, brave, and affable." "You have learnt a pretty lesson, Perdita," said I, "and repeat it so literally, that you forget the while
the proofs we have of the Earl's virtues; his generosity to us is manifest in our plenty, his bravery in
the protection he affords us, his affability in the notice he takes of us. His rank his least merit, do you
say? Why, all his virtues are derived from his station only; because he is rich, he is called generous;
because he is powerful, brave; because he is well served, he is affable. Let them call him so, let all
England believe him to be thus-we know him-he is our enemy-our penurious, dastardly, arrogant
enemy; if he were gifted with one particle of the virtues you call his, he would do justly by us, if it
were only to shew, that if he must strike, it should not be a fallen foe. His father injured my father-
his father, unassailable on his throne, dared despise him who only stooped beneath himself, when he
deigned to associate with the royal ingrate. We, descendants from the one and the other, must be
enemies also. He shall find that I can feel my injuries; he shall learn to dread my revenge!" A few days after he arrived. Every inhabitant of the most miserable cottage, went to swell the stream
of population that poured forth to meet him: even Perdita, in spite of my late philippic, crept near
the highway, to behold this idol of all hearts. I, driven half mad, as I met party after party of the
country people, in their holiday best, descending the hills, escaped to their cloud-veiled summits, and
looking on the sterile rocks about me, exclaimed-"They do not cry, long live the Earl!" Nor, when
night came, accompanied by drizzling rain and cold, would I return home; for I knew that each
cottage rang with the praises of Adrian; as I felt my limbs grow numb and chill, my pain served as
food for my insane aversion; nay, I almost triumphed in it, since it seemed to afford me reason and
excuse for my hatred of my unheeding adversary. All was attributed to him, for I confounded so
entirely the idea of father and son, that I forgot that the latter might be wholly unconscious of his
parent's neglect of us; and as I struck my aching head with my hand, I cried: "He shall hear of this! I
will be revenged! I will not suffer like a spaniel! He shall know, beggar and friendless as I am, that I
will not tamely submit to injury!" Each day, each hour added to these exaggerated wrongs. His
praises were so many adder's stings infixed in my vulnerable breast. If I saw him at a distance, riding
a beautiful horse, my blood boiled with rage; the air seemed poisoned by his presence, and my very
native English was changed to a vile jargon, since every phrase I heard was coupled with his name
and honour. I panted to relieve this painful heart-burning by some misdeed that should rouse him to
a sense of my antipathy. It was the height of his offending, that he should occasion in me such
intolerable sensations, and not deign himself to afford any demonstration that he was aware that I
even lived to feel them. It soon became known that Adrian took great delight in his park and preserves. He never sported, but
spent hours in watching the tribes of lovely and almost tame animals with which it was stocked, and
ordered that greater care should be taken of them than ever. Here was an opening for my plans of
offence, and I made use of it with all the brute impetuosity I derived from my active mode of life. I
proposed the enterprize of poaching on his demesne to my few remaining comrades, who were the
most determined and lawless of the crew; but they all shrunk from the peril; so I was left to achieve
my revenge myself. At first my exploits were unperceived; I increased in daring; footsteps on the
dewy grass, torn boughs, and marks of slaughter, at length betrayed me to the game-keepers. They
kept better watch; I was taken, and sent to prison. I entered its gloomy walls in a fit of triumphant
extasy: "He feels me now," I cried, "and shall, again and again! "-I passed but one day in
confinement; in the evening I was liberated, as I was told, by the order of the Earl himself. This news
precipitated me from my self-raised pinnacle of honour. He despises me, I thought; but he shall learn
that I despise him, and hold in equal contempt his punishments and his clemency. On the second
night after my release, I was again taken by the gamekeepers-again imprisoned, and again released;
and again, such was my pertinacity, did the fourth night find me in the forbidden park. The
gamekeepers were more enraged than their lord by my obstinacy. They had received orders that if I
were again taken, I should be brought to the Earl; and his lenity made them expect a conclusion
which they considered ill befitting my crime. One of them, who had been from the first the leader
among those who had seized me, resolved to satisfy his own resentment, before he made me over to
the higher powers. The late setting of the moon, and the extreme caution I was obliged to use in this my third
expedition, consumed so much time, that something like a qualm of fear came over me when I
perceived dark night yield to twilight. I crept along by the fern, on my hands and knees, seeking the
shadowy coverts of the underwood, while the birds awoke with unwelcome song above, and the
fresh morning wind, playing among the boughs, made me suspect a footfall at each turn. My heart
beat quick as I approached the palings; my hand was on one of them, a leap would take me to the
other side, when two keepers sprang from an ambush upon me: one knocked me down, and
proceeded to inflict a severe horse-whipping. I started up-a knife was in my grasp; I made a plunge
at his raised right arm, and inflicted a deep, wide wound in his hand. The rage and yells of the
wounded man, the howling execrations of his comrade, which I answered with equal bitterness and
fury, echoed through the dell; morning broke more and more, ill accordant in its celestial beauty with
our brute and noisy contest. I and my enemy were still struggling, when the wounded man
exclaimed, "The Earl!" I sprang out of the herculean hold of the keeper, panting from my exertions; I
cast furious glances on my persecutors, and placing myself with my back to a tree, resolved to defend
myself to the last. My garments were torn, and they, as well as my hands, were stained with the
blood of the man I had wounded; one hand grasped the dead birds-my hard-earned prey, the other
held the knife; my hair was matted; my face besmeared with the same guilty signs that bore witness
against me on the dripping instrument I clenched; my whole appearance was haggard and squalid. Tall and muscular as I was in form, I must have looked like, what indeed I was, the merest ruffian that
ever trod the earth. The name of the Earl startled me, and caused all the indignant blood that warmed my heart to rush
into my cheeks; I had never seen him before; I figured to myself a haughty, assuming youth, who
would take me to task, if he deigned to speak to me, with all the arrogance of superiority. My reply
was ready; a reproach I deemed calculated to sting his very heart. He came up the while; and his
appearance blew aside, with gentle western breath, my cloudy wrath: a tall, slim, fair boy, with a
physiognomy expressive of the excess of sensibility and refinement stood before me; the morning
sunbeams tinged with gold his silken hair, and spread light and glory over his beaming countenance. "How is this?" he cried. The men eagerly began their defence; he put them aside, saying, "Two of you
at once on a mere lad- for shame!" He came up to me: "Verney," he cried, "Lionel Verney, do we
meet thus for the first time? We were born to be friends to each other; and though ill fortune has
divided us, will you not acknowledge the hereditary bond of friendship which I trust will hereafter
unite us?" As he spoke, his earnest eyes, fixed on me, seemed to read my very soul: my heart, my savage
revengeful heart, felt the influence of sweet benignity sink upon it; while his thrilling voice, like
sweetest melody, awoke a mute echo within me, stirring to its depths the life-blood in my frame. I
desired to reply, to acknowledge his goodness, accept his proffered friendship; but words, fitting
words, were not afforded to the rough mountaineer; I would have held out my hand, but its guilty
stain restrained me. Adrian took pity on my faltering mien: "Come with me," he said, "I have much to
say to you; come home with me-you know who I am?" "Yes," I exclaimed, "I do believe that I now know you, and that you will pardon my mistakes-my
crime." Adrian smiled gently; and after giving his orders to the gamekeepers, he came up to me; putting his
arm in mine, we walked together to the mansion. It was not his rank-after all that I have said, surely it will not be suspected that it was Adrian's rank,
that, from the first, subdued my heart of hearts, and laid my entire spirit prostrate before him. Nor
was it I alone who felt thus intimately his perfections. His sensibility and courtesy fascinated every
one. His vivacity, intelligence, and active spirit of benevolence, completed the conquest. Even at this
early age, he was deep read and imbued with the spirit of high philosophy. This spirit gave a tone of
irresistible persuasion to his intercourse with others, so that he seemed like an inspired musician,
who struck, with unerring skill, the "lyre of mind," and produced thence divine harmony. In person,
he hardly appeared of this world; his slight frame was overinformed by the soul that dwelt within; he
was all mind; "Man but a rush against" his breast, and it would have conquered his strength; but the
might of his smile would have tamed an hungry lion, or caused a legion of armed men to lay their
weapons at his feet. I spent the day with him. At first he did not recur to the past, or indeed to any personal occurrences. He wished probably to inspire me with confidence, and give me time to gather together my scattered
thoughts. He talked of general subjects, and gave me ideas I had never before conceived. We sat in
his library, and he spoke of the old Greek sages, and of the power which they had acquired over the
minds of men, through the force of love and wisdom only. The room was decorated with the busts of
many of them, and he described their characters to me. As he spoke, I felt subject to him; and all my
boasted pride and strength were subdued by the honeyed accents of this blue-eyed boy. The trim
and paled demesne of civilization, which I had before regarded from my wild jungle as inaccessible,
had its wicket opened by him; I stepped within, and felt, as I entered, that I trod my native soil. As evening came on, he reverted to the past. "I have a tale to relate," he said, "and much explanation
to give concerning the past; perhaps you can assist me to curtail it. Do you remember your father? I
had never the happiness of seeing him, but his name is one of my earliest recollections: he stands
written in my mind's tablets as the type of all that was gallant, amiable, and fascinating in man. His
wit was not more conspicuous than the overflowing goodness of his heart, which he poured in such
full measure on his friends, as to leave, alas! small remnant for himself." Encouraged by this encomium, I proceeded, in answer to his inquiries, to relate what I remembered
of my parent; and he gave an account of those circumstances which had brought about a neglect of
my father's testamentary letter. When, in after times, Adrian's father, then king of England, felt his
situation become more perilous, his line of conduct more embarrassed, again and again he wished
for his early friend, who might stand a mound against the impetuous anger of his queen, a mediator
between him and the parliament. From the time that he had quitted London, on the fatal night of his
defeat at the gaming-table, the king had received no tidings concerning him; and when, after the
lapse of years, he exerted himself to discover him, every trace was lost. With fonder regret than ever,
he clung to his memory; and gave it in charge to his son, if ever he should meet this valued friend, in
his name to bestow every succour, and to assure him that, to the last, his attachment survived
separation and silence. A short time before Adrian's visit to Cumberland, the heir of the nobleman to whom my father had
confided his last appeal to his royal master, put this letter, its seal unbroken, into the young Earl's
hands. It had been found cast aside with a mass of papers of old date, and accident alone brought it
to light. Adrian read it with deep interest; and found there that living spirit of genius and wit he had
so often heard commemorated. He discovered the name of the spot whither my father had
retreated, and where he died; he learnt the existence of his orphan children; and during the short
interval between his arrival at Ulswater and our meeting in the park, he had been occupied in making
inquiries concerning us, and arranging a variety of plans for our benefit, preliminary to his
introducing himself to our notice. The mode in which he spoke of my father was gratifying to my vanity; the veil which he delicately
cast over his benevolence, in alledging a duteous fulfilment of the king's latest will, was soothing to
my pride. Other feelings, less ambiguous, were called into play by his conciliating manner and the
generous warmth of his expressions, respect rarely before experienced, admiration, and love-he
had touched my rocky heart with his magic power, and the stream of affection gushed forth,
imperishable and pure. In the evening we parted; he pressed my hand: "We shall meet again; come
to me to-morrow." I clasped that kind hand; I tried to answer; a fervent "God bless you!" was all my
ignorance could frame of speech, and I darted away, oppressed by my new emotions. I could not rest. I sought the hills; a west wind swept them, and the stars glittered above. I ran on,
careless of outward objects, but trying to master the struggling spirit within me by means of bodily
fatigue. "This," I thought, "is power! Not to be strong of limb, hard of heart, ferocious, and daring;
but kind compassionate and soft. "-Stopping short, I clasped my hands, and with the fervour of a
new proselyte, cried, "Doubt me not, Adrian, I also will become wise and good!" and then quite
overcome, I wept aloud. As this gust of passion passed from me, I felt more composed. I lay on the ground, and giving the
reins to my thoughts, repassed in my mind my former life; and began, fold by fold, to unwind the
many errors of my heart, and to discover how brutish, savage, and worthless I had hitherto been. I
could not however at that time feel remorse, for methought I was born anew; my soul threw off the
burthen of past sin, to commence a new career in innocence and love. Nothing harsh or rough
remained to jar with the soft feelings which the transactions of the day had inspired; I was as a child
lisping its devotions after its mother, and my plastic soul was remoulded by a master hand, which I
neither desired nor was able to resist. This was the first commencement of my friendship with Adrian, and I must commemorate this day as
the most fortunate of my life. I now began to be human. I was admitted within that sacred boundary
which divides the intellectual and moral nature of man from that which characterizes animals. My
best feelings were called into play to give fitting responses to the generosity, wisdom, and amenity of
my new friend. He, with a noble goodness all his own, took infinite delight in bestowing to prodigality
the treasures of his mind and fortune on the long-neglected son of his father's friend, the offspring of
that gifted being whose excellencies and talents he had heard commemorated from infancy. After his abdication the late king had retreated from the sphere of politics, yet his domestic circle
afforded him small content. The ex-queen had none of the virtues of domestic life, and those of
courage and daring which she possessed were rendered null by the secession of her husband: she
despised him, and did not care to conceal her sentiments. The king had, in compliance with her
exactions, cast off his old friends, but he had acquired no new ones under her guidance. In this
dearth of sympathy, he had recourse to his almost infant son; and the early development of talent
and sensibility rendered Adrian no unfitting depository of his father's confidence. He was never
weary of listening to the latter's often repeated accounts of old times, in which my father had played
a distinguished part; his keen remarks were repeated to the boy, and remembered by him; his wit,
his fascinations, his very faults were hallowed by the regret of affection; his loss was sincerely
deplored. Even the queen's dislike of the favourite was ineffectual to deprive him of his son's
admiration: it was bitter, sarcastic, contemptuous-but as she bestowed her heavy censure alike on
his virtues as his errors, on his devoted friendship and his ill-bestowed loves, on his disinterestedness
and his prodigality, on his pre-possessing grace of manner, and the facility with which he yielded to
temptation, her double shot proved too heavy, and fell short of the mark. Nor did her angry dislike
prevent Adrian from imaging my father, as he had said, the type of all that was gallant, amiable, and
fascinating in man. It was not strange therefore, that when he heard of the existence of the offspring
of this celebrated person, he should have formed the plan of bestowing on them all the advantages
his rank made him rich to afford. When he found me a vagabond shepherd of the hills, a poacher, an
unlettered savage, still his kindness did not fail. In addition to the opinion he entertained that his
father was to a degree culpable of neglect towards us, and that he was bound to every possible
reparation, he was pleased to say that under all my ruggedness there glimmered forth an elevation
of spirit, which could be distinguished from mere animal courage, and that I inherited a similarity of
countenance to my father, which gave proof that all his virtues and talents had not died with him. Whatever those might be which descended to me, my noble young friend resolved should not be lost
for want of culture. Acting upon this plan in our subsequent intercourse, he led me to wish to participate in that
cultivation which graced his own intellect. My active mind, when once it seized upon this new idea,
fastened on it with extreme avidity. At first it was the great object of my ambition to rival the merits
of my father, and render myself worthy of the friendship of Adrian. But curiosity soon awoke, and an
earnest love of knowledge, which caused me to pass days and nights in reading and study. I was
already well acquainted with what I may term the panorama of nature, the change of seasons, and
the various appearances of heaven and earth. But I was at once startled and enchanted by my
sudden extension of vision, when the curtain, which had been drawn before the intellectual world,
was withdrawn, and I saw the universe, not only as it presented itself to my outward senses, but as it
had appeared to the wisest among men. Poetry and its creations, philosophy and its researches and
classifications, alike awoke the sleeping ideas in my mind, and gave me new ones. I felt as the sailor, who from the topmast first discovered the shore of America; and like him I
hastened to tell my companions of my discoveries in unknown regions. But I was unable to excite in
any breast the same craving appetite for knowledge that existed in mine. Even Perdita was unable to
understand me. I had lived in what is generally called the world of reality, and it was awakening to a
new country to find that there was a deeper meaning in all I saw, besides that which my eyes
conveyed to me. The visionary Perdita beheld in all this only a new gloss upon an old reading, and
her own was sufficiently inexhaustible to content her. She listened to me as she had done to the
narration of my adventures, and sometimes took an interest in this species of information; but she
did not, as I did, look on it as an integral part of her being, which having obtained, I could no more
put off than the universal sense of touch. We both agreed in loving Adrian: although she not having yet escaped from childhood could not
appreciate as I did the extent of his merits, or feel the same sympathy in his pursuits and opinions. I
was for ever with him. There was a sensibility and sweetness in his disposition, that gave a tender
and unearthly tone to our converse. Then he was gay as a lark carolling from its skiey tower, soaring
in thought as an eagle, innocent as the mild-eyed dove. He could dispel the seriousness of Perdita,
and take the sting from the torturing activity of my nature. I looked back to my restless desires and
painful struggles with my fellow beings as to a troubled dream, and felt myself as much changed as if
I had transmigrated into another form, whose fresh sensorium and mechanism of nerves had altered
the reflection of the apparent universe in the mirror of mind. But it was not so; I was the same in
strength, in earnest craving for sympathy, in my yearning for active exertion. My manly virtues did
not desert me, for the witch Urania spared the locks of Sampson, while he reposed at her feet; but all
was softened and humanized. Nor did Adrian instruct me only in the cold truths of history and
philosophy. At the same time that he taught me by their means to subdue my own reckless and
uncultured spirit, he opened to my view the living page of his own heart, and gave me to feel and
understand its wondrous character. The ex-queen of England had, even during infancy, endeavoured to implant daring and ambitious
designs in the mind of her son. She saw that he was endowed with genius and surpassing talent;
these she cultivated for the sake of afterwards using them for the furtherance of her own views. She
encouraged his craving for knowledge and his impetuous courage; she even tolerated his tameless
love of freedom, under the hope that this would, as is too often the case, lead to a passion for
command. She endeavoured to bring him up in a sense of resentment towards, and a desire to
revenge himself upon, those who had been instrumental in bringing about his father's abdication. In
this she did not succeed. The accounts furnished him, however distorted, of a great and wise nation
asserting its right to govern itself, excited his admiration: in early days he became a republican from
principle. Still his mother did not despair. To the love of rule and haughty pride of birth she added
determined ambition, patience, and self-control. She devoted herself to the study of her son's
disposition. By the application of praise, censure, and exhortation, she tried to seek and strike the
fitting chords; and though the melody that followed her touch seemed discord to her, she built her
hopes on his talents, and felt sure that she would at last win him. The kind of banishment he now
experienced arose from other causes. The ex-queen had also a daughter, now twelve years of age; his fairy sister, Adrian was wont to call
her; a lovely, animated, little thing, all sensibility and truth. With these, her children, the noble
widow constantly resided at Windsor; and admitted no visitors, except her own partizans, travellers
from her native Germany, and a few of the foreign ministers. Among these, and highly distinguished
by her, was Prince Zaimi, ambassador to England from the free States of Greece; and his daughter,
the young Princess Evadne, passed much of her time at Windsor Castle. In company with this
sprightly and clever Greek girl, the Countess would relax from her usual state. Her views with regard
to her own children, placed all her words and actions relative to them under restraint: but Evadne
was a plaything she could in no way fear; nor were her talents and vivacity slight alleviations to the
monotony of the Countess's life. Evadne was eighteen years of age. Although they spent much time together at Windsor, the extreme
youth of Adrian prevented any suspicion as to the nature of their intercourse. But he was ardent and
tender of heart beyond the common nature of man, and had already learnt to love, while the
beauteous Greek smiled benignantly on the boy. It was strange to me, who, though older than
Adrian, had never loved, to witness the whole heart's sacrifice of my friend. There was neither
jealousy, inquietude, or mistrust in his sentiment; it was devotion and faith.