No one is opposing your will, and I well believe no one within the
castle will attempt it--"

"Because they dare not!" said he, furiously, interrupting his brother:
"They dare not, I tell you! But if they durst, what do you think I would
do? Ha, ha, ha!" Douglas overheard all this, and judging it a fit time to interfere,
immediately a knight opened the door of the apartment where the two
brothers conversed, and announced the Lord Douglas. Musgrave composed
himself with wonderful alacrity; and the greeting between the two great
chiefs, though dignified, was courteous and apparently free of rancour
or jealousy. Douglas first addressed his rival as follows:

"I crave pardon, knights, for thus interrupting you. I will again leave
you to yourselves; but I judged it incumbent on me, as a warrior and a
knight of honour, to come, before you settled finally on your mode of
procedure, and conjure you, Lord Philip Musgrave, to save the life of
your brother--"

"Certainly you will not put down my brave brother, Lord Douglas?" said
Musgrave, interrupting him. "As certainly," returned he, "as you put down my two kinsmen, Cleland
and Douglas of Rowlaw, in mere spite and wanton cruelty, because they
were beloved and respected by me. I am blameless, as it was yourself who
began this unwarrantable system, and my word is passed. Sir Richard must
die, unless the keys of the castle are delivered to me before Friday at
noon. But I shall be blameless in any thing further. I conjure you to
save him; and as an inducement, assure you, by the honour of knighthood,
that your resistance is not only unnatural, but totally useless; for I
have the means of commanding your submission when I please." "Lord Douglas, I defy thee!" answered Musgrave. "You hold the life in
your hand that I hold dearest on earth, save one. For these two would I
live or die: but, since thy inveterate enmity will not be satisfied
with ought short of the life of my only brother, take it; and may my
curse, and the curse of heaven, be your guerdon. It shall only render
the other doubly dear to me; and, for her sake, will I withstand your
proud pretensions; and, as she enjoined me, hold this castle, with all
its perils, till the expiry of the Christmas holidays, in spite of you. I defy your might and your ire. Let your cruel nature have its full
sway. Let it be gorged with the blood of my kinsfolk; it shall only
serve to make my opposition the stronger and more determined. For the
sake of her whom I serve, the mistress of my heart and soul, I will hold
my resolution.--Do your worst!" "So be it!" said Douglas. "Remember that I do not, like you, fight only
in the enthusiasm of love and chivalry, but for the very being of my
house. I will stick at no means of retaliating the injuries you have
done to me and mine, however unjustifiable these may appear to some,--no
act of cruelty, to attain the prize for which I contend. Little do you
know what you are doomed to suffer, and that in a short space of time. I again conjure you to save the life of your brother, by yielding up to
me your ill-got right, and your conditions shall be as liberal as you
can desire." "I will yield you my estate to save my brother, but not the castle of
Roxburgh. Name any other ransom but that, and I will treat with you. Ask
what I can grant with honour, and command it." "Would you give up the life of a brave only brother to gratify the
vanity and whim of a romantic girl, who, if present herself, would plead
for the life of Sir Richard, maugre all other considerations, else she
has not the feelings of woman? What would you give, Lord Musgrave, to
see that lady, and hear her sentiments on the subject." "I would give much to see her. But, rather than see her in this place, I
would give all the world and my life's blood into the bargain. But of
that I need not have any fear. You have conjurors among you, it is said,
and witches that can raise up the dead, but their power extends not to
the living, else who of my race would have been left?" "I have more power than you divine; and I will here give you a simple
specimen of it, to convince you how vain it is to contend with me. You
are waging war with your own vain imagination, and suffer all this
wretchedness for a thing that has neither being nor name." Douglas then lifted a small gilded bugle that hung always at his sword
belt, the language of which was well known to all the army; and on that
he gave two blasts not louder than a common whistle, when instantly the
door of the apartment opened, and there entered Lady Jane Howard,
leaning on her female attendant, dressed in attire of princely
magnificence. "Lady Jane Howard!" exclaimed Sir Richard, starting up,
and struggling with his fettered arms to embrace her. But when the
vision met the eyes of Lord Musgrave, he uttered a shuddering cry of
horror, and sprung with a convulsive leap back into the corner of the
tent. There he stood, like the statue of distraction, with his raised
hands pressed to each side of his helmet, as if he had been strenuously
holding his head from splitting asunder. "So! Friend and foe have combined against me!" cried he wildly. "Earth
and hell have joined their forces in opposition to one impotent human
thing! And what his crime? He presumed on no more than what he did, and
could have done; but who can stand against the powers of darkness, and
the unjust decrees of heaven? Yes; unjust! I say unjust! Down with all
decrees to the centre! There's no truth in heaven! I weened there was,
but it is as false as the rest! I say as false!--falser than both!--I'll
brave all the three! Ha, ha, ha!" Douglas had brought Lady Jane the apparel, and commanded her to dress in
it; and, perceiving the stern, authoritative nature of the chief, she
judged it meet to comply. At first she entered with a languid dejected
look, for she had been given to understand something of the rueful
nature of the meeting she was called on to attend. But when she heard
the above infuriated rhapsody, and turned her eyes in terror to look on
the speaker, whose voice she well knew, she uttered a scream and
fainted. Douglas supported her in his arms; and Sir Richard, whose arms
were in fetters, stood and wept over her. But Musgrave himself only
strode to and fro over the floor of the pavilion, and uttered now and
then a frantic laugh. "That is well!--That is well!" exclaimed he; "Just
as it should be! I hope she will not recover. Surely she will not?" and
then bending himself back, and clasping his hands together, he cried
fervently: "O mother of God, take her to thyself while she is yet pure
and uncontaminated, or what heart of flesh can endure the prospect? What
a wreck in nature that lovely form will soon be! Oh-oh-oh!" The lady's swoon was temporary. She soon began to revive, and cast
unsettled looks around in search of the object that had so overpowered
her; and, at the request of Sir Richard, who perceived his brother's
intemperate mood, she was removed. She was so struck with the altered
features, looks, and deportment of the knight, who in her imagination
was every thing that was courteous, comely, and noble, and whom she had
long considered as destined to be her own, that her heart was unable to
stand the shock, and her removal from his presence was an act of
humanity. She was supported out of the tent by Douglas and her female relation;
but when Musgrave saw them leading her away, he stepped rapidly in
before them and interposed; and, with a twist of his body, put his hand
two or three times to the place where the handle of his sword should
have been. The lady lifted her eyes to him, but there was no conception
in that look, and her lovely face was as pale as if the hand of death
had passed over it. Any one would have thought that such a look from the lady of his love,
in such a forlorn situation, and in the hands of his mortal enemy, would
have totally uprooted the last fibres of his distempered mind. But who
can calculate on the medicine suited to a diseased spirit? The cures
even of some bodily diseases are those that would poison a healthy
frame. So did it prove in this mental one. He lifted his hand from his
left side, where he had thrust it convulsively in search of his sword,
and clapping it on his forehead, he seemed to resume the command of
himself at once, and looked as calm and serene as in the most collected
moments of his life. When they were gone, he said to Sir Richard, in the hearing of the
guards: "Brother, what is the meaning of this? What English traitor has
betrayed that angelic maid into the hands of our enemy?" "To me it is incomprehensible," said Sir Richard: "I was told of it by
my keeper last night, but paid no regard to the information, judging it
a piece of wanton barbarity; but now my soul shudders at the rest of the
information that he added." "What more did the dog say?" said Musgrave. "He said he had heard that it was resolved by the Douglasses, that, if
you did not yield up the fortress and citadel freely, on or before the
day of the conception of the Blessed Virgin, on that day at noon the
lady of your heart should be exhibited in a state not to be named on a
stage erected on the top of the Bush-law, that faces the western tower,
and is divided from it only by the moat; and there before your eyes, and
in sight of both hosts, compelled to yield to that disgrace which
barbarians only could have conceived; and then to have her nose cut off,
her eyes put out, and her beauteous frame otherwise disfigured." "He dares not for his soul's salvation do such a deed!" said Musgrave:
"No; there's not a bloodhound that ever mouthed the air of his cursed
country durst do a deed like that. And though every Douglas is a hound
confest, where is the mongrel among them that durst but howl of such an
outrage in nature? Why, the most absolute fiend would shrink from it:
Hell would disown it; and do you think the earth would bear it?" "Brother, suspend your passion, and listen to the voice of reason and of
nature. Your cause is lost, but not your honour. You took, and have kept
that fortress, to the astonishment of the world. But for what do you
now fight? or what can your opposition avail? Let me beseech you not to
throw away the lives of those you love most on earth thus wantonly, but
capitulate on honourable terms, and rescue your betrothed bride and your
only brother from the irritated Scots. Trust not that they will stick at
any outrage to accomplish their aim. Loth would I be to know our name
were dishonoured by any pusillanimity on the part of my brother; but
desperate obstinacy is not bravery. I, therefore, conjure you to save
me, and her in whom all your hopes of future felicity are bound up." Musgrave was deeply affected; and, at that instant, before he had time
to reply, Douglas re-entered. "Scots lord, you have overcome me," said he, with a pathos that could
not be exceeded: "Yes you have conquered, but not with your sword. Not
on the field, nor on the wall, have ye turned the glaive of Musgrave;
but either by some infernal power, or else by chicanery and guile, the
everlasting resources of your cursed nation. It boots not me to know how
you came possessed of this last and only remaining pledge of my
submission. It is sufficient you have it. I yield myself your prisoner;
let me live or die with those two already in your power." "No, knight, that must not be," replied Douglas. "You are here on safe
conduct and protection; my honour is pledged, and must not be forfeited. You shall return in safety to your kinsmen and soldiers, and act by
their counsel. It is not prisoners I want, but the castle of Roxburgh,
which is the right of my sovereign and my nation,--clandestinely taken,
and wrongously held by you. I am neither cruel nor severe beyond the
small range that points to that attainment; but that fortress I will
have,--else wo be to you, and all who advise withholding it, as well as
all their connexions to whom the power of Scotland can extend. If the
castle is not delivered up before Friday at noon, your brother shall
suffer,--that you already know. But at the same hour on the day of the
Conception, if it is still madly and wantonly detained, there shall be
such a scene transacted before your eyes as shall blur the annals of the
Border for ever." "If you allude to any injury intended to the lady who is your prisoner,"
said Musgrave, "the cruellest fiend in hell could not have the heart to
hurt such angelic purity and loveliness; and it would degrade the honour
of knighthood for ever to suffer it. Cruel as you are, you dare not
injure a hair of her head." "Talk not of cruelty in me," said Douglas: "If the knight who is her
lover will not save her, how should I? You have it in your power, and
certainly it is you that behove to do it; even granting that the stakes
for which we fought were equal, the task of redemption and the blame
would rest solely with you. And how wide is the difference between the
prizes for which we contend? I for my love, my honour, and the very
existence of my house and name; and you for you know not what,--the
miserable pride of opposition. Take your measures, my lord. I will not
be mocked." Douglas left the apartment. Musgrave also arose and embraced his
brother, and, as he parted from him, he spoke these ominous words:
"Farewell, my dear Richard. May the angels that watch over honour be
your guardians in the hour of trial. You know not what I have to endure
from tormentors without and within. But hence we meet not again in this
state of existence. The ties of love must be broken, and the bands of
brotherly love burst asunder,--nevertheless I will save you--A long
farewell my brother." Musgrave was then conducted back to the draw-bridge, between two long
files of soldiers as before, while all the musicians that belonged
either to the army or the city were ranked up in a line behind them, on
the top of the great precipice that over-hangs the Teviot, playing, on
all manner of instruments, "_Turn the Blue Bonnets wha can, wha can_,"
with such a tremendous din that one would have thought every stone in
the walls of Roxburgh was singing out the bravado. Qnhat weywerde elfin thynge is thaten boie,
    That hyngethe still upon myne gaire, as doeth
    My synne of harte? And quhome rychte loth; I lofe
    With not les hauckerynge. His locent eyne,
    And his tungis maiter comethe on myne sense
    Lyke a remembourance; or lyke ane dreime
    That had delytis in it. Quhen I wolde say
    "Begone;" lo then my tung mistakethe quyte,
    Or fanceyinge not the terme, it sayethe "Come hidder,
    Come hidder, crabbed boie, unto myne syde."