Glenmurray could not reply to this natural observation: he knew that, in
a similar situation, his feelings would have been like Adeline's; and,
pressing her hand with all the little strength left him, he said 'Poor
Berrendale!' and tried to compose himself to sleep; while Adeline, lost
in sad contemplation, threw herself in a chair by his bed-side, and
anxiously awaited the event of his re-awaking. But it was not long before Adeline herself, exhausted both in body and
mind, fell into a deep sleep; and it was mid-day before she awoke: for
no careless, heavy-treading, and hired nurse now watched the slumbers of
the unhappy lovers; but the mulatto, stepping light as air, and afraid
even of breathing lest she should disturb their repose, had assumed her
station at the bed-side, and taken every precaution lest any noise
should awake them. Hers was the service of the heart; and there is none
like it. At twelve o'clock Adeline awoke; and her first glance met the dark eyes
of Savanna kindly fixed upon her. Adeline started, not immediately
recollecting who it could be; but in a moment the idea of the mulatto,
and of the service which she had rendered her, recurred to her mind, and
diffused a sensation of pleasure through her frame. 'There is a being
whom I have served,' said Adeline to herself, and, extending her hand to
Savanna, she started from her seat, invigorated by the thought: but she
felt depressed again by the consciousness that she, who had been able to
impart so much joy and help to another, was herself a wretch for ever;
and in a moment her eyes filled with tears, while the mulatto gazed on
her with a look of inquiring solicitude. 'Poor Savanna!' cried Adeline in a low and plaintive tone. There are moments when the sound of one's own voice has a mournful
effect on one's feelings--this was one of those moments to Adeline;
the pathos of her own tone overcame her, and she burst into tears: but
Glenmurray slept on; and Adeline hoped nothing would suddenly disturb
his rest, when Berrendale opened the door with what appeared unnecessary
noise, and Glenmurray hastily awoke. Adeline immediately started from her seat, and, looking at him with
great indignation, demanded why he came in in such a manner, when he
knew Mr Glenmurray was asleep. Berrendale, shocked and alarmed at Adeline's words and expression, so
unlike her usual manner, stammered out an excuse. 'Another time, Sir',
replied Adeline coldly, 'I hope you will be more _careful_.' 'What is the matter?' said Glenmurray, raising himself in the bed. 'Are
you scolding, Adeline? If so, let me hear you: I like novelty.' Here Adeline and Berrendale both hastened to him, and Adeline almost
looked with complacency on Berrendale; when Glenmurray, declaring
himself wonderfully refreshed by his long sleep, expressed a great
desire for his breakfast, and said he had a most voracious appetite. But to all Berrendale's attentions she returned the most forbidding
reserve; nor could she for a moment lose the painful idea, that the
death of Glenmurray would be to him a source of joy, not of anguish. Berrendale was not slow to observe this change in her conduct; and he
conceived that, as he knew Glenmurray had mentioned his pretensions
to her, his absence would be of more service to his wishes than his
presence; and he resolved to leave Richmond that afternoon,--especially
as he had a dinner engagement at a tavern in London, which, in spite of
love and friendship, he was desirous of keeping. He was not mistaken in his ideas: the countenance of Adeline assumed
less severity when he mentioned his intention of going away, nor could
she express regret at his resolution, even though Glenmurray with
anxious earnestness requested him to stay. But Glenmurray entreated in
vain: used to consider his own interest and pleasure in preference to
that of others, Berrendale resolved to go; and resisted the prayers of a
man who had often obliged him with the greatest difficulty to himself. 'Well, then,' said Glenmurray mournfully, 'if you must go, God bless
you! I wish you, Charles, all possible earthly happiness; nay, I have
done all I can to ensure it you: but you have disappointed me. I hoped
to have joined your hand, in my last moments, to that of this dear girl,
and to have bequeathed her in the most solemn manner to your care and
tenderness; but no matter, farewell! we shall probably meet no more.' Here Berrendale's heart failed him, and he almost resolved to stay: but
a look of angry repugnance which he saw on Adeline's countenance, even
amidst her sorrow, got the better of his kind emotions, by wounding his
self-love; and grasping Glenmurray's hand, and saying 'I shall be back
in a day or two,' he rushed out of the room. 'I am sorry Mr Berrendale is forced to go,' said Adeline involuntarily
when the street door closed after him. 'Had you condescended to tell him so, he would undoubtedly have staid,'
replied Glenmurray rather peevishly. Adeline instantly felt, and
regretted, the selfishness of her conduct. To avoid the sight of a
disagreeable object, she had given pain to Glenmurray; or, rather, she
had not done her utmost to prevent his being exposed to it. 'Forgive me,' said Adeline, bursting into tears: 'I own I thought only
of myself, when I forbore to urge his stay. Alas! with you, and you
alone, I believe, is the gratification of self always a secondary
consideration.' 'You forget that I am a philanthropist,' replied Glenmurray, 'and cannot
bear to be praised, even by you, at the expense of my fellow-creatures. But come, hasten dinner; my breakfast agreed with me so well, that I am
impatient for another meal.' 'You certainly are better to-day,' exclaimed Adeline with unwonted
cheerfulness. 'My feelings are more tolerable, at least,' replied Glenmurray: and
Adeline and the mulatto began to prepare the dinner immediately. How
often during her attendance on Glenmurray had she recollected the words
of her grandmother, and blessed her for having taught her to be
_useful_! As soon as dinner was over, Glenmurray complained of being drowsy: still
he declared he would not go to bed till he had seen the sun set, as he
had that day, for the second time since his illness, seen it rise; and
therefore, when it was setting, Adeline and Savanna led him into a room
adjoining, which had a western aspect. Glenmurray fixed his eyes on
the crimson horizon with a peculiar expression; and his lips seemed to
murmur, 'For the last time! Let me breathe the evening air, too, once
more,' said he. 'It is too chill, dear Glenmurray.' 'It will not hurt me,' replied Glenmurray; and Adeline complied with his
request. 'The breeze of evening is not refreshing like that of morning,' he
observed; 'but the beauty of the setting is, perhaps, superior to that
of the rising sun:--they are both glorious sights, and I have enjoyed
them both to-day, nor have I for years experienced so strong a feeling
of devotion.' 'Thank God!' cried Adeline. 'O Glenmurray! there has been one thing only
wanting to the completion of our union; and that was, that we should
worship together.' 'Perhaps, had I remained longer here,' replied Glenmurray, 'we might
have done so; for, believe me, Adeline, though my feelings have
continually hurried me into adoration of the Supreme Being, I have often
wished my homage to be as regular and as founded on immutable conviction
as it once was: but it is too late now for amendment, though, alas! not
for _regret_, _deep_ regret: yet He who reads the heart knows that my
intentions were pure, and that I was not fixed in the stubbornness of
error.' 'Let us change this discourse,' cried Adeline, seeing on Glenmurray's
countenance an expression of uncommon sadness, which he, from a regard
to her feelings, struggled to cover. He did indeed feel sadness--a
sadness of the most painful nature; and while Adeline hung over him with
all the anxious and soothing attention of unbounded love, he seemed to
shrink from her embrace with horror, and, turning away his head, feebly
murmured. 'O Adeline! this faithful kindness wounds me to the very soul. Alas! alas! how little have I deserved it!' If Glenmurray, who had been the means of injuring the woman he loved,
merely by following the dictates of his conscience, and a love of what
he imagined to be truth, without any view of his own benefit or the
gratification of his personal wishes, felt thus acutely the anguish of
self-upbraiding,--what ought to be, and what must be, sooner or later,
the agony and remorse of that man, who, merely for the gratification of
his own illicit desires, has seduced the woman whom he loved from the
path of virtue, and ruined for ever her reputation and her peace of
mind! 'It is too late now for you to sit at an open window, indeed it is,'
cried Adeline, after having replied to Glenmurray's self-reproaches by
the touching language of tears, and incoherent expressions of confiding
and unchanged attachment; 'and as you are evidently better to-day, do
not, by breathing too much cold air, run the risk of making yourself
worse again.' 'Would I were really better! would I could live!' passionately exclaimed
Glenmurray: 'but indeed I do feel stronger to-night than I have felt for
many months.' In a moment the fine eyes of Adeline were raised to heaven
with an expression of devout thankfulness; and, eager to make the most
of a change so favourable, she hurried Glenmurray back to his chamber,
and, with a feeling of renewed hope, sat by to watch his slumbers. She had not sat long before the door opened, and the little tawny boy
entered. He had watched all day to see the good lady, as he called
Adeline; but, as she had not left Glenmurray's chamber except to prepare
dinner, he had been disappointed: so he was resolved to seek her in her
own apartment. He had bought some cakes with the penny which Adeline had
given him, and he was eager to give her a piece of them. 'Hush!' cried Adeline, as she held out her hand to him; and he in a
whisper crying 'Bite,' held his purchase to her lips. Adeline tasted
it, said it was very good, and, giving him a halfpenny, the tawny boy
disappeared again: the noise he made as he bounded down the stairs woke
Glenmurray. Adeline was sitting on the side of the bed; and as he turned
round to sleep again he grasped her hand in his, and its feverish touch
damped her hopes, and re-awakened her fears. For a short time she
mournfully gazed on his flushed cheek, and then, gently sliding off the
bed, and dropping on one knee, she addressed the Deity in the language
of humble supplication. Insensibly she ceased to pray in thought only, and the lowly-murmured
prayer became audible. Again Glenmurray awoke, and Adeline reproached
herself as the cause. 'My rest was uneasy,' cried he, 'and I rejoice that you woke me:
besides, I like to hear you--Go on, my dearest girl; there is a
something in the breathings of your pious fondness that soothes me,'
added he, pressing the hand he held to his parched lips. Adeline obeyed: and as she continued, she felt ever and anon, by the
pressure of Glenmurray's hand, how much he was affected by what she
uttered. 'But must he be taken from me!' she exclaimed in one part of her prayer. 'Father, if it be possible, permit this cup to pass by me untasted.' Here she felt the hand of Glenmurray grasp hers most vehemently; and,
delighted to think that he had pleasure in hearing her, she went on to
breathe forth all the wishes of a trembling yet confiding spirit, till
overcome with her own emotions she ceased and arose, and leaning over
Glenmurray's pillow was going to take his hand:--but the hand which she
pressed returned not her pressure; the eyes were fixed whose approving
glance she sought; and the horrid truth rushed at once on her mind, that
the last convulsive grasp had been an eternal farewell, and that he had
in that grasp expired. Alas! what preparation however long, what anticipation however sure, can
enable the mind to bear a shock like this! It came on Adeline like a
thunder-stroke: she screamed not; she moved not; but, fixing a dim and
glassy eye on the pale countenance of her lover, she seemed as insensible
as poor Glenmurray himself; and hours might have elapsed--hours
immediately fatal both to her senses and existence--ere any one had
entered the room, since she had given orders to be disturbed by no one,
had not the tawny boy, encouraged by his past success, stolen in again,
unperceived, to give her a piece of the apple which he had bought with
her last bounty. The delighted boy tripped gaily to the bed-side, holding up his
treasure; but he started back, and screamed in all the agony of terror,
at the sight which he beheld--the face of Glenmurray ghastly, and the
mouth distorted as if in the last agony, and Adeline in the stupor of
despair. The affectionate boy's repeated screams soon summoned the whole family
into the room, while he, vainly hanging on Adeline's arm, begged her
to speak to him. But nothing could at first rouse Adeline, not even
Savanna's loud and extravagant grief. When, however, they tried to force
her from the body, she recovered her recollection and her strength; and
it was with great difficulty she could be carried out of the room, and
kept out when they had accomplished their purpose. But Savanna was sure that looking at such a sad sight would kill her
mistress; for she should die herself if she saw William dead, she
declared; and the people of the house agreed with her. They knew not
that grief is the best medicine for itself; and that the overcharged
heart is often relieved by the sight which standers-by conceive likely
to snap the very threads of existence. As Adeline and Glenmurray had both of them excited some interest in
Richmond, the news of the death of the latter was immediately abroad;
and it was told to Mrs Pemberton, with a pathetic account of Adeline's
distress, just as the carriage was preparing to convey her and her sick
friend on their way to Lisbon. It was a relation to call forth all the
humanity of Mrs Pemberton's nature. She forgot Adeline's crime in her
distress; and knowing she had no female friend with her, she hastened on
the errand of pity to the abode of vice. Alas! Mrs Pemberton had learnt
but too well to sympathize in grief like that of Adeline. She had seen
a beloved husband expire in her arms, and had afterwards followed two
children to the grave. But she had taken refuge from sorrow in the
active duties of her religion, and was enabled to become a teacher of
those truths to others, by which she had so much benefited herself. Mrs Pemberton entered the room just as Adeline, on her knees, was
conjuring the persons with her to allow her to see Glenmurray once more. Adeline did not at all observe the entrance of Mrs Pemberton, who, in
spite of the self-command which her principles and habits gave her, was
visibly affected when she beheld the mourner's tearless affliction: and
the hands which, on her entrance, were quietly crossed on each other,
confining the modest folds of her simple cloak, were suddenly and
involuntarily separated by the irresistible impulse of pity; while,
catching hold of the wall for support, she leaned against it, covering
her face with her hands. 'Let me see him! only let me see him once
more!' cried Adeline, gazing on Mrs Pemberton, but unconscious who she
was. 'Thou shalt see him,' replied Mrs Pemberton with considerable effort;
'give me thy hand, and I will go with thee to the chamber of death.' Adeline gave a scream of mournful joy at this permission, and suffered
herself to be led into Glenmurray's apartment. As soon as she entered it
she sprang to the bed, and, throwing herself beside the corpse, began to
contemplate it with an earnestness and firmness which surprised every
one. Mrs Pemberton also fixedly gazed on the wan face of Glenmurray:
'And art thou fallen!' she exclaimed, 'thou, wise in thine own conceit,
who presumedst, perhaps, sometimes to question even the existence of the
Most High, and to set up thy vain chimeras of yesterday against the
wisdom and experience of centuries? Child of the dust! child of error! what art thou now, and whither is thy guilty spirit fled? But balmy is
the hand of affliction; and she, thy mourning victim, may learn to bless
the hand that chastizes her, nor add to the offences which will weigh
down thy soul, a dread responsibility for hers!' Here she was interrupted by the voice of Adeline; who, in a deep and
hollow tone, was addressing the unconscious corpse. 'For God's sake,
speak! for this silence is dreadful--it looks so like death.' 'Poor thing!' said Mrs Pemberton, kneeling beside her, 'and is it even
thus with thee? Would thou couldst shed tears, afflicted one!' 'It is very strange,' continued Adeline: 'he loved me so tenderly, and
he used to speak and look so tenderly, and now, see how he neglects me! Glenmurray, my love! for mercy's sake, speak to me!' As she said this,
she laid her lips to his: but, feeling on them the icy coldness of
death, she started back, screaming in all the violence of phrensy; and,
recovered to the full consciousness of her misfortune, she was carried
back to her room in violent convulsions. 'Would I could stay and watch over thee!' said Mrs Pemberton, as she
gazed on Adeline's distorted countenance; 'for thou, young as thou art,
wert well known in the chambers of sorrow and of sickness; and I should
rejoice to pay back to thee part of the debt of those whom thy presence
so often soothed: but I must leave thee to the care of others.' 'You leave her to my care,' cried Savanna reproachfully,--who felt even
her violent sorrow suspended while Mrs Pemberton spoke in accents at
once sad yet soothing,--'you leave her to my care, and who watch, who
love her more than me?' 'Good Savanna!' replied Mrs Pemberton, pressing the mulatto's hand as
she returned to her station beside Adeline, who was fallen into a calm
slumber, 'to thy care, with confidence, I commit her. But perhaps there
may be an immediate necessity for money, and I had better leave this
with thee,' she added, taking out her purse: but Savanna assured her
that Mr Berrendale was sent for, and to him all those concerns were to
be left. Mrs Pemberton stood for a few moments looking at Adeline in
silence, then slowly left the house. When Adeline awoke, she seemed so calm and resigned, that her earnest
request of being allowed to pass the night alone was granted, especially
as Mrs Pemberton had desired that her wish, even to see Glenmurray
again, should be complied with: but the faithful mulatto watched till
morning at the door. No bed that night received the weary limbs of
Adeline. She threw herself on the ground, and in alternate prayer and
phrensy passed the first night of her woe: towards morning, however, she
fell into a perturbed sleep. But when the light of day darting into the
room awakened her to consciousness; and when she recollected that he
to whom it usually summoned her existed no longer; that the eyes which
but the preceding morning had opened with enthusiastic ardour to hail
its beams, were now for ever closed; and that the voice which used
to welcome her so tenderly, she should never, never hear again; the
forlornness of her situation, the hopelessness of her sorrow burst upon
her with a violence too powerful for her reason: and when Berrendale
arrived, he found Glenmurray in his shroud, and Adeline in a state
of insanity. For six months her phrensy resisted all the efforts of
medicine, and the united care which Berrendale's love and Savanna's
grateful attachment could bestow; while with Adeline's want of their
care seemed to increase their desire of bestowing it, and their
affection gathered new strength from the duration of her helpless
malady. So true is it, that we become attached more from the aid which
we give than that which we receive; and that the love of the obliger
is more apt to increase than that of the obliged by the obligation
conferred. At length, however, Adeline's reason slowly yet surely
returned; and she, by degrees, learnt to contemplate with firmness,
and even calmness, the loss which she had sustained. She even looked
on Berrendale and his attentions not with anger, but gratitude and
complacency; she had even pleasure in observing the likeness he bore
Glenmurray; she felt that it endeared him to her. In the first paroxysms
of her phrensy, the sight of him threw her into fits of ravings; but
as she grew better she had pleasure in seeing him: and when, on her
recovery, she heard how much she was indebted to his persevering
tenderness, she felt for him a decided regard, which Berrendale tried
to flatter himself might be ripened into love. But he was mistaken; the heart of Adeline was formed to feel violent
and lasting attachments only. She had always loved her mother with a
tenderness of a most uncommon nature; she had felt for Glenmurray the
fondest enthusiasm of passion: she was now separated from them both. But her mother still lived: and though almost hopeless of ever being
restored to her society, all her love for her returned; and she pined
for that consoling fondness, those soothing attentions, which, in a time
of such affliction, a mother on a widowed daughter can alone bestow. 'Yet, surely,' cried she in the solitude of her own room, 'her oath
cannot now forbid her to forgive me; for, am I not as WRETCHED IN LOVE,
nay more, far more so, than _she_ has been? Yes--yes; I will write to
her: besides HE wished me to do so' (meaning Glenmurray, whom she never
named); and she did write to her, according to the address which Dr
Norberry sent soon after he returned to his own house. Still week after
week elapsed, and month after month, but no answer came. Again she wrote, and again she was disappointed; though her loss, her
illness in consequence of it, her pecuniary distress, and the large debt
which she had incurred to Berrendale, were all detailed in a manner
calculated to move the most obdurate heart. What then could Adeline
suppose? Perhaps her mother was ill; perhaps she was dead: and her
reason was again on the point of yielding to this horrible supposition,
when she received her two letters in a cover, directed in her mother's
hand-writing. At first she was overwhelmed by this dreadful proof of the continuance
of Mrs Mowbray's deep resentment; but, ever sanguine, the circumstance
of Mrs Mowbray's having written the address herself appeared to Adeline
a favourable symptom; and with renewed hope she wrote to Dr Norberry
to become her mediator once more: but to this letter no answer was
returned; and Adeline concluded her only friend had died of the fever
which Mrs Norberry had mentioned in her letter. 'Then I have lost my only friend!' cried Adeline, wringing her hands
in agony, as this idea recurred to her. 'Your only friend?' repeated
Berrendale, who happened to be present, 'O Adeline!' Her heart smote her as he said this. 'My oldest friend I should have
said,' she replied, holding out her hand to him; and Berrendale thought
himself happy. But Adeline was far from meaning to give the encouragement which this
action seemed to bestow: wholly occupied by her affliction, her mind
had lost its energy, and she would not have made an effort to dissipate
her grief by employment and exertion, had not that virtuous pride and
delicacy, which in happier hours had been the ornament of her character,
rebelled against the consciousness of owing pecuniary obligations to the
lover whose suit she was determined to reject, and urged her to make
some vigorous attempt to maintain herself. Many were the schemes which occurred to her; but none seemed so
practicable as that of keeping a day-school in some village near the
metropolis.--True, Glenmurray had said, that her having been his
mistress would prevent her obtaining scholars; but his fears, perhaps,
were stronger than his justice in this case. These fears, however, she
found existed in Berrendale's mind also, though he ventured only to hint
them with great caution. 'You think, then, no prudent parents, if my story should be known to
them, would send their children to me?' said Adeline to Berrendale. 'I fear--I--that is to say, I am sure they would not.' 'Under such circumstances,' said Adeline, 'you yourself would not send a
child to my school?' 'Why--really--I--as the world goes,' replied Berrendale. 'I am answered,' said Adeline with a look and tone of displeasure; and
retired to her chamber, intending not to return till Berrendale was
gone to his own lodging. But her heart soon reproached her with unjust
resentment; and, coming back, she apologized to Berrendale for being
angry at his laudable resolution of acting according to those principles
which he thought most virtuous, especially as she claimed for herself a
similar right. Berrendale, gratified by her apology, replied, 'that he saw no objection
to her plan, if she chose to deny him the happiness of sharing his
income with her, provided she would settle in a village where she was
not likely to be known, and change her name.' 'Change my name! Never. Concealment of any kind almost always implies
the consciousness of guilt; and while my heart does not condemn me, my
conduct shall not seem to accuse me. I will go to whatever place you
shall recommend; but I beg your other request may be mentioned no
more.' Berrendale, glad to be forgiven on any terms, promised to comply with
her wishes; and he having recommended to her to settle at a village some
few miles north of London, Adeline hired there a small but commodious
lodging, and issued immediately cards of advertisement, stating what she
meant to teach, and on what terms; while Berrendale took lodgings within
a mile of her, and the faithful mulatto attended her as a servant of
all-work. Fortunately, at this time, a lady at Richmond, who had a son the age
of the tawny boy, became so attached to him, that she was desirous of
bringing him up to be the play-fellow and future attendant on her son;
and the mulatto, pleased to have him so well disposed of, resisted the
poor little boy's tears and reluctance at the idea of being separated
from her and Adeline: and before she left Richmond she had the
satisfaction of seeing him comfortably settled in the house of his
patroness. Adeline succeeded in her undertaking even beyond her utmost wishes. Though unknown and unrecommended, there was in her countenance and
manner a something so engaging, so strongly inviting confidence, and
so decisively bespeaking the gentlewoman, that she soon excited in the
village general respect and attention: and no sooner were scholars
entrusted to her care, than she became the idol of her pupils; and their
improvement was rapid in proportion to the love which they bore her. This fortunate circumstance proved a balm to the wounded mind
of Adeline. She felt that she had recovered her usefulness--that
desideratum in morals; and life, spite of her misfortunes, acquired a
charm in her eyes. True it was, that she was restored to her capability
of being useful, by being where she was unknown; and because the
mulatto, unknown to her, had described her as reduced to earn her
living, on account of the death of the man to whom she was about to be
married: but she did not revert to the reasons of her being so generally
esteemed; she contented herself with the consciousness of being so; and
for some months she was tranquil, though not happy. But her tranquillity
was destined to be of short duration. The village in which Adeline resided happened to be the native place
of Mary Warner, the servant whom she had been forced to dismiss at
Richmond; and who having gone from Mrs Pemberton to another situation,
which she had also quitted, came to visit her friends. The wish of saying lessening things of those of whom one hears extravagant
commendations, is, I fear, common to almost every one, even where the
object praised comes in no competition with oneself:--and when Mary
Warner heard from every quarter of the grace and elegance, affability
and active benevolence of the new comer, it was no doubt infinitely
gratifying to her to be able to exclaim,--'Mowbray! did you say her name
is? La! I dares to say it is my old mistress, who was kept by one Mr
Glenmurray!' But so greatly were her auditors prepossessed in favour of
Adeline, that very few of them could be prevailed upon to believe Mary's
supposition was just; and so much was she piqued at the disbelief which
she met with, that she declared she would go to church the next Sunday
to shame the hussey, and go up and speak to her in the church-yard
before all the people. 'Ah! do so, if you ever saw our Miss Mowbray before,' was the answer:
and Mary eagerly looked forward to the approaching Sunday. Meanwhile,
as we are all of us but too apt to repeat stories to the prejudice of
others, even though we do not believe them, this strange assertion of
Mary was circulated through the village even by Adeline's admirers; and
the next Sunday was expected by the unconscious Adeline alone with no
unusual eagerness. Sunday came; and Adeline, as she was wont to do, attended the service:
but from the situation of her pew, she could neither see Mary nor be
seen by her till church was over. Adeline then, as usual, was walking
down the broad walk of the church-yard, surrounded by the parents of the
children who came to her school, and receiving from them the customary
marks of respect, when Mary, bustling through the crowd, accosted her
with:--'So!--your sarvant, Miss Mowbray, I am glad to see you here in
such a respectable situation.' Adeline, though in the gaily-dressed lady who accosted her she had some
difficulty in recognizing her quondam servant, recollected the pert
shrill voice and insolent manner of Mary immediately; and involuntarily
starting when she addressed her, from painful associations and fear of
impending evil, she replied, 'How are you, Mary?' in a faltering tone. 'Then it is Mary's Miss Mowbray,' whispered Mary's auditors of the
day before to each other; while Mary, proud of her success, looked
triumphantly at them, and was resolved to pursue the advantage which
she had gained. 'So you have lost Mr Glenmurray, I find!'