All day we watched the ranging of
the mountainous waves, and towards sunset a desire to decypher the promise for the morrow at its
setting, made us all gather with one accord on the edge of the cliff. When the mighty luminary
approached within a few degrees of the tempest-tossed horizon, suddenly, a wonder! three other
suns, alike burning and brilliant, rushed from various quarters of the heavens towards the great orb;
they whirled round it. The glare of light was intense to our dazzled eyes; the sun itself seemed to join
in the dance, while the sea burned like a furnace, like all Vesuvius a-light, with flowing lava beneath. The horses broke loose from their stalls in terror-a herd of cattle, panic struck, raced down to the
brink of the cliff, and blinded by light, plunged down with frightful yells in the waves below. The time
occupied by the apparition of these meteors was comparatively short; suddenly the three mock suns
united in one, and plunged into the sea. A few seconds afterwards, a deafening watery sound came
up with awful peal from the spot where they had disappeared. Meanwhile the sun, disencumbered from his strange satellites, paced with its accustomed majesty
towards its western home. When-we dared not trust our eyes late dazzled, but it seemed that-the
sea rose to meet it-it mounted higher and higher, till the fiery globe was obscured, and the wall of
water still ascended the horizon; it appeared as if suddenly the motion of earth was revealed to us-
as if no longer we were ruled by ancient laws, but were turned adrift in an unknown region of space. Many cried aloud, that these were no meteors, but globes of burning matter, which had set fire to
the earth, and caused the vast cauldron at our feet to bubble up with its measureless waves; the day
of judgment was come they averred, and a few moments would transport us before the awful
countenance of the omnipotent judge; while those less given to visionary terrors, declared that two
conflicting gales had occasioned the last phaenomenon. In support of this opinion they pointed out
the fact that the east wind died away, while the rushing of the coming west mingled its wild howl
with the roar of the advancing waters. Would the cliff resist this new battery? Was not the giant
wave far higher than the precipice? Would not our little island be deluged by its approach? The
crowd of spectators fled. They were dispersed over the fields, stopping now and then, and looking
back in terror. A sublime sense of awe calmed the swift pulsations of my heart-I awaited the
approach of the destruction menaced, with that solemn resignation which an unavoidable necessity
instils. The ocean every moment assumed a more terrific aspect, while the twilight was dimmed by
the rack which the west wind spread over the sky. By slow degrees however, as the wave advanced,
it took a more mild appearance; some under current of air, or obstruction in the bed of the waters,
checked its progress, and it sank gradually; while the surface of the sea became uniformly higher as it
dissolved into it. This change took from us the fear of an immediate catastrophe, although we were
still anxious as to the final result. We continued during the whole night to watch the fury of the sea
and the pace of the driving clouds, through whose openings the rare stars rushed impetuously; the
thunder of conflicting elements deprived us of all power to sleep. This endured ceaselessly for three days and nights. The stoutest hearts quailed before the savage
enmity of nature; provisions began to fail us, though every day foraging parties were dispersed to the
nearer towns. In vain we schooled ourselves into the belief, that there was nothing out of the
common order of nature in the strife we witnessed; our disasterous and overwhelming destiny
turned the best of us to cowards. Death had hunted us through the course of many months, even to
the narrow strip of time on which we now stood; narrow indeed, and buffeted by storms, was our
footway overhanging the great sea of calamity-
  As an unsheltered northern shore
  Is shaken by the wintry wave-
  And frequent storms for evermore,
  (While from the west the loud winds rave,
  Or from the east, or mountains hoar)
  The struck and tott'ring sand-bank lave. It required more than human energy to bear up against the menaces of destruction that every where
surrounded us. After the lapse of three days, the gale died away, the sea-gull sailed upon the calm bosom of the
windless atmosphere, and the last yellow leaf on the topmost branch of the oak hung without
motion. The sea no longer broke with fury; but a swell setting in steadily for shore, with long sweep
and sullen burst replaced the roar of the breakers. Yet we derived hope from the change, and we did
not doubt that after the interval of a few days the sea would resume its tranquillity. The sunset of the
fourth day favoured this idea; it was clear and golden. As we gazed on the purple sea, radiant
beneath, we were attracted by a novel spectacle; a dark speck-as it neared, visibly a boat-rode on
the top of the waves, every now and then lost in the steep vallies between. We marked its course
with eager questionings; and, when we saw that it evidently made for shore, we descended to the
only practicable landing place, and hoisted a signal to direct them. By the help of glasses we
distinguished her crew; it consisted of nine men, Englishmen, belonging in truth to the two divisions
of our people, who had preceded us, and had been for several weeks at Paris. As countryman was
wont to meet countryman in distant lands, did we greet our visitors on their landing, with
outstretched hands and gladsome welcome. They were slow to reciprocate our gratulations. They
looked angry and resentful; not less than the chafed sea which they had traversed with imminent
peril, though apparently more displeased with each other than with us. It was strange to see these
human beings, who appeared to be given forth by the earth like rare and inestimable plants, full of
towering passion, and the spirit of angry contest. Their first demand was to be conducted to the Lord
Protector of England, so they called Adrian, though he had long discarded the empty title, as a bitter
mockery of the shadow to which the Protectorship was now reduced. They were speedily led to
Dover Castle, from whose keep Adrian had watched the movements of the boat. He received them
with the interest and wonder so strange a visitation created. In the confusion occasioned by their
angry demands for precedence, it was long before we could discover the secret meaning of this
strange scene. By degrees, from the furious declamations of one, the fierce interruptions of another,
and the bitter scoffs of a third, we found that they were deputies from our colony at Paris, from
three parties there formed, who, each with angry rivalry, tried to attain a superiority over the other
two. These deputies had been dispatched by them to Adrian, who had been selected arbiter; and
they had journied from Paris to Calais, through the vacant towns and desolate country, indulging the
while violent hatred against each other; and now they pleaded their several causes with unmitigated
party-spirit. By examining the deputies apart, and after much investigation, we learnt the true state of things at
Paris. Since parliament had elected him Ryland's deputy, all the surviving English had submitted to
Adrian. He was our captain to lead us from our native soil to unknown lands, our lawgiver and our
preserver. On the first arrangement of our scheme of emigration, no continued separation of our
members was contemplated, and the command of the whole body in gradual ascent of power had its
apex in the Earl of Windsor. But unforeseen circumstances changed our plans for us, and occasioned
the greater part of our numbers to be divided for the space of nearly two months, from the supreme
chief. They had gone over in two distinct bodies; and on their arrival at Paris dissension arose
between them. They had found Paris a desert. When first the plague had appeared, the return of travellers and
merchants, and communications by letter, informed us regularly of the ravages made by disease on
the continent. But with the encreased mortality this intercourse declined and ceased. Even in
England itself communication from one part of the island to the other became slow and rare. No
vessel stemmed the flood that divided Calais from Dover; or if some melancholy voyager, wishing to
assure himself of the life or death of his relatives, put from the French shore to return among us,
often the greedy ocean swallowed his little craft, or after a day or two he was infected by the
disorder, and died before he could tell the tale of the desolation of France. We were therefore to a
great degree ignorant of the state of things on the continent, and were not without some vague
hope of finding numerous companions in its wide track. But the same causes that had so fearfully
diminished the English nation had had even greater scope for mischief in the sister land. France was a
blank; during the long line of road from Calais to Paris not one human being was found. In Paris there
were a few, perhaps a hundred, who, resigned to their coming fate, flitted about the streets of the
capital and assembled to converse of past times, with that vivacity and even gaiety that seldom
deserts the individuals of this nation. The English took uncontested possession of Paris. Its high houses and narrow streets were lifeless. A
few pale figures were to be distinguished at the accustomed resort at the Tuileries; they wondered
wherefore the islanders should approach their ill-fated city-for in the excess of wretchedness, the
sufferers always imagine, that their part of the calamity is the bitterest, as, when enduring intense
pain, we would exchange the particular torture we writhe under, for any other which should visit a
different part of the frame. They listened to the account the emigrants gave of their motives for
leaving their native land, with a shrug almost of disdain-"Return," they said, "return to your island,
whose sea breezes, and division from the continent gives some promise of health; if Pestilence
among you has slain its hundreds, with us it has slain its thousands. Are you not even now more
numerous than we are?-A year ago you would have found only the sick burying the dead; now we
are happier; for the pang of struggle has passed away, and the few you find here are patiently
waiting the final blow. But you, who are not content to die, breathe no longer the air of France, or
soon you will only be a part of her soil." Thus, by menaces of the sword, they would have driven back those who had escaped from fire. But
the peril left behind was deemed imminent by my countrymen; that before them doubtful and
distant; and soon other feelings arose to obliterate fear, or to replace it by passions, that ought to
have had no place among a brotherhood of unhappy survivors of the expiring world. The more numerous division of emigrants, which arrived first at Paris, assumed a superiority of rank
and power; the second party asserted their independence. A third was formed by a sectarian, a self-
erected prophet, who, while he attributed all power and rule to God, strove to get the real command
of his comrades into his own hands. This third division consisted of fewest individuals, but their
purpose was more one, their obedience to their leader more entire, their fortitude and courage
more unyielding and active. During the whole progress of the plague, the teachers of religion were in possession of great power;
a power of good, if rightly directed, or of incalculable mischief, if fanaticism or intolerance guided
their efforts. In the present instance, a worse feeling than either of these actuated the leader. He
was an impostor in the most determined sense of the term. A man who had in early life lost, through
the indulgence of vicious propensities, all sense of rectitude or self-esteem; and who, when ambition
was awakened in him, gave himself up to its influence unbridled by any scruple. His father had been
a methodist preacher, an enthusiastic man with simple intentions; but whose pernicious doctrines of
election and special grace had contributed to destroy all conscientious feeling in his son. During the
progress of the pestilence he had entered upon various schemes, by which to acquire adherents and
power. Adrian had discovered and defeated these attempts; but Adrian was absent; the wolf
assumed the shepherd's garb, and the flock admitted the deception: he had formed a party during
the few weeks he had been in Paris, who zealously propagated the creed of his divine mission, and
believed that safety and salvation were to be afforded only to those who put their trust in him. When once the spirit of dissension had arisen, the most frivolous causes gave it activity. The first
party, on arriving at Paris, had taken possession of the Tuileries; chance and friendly feeling had
induced the second to lodge near to them. A contest arose concerning the distribution of the pillage;
the chiefs of the first division demanded that the whole should be placed at their disposal; with this
assumption the opposite party refused to comply. When next the latter went to forage, the gates of
Paris were shut on them. After overcoming this difficulty, they marched in a body to the Tuileries. They found that their enemies had been already expelled thence by the Elect, as the fanatical party
designated themselves, who refused to admit any into the palace who did not first abjure obedience
to all except God, and his delegate on earth, their chief. Such was the beginning of the strife, which
at length proceeded so far, that the three divisions, armed, met in the Place Vendome, each resolved
to subdue by force the resistance of its adversaries. They assembled, their muskets were loaded, and
even pointed at the breasts of their so called enemies. One word had been sufficient; and there the
last of mankind would have burthened their souls with the crime of murder, and dipt their hands in
each other's blood. A sense of shame, a recollection that not only their cause, but the existence of
the whole human race was at stake, entered the breast of the leader of the more numerous party. He was aware, that if the ranks were thinned, no other recruits could fill them up; that each man was
as a priceless gem in a kingly crown, which if destroyed, the earth's deep entrails could yield no
paragon. He was a young man, and had been hurried on by presumption, and the notion of his high
rank and superiority to all other pretenders; now he repented his work, he felt that all the blood
about to be shed would be on his head; with sudden impulse therefore he spurred his horse between
the bands, and, having fixed a white handkerchief on the point of his uplifted sword, thus demanded
parley; the opposite leaders obeyed the signal. He spoke with warmth; he reminded them of the
oath all the chiefs had taken to submit to the Lord Protector; he declared their present meeting to be
an act of treason and mutiny; he allowed that he had been hurried away by passion, but that a cooler
moment had arrived; and he proposed that each party should send deputies to the Earl of Windsor,
inviting his interference and offering submission to his decision. His offer was accepted so far, that
each leader consented to command a retreat, and moreover agreed, that after the approbation of
their several parties had been consulted, they should meet that night on some neutral spot to ratify
the truce. At the meeting of the chiefs, this plan was finally concluded upon. The leader of the
fanatics indeed refused to admit the arbitration of Adrian; he sent ambassadors, rather than
deputies, to assert his claim, not plead his cause. The truce was to continue until the first of February, when the bands were again to assemble on the
Place Vendome; it was of the utmost consequence therefore that Adrian should arrive in Paris by
that day, since an hair might turn the scale, and peace, scared away by intestine broils, might only
return to watch by the silent dead. It was now the twenty-eighth of January; every vessel stationed
near Dover had been beaten to pieces and destroyed by the furious storms I have commemorated. Our journey however would admit of no delay. That very night, Adrian, and I, and twelve others,
either friends or attendants, put off from the English shore, in the boat that had brought over the
deputies. We all took our turn at the oar; and the immediate occasion of our departure affording us
abundant matter for conjecture and discourse, prevented the feeling that we left our native country,
depopulate England, for the last time, to enter deeply into the minds of the greater part of our
number. It was a serene starlight night, and the dark line of the English coast continued for some
time visible at intervals, as we rose on the broad back of the waves. I exerted myself with my long oar
to give swift impulse to our skiff; and, while the waters splashed with melancholy sound against its
sides, I looked with sad affection on this last glimpse of sea-girt England, and strained my eyes not
too soon to lose sight of the castellated cliff, which rose to protect the land of heroism and beauty
from the inroads of ocean, that, turbulent as I had lately seen it, required such cyclopean walls for its
repulsion. A solitary sea-gull winged its flight over our heads, to seek its nest in a cleft of the
precipice. Yes, thou shalt revisit the land of thy birth, I thought, as I looked invidiously on the airy
voyager; but we shall, never more! Tomb of Idris, farewell! Grave, in which my heart lies sepultured,
farewell for ever! We were twelve hours at sea, and the heavy swell obliged us to exert all our strength. At length, by
mere dint of rowing, we reached the French coast. The stars faded, and the grey morning cast a dim
veil over the silver horns of the waning moon-the sun rose broad and red from the sea, as we
walked over the sands to Calais. Our first care was to procure horses, and although wearied by our
night of watching and toil, some of our party immediately went in quest of these in the wide fields of
the unenclosed and now barren plain round Calais. We divided ourselves, like seamen, into watches,
and some reposed, while others prepared the morning's repast. Our foragers returned at noon with
only six horses-on these, Adrian and I, and four others, proceeded on our journey towards the great
city, which its inhabitants had fondly named the capital of the civilized world. Our horses had
become, through their long holiday, almost wild, and we crossed the plain round Calais with
impetuous speed. From the height near Boulogne, I turned again to look on England; nature had cast
a misty pall over her, her cliff was hidden-there was spread the watery barrier that divided us,
never again to be crossed; she lay on the ocean plain,
In the great pool a swan's nest. Ruined the nest, alas! the swans of Albion had passed away for ever-an uninhabited rock in the
wide Pacific, which had remained since the creation uninhabited, unnamed, unmarked, would be of
as much account in the world's future history, as desert England. Our journey was impeded by a thousand obstacles. As our horses grew tired, we had to seek for
others; and hours were wasted, while we exhausted our artifices to allure some of these
enfranchised slaves of man to resume the yoke; or as we went from stable to stable through the
towns, hoping to find some who had not forgotten the shelter of their native stalls. Our ill success in
procuring them, obliged us continually to leave some one of our companions behind; and on the first
of February, Adrian and I entered Paris, wholly unaccompanied. The serene morning had dawned
when we arrived at Saint Denis, and the sun was high, when the clamour of voices, and the clash, as
we feared, of weapons, guided us to where our countrymen had assembled on the Place Vendome. We passed a knot of Frenchmen, who were talking earnestly of the madness of the insular invaders,
and then coming by a sudden turn upon the Place, we saw the sun glitter on drawn swords and fixed
bayonets, while yells and clamours rent the air. It was a scene of unaccustomed confusion in these
days of depopulation. Roused by fancied wrongs, and insulting scoffs, the opposite parties had
rushed to attack each other; while the elect, drawn up apart, seemed to wait an opportunity to fall
with better advantage on their foes, when they should have mutually weakened each other. A
merciful power interposed, and no blood was shed; for, while the insane mob were in the very act of
attack, the females, wives, mothers and daughters, rushed between; they seized the bridles; they
embraced the knees of the horsemen, and hung on the necks, or enweaponed arms of their enraged
relatives; the shrill female scream was mingled with the manly shout, and formed the wild clamour
that welcomed us on our arrival. Our voices could not be heard in the tumult; Adrian however was eminent for the white charger he
rode; spurring him, he dashed into the midst of the throng: he was recognized, and a loud cry raised
for England and the Protector. The late adversaries, warmed to affection at the sight of him, joined in
heedless confusion, and surrounded him; the women kissed his hands, and the edges of his
garments; nay, his horse received tribute of their embraces; some wept their welcome; he appeared
an angel of peace descended among them; and the only danger was, that his mortal nature would be
demonstrated, by his suffocation from the kindness of his friends. His voice was at length heard, and
obeyed; the crowd fell back; the chiefs alone rallied round him. I had seen Lord Raymond ride
through his lines; his look of victory, and majestic mien obtained the respect and obedience of all:
such was not the appearance or influence of Adrian. His slight figure, his fervent look, his gesture,
more of deprecation than rule, were proofs that love, unmingled with fear, gave him dominion over
the hearts of a multitude, who knew that he never flinched from danger, nor was actuated by other
motives than care for the general welfare. No distinction was now visible between the two parties,
late ready to shed each other's blood, for, though neither would submit to the other, they both
yielded ready obedience to the Earl of Windsor. One party however remained, cut off from the rest, which did not sympathize in the joy exhibited on
Adrian's arrival, or imbibe the spirit of peace, which fell like dew upon the softened hearts of their
countrymen. At the head of this assembly was a ponderous, dark-looking man, whose malign eye
surveyed with gloating delight the stern looks of his followers. They had hitherto been inactive, but
now, perceiving themselves to be forgotten in the universal jubilee, they advanced with threatening
gestures: our friends had, as it were in wanton contention, attacked each other; they wanted but to
be told that their cause was one, for it to become so: their mutual anger had been a fire of straw,
compared to the slow-burning hatred they both entertained for these seceders, who seized a portion
of the world to come, there to entrench and incastellate themselves, and to issue with fearful sally,
and appalling denunciations, on the mere common children of the earth. The first advance of the
little army of the elect reawakened their rage; they grasped their arms, and waited but their leader's
signal to commence the attack, when the clear tones of Adrian's voice were heard, commanding
them to fall back; with confused murmur and hurried retreat, as the wave ebbs clamorously from the
sands it lately covered, our friends obeyed. Adrian rode singly into the space between the opposing
bands; he approached the hostile leader, as requesting him to imitate his example, but his look was
not obeyed, and the chief advanced, followed by his whole troop. There were many women among
them, who seemed more eager and resolute than their male companions. They pressed round their
leader, as if to shield him, while they loudly bestowed on him every sacred denomination and epithet
of worship. Adrian met them half way; they halted: "What," he said, "do you seek? Do you require
any thing of us that we refuse to give, and that you are forced to acquire by arms and warfare?" His questions were answered by a general cry, in which the words election, sin, and red right arm of
God, could alone be heard. Adrian looked expressly at their leader, saying, "Can you not silence your followers? Mine, you
perceive, obey me." The fellow answered by a scowl; and then, perhaps fearful that his people should become auditors of
the debate he expected to ensue, he commanded them to fall back, and advanced by himself. "What,
I again ask," said Adrian, "do you require of us?" "Repentance," replied the man, whose sinister brow gathered clouds as he spoke. "Obedience to the
will of the Most High, made manifest to these his Elected People. Do we not all die through your sins,
O generation of unbelief, and have we not a right to demand of you repentance and obedience?" "And if we refuse them, what then?" his opponent inquired mildly. "Beware," cried the man, "God hears you, and will smite your stony heart in his wrath; his poisoned
arrows fly, his dogs of death are unleashed! We will not perish unrevenged-and mighty will our
avenger be, when he descends in visible majesty, and scatters destruction among you." "My good fellow," said Adrian, with quiet scorn, "I wish that you were ignorant only, and I think it
would be no difficult task to prove to you, that you speak of what you do not understand. On the
present occasion however, it is enough for me to know that you seek nothing of us; and, heaven is
our witness, we seek nothing of you. I should be sorry to embitter by strife the few days that we any
of us may have here to live; when there," he pointed downwards, "we shall not be able to contend,
while here we need not. Go home, or stay; pray to your God in your own mode; your friends may do
the like. My orisons consist in peace and good will, in resignation and hope. Farewell!" He bowed slightly to the angry disputant who was about to reply; and, turning his horse down Rue
Saint Honore, called on his friends to follow him. He rode slowly, to give time to all to join him at the
Barrier, and then issued his orders that those who yielded obedience to him, should rendezvous at
Versailles. In the meantime he remained within the walls of Paris, until he had secured the safe
retreat of all. In about a fortnight the remainder of the emigrants arrived from England, and they all
repaired to Versailles; apartments were prepared for the family of the Protector in the Grand
Trianon, and there, after the excitement of these events, we reposed amidst the luxuries of the
departed Bourbons. AFTER the repose of a few days, we held a council, to decide on our future movements. Our first plan
had been to quit our wintry native latitude, and seek for our diminished numbers the luxuries and
delights of a southern climate. We had not fixed on any precise spot as the termination of our
wanderings; but a vague picture of perpetual spring, fragrant groves, and sparkling streams, floated
in our imagination to entice us on. A variety of causes had detained us in England, and we had now
arrived at the middle of February; if we pursued our original project, we should find ourselves in a
worse situation than before, having exchanged our temperate climate for the intolerable heats of a
summer in Egypt or Persia. We were therefore obliged to modify our plan, as the season continued
to be inclement; and it was determined that we should await the arrival of spring in our present
abode, and so order our future movements as to pass the hot months in the icy vallies of
Switzerland, deferring our southern progress until the ensuing autumn, if such a season was ever
again to be beheld by us. The castle and town of Versailles afforded our numbers ample accommodation, and foraging parties
took it by turns to supply our wants. There was a strange and appalling motley in the situation of
these the last of the race. At first I likened it to a colony, which borne over the far seas, struck root
for the first time in a new country. But where was the bustle and industry characteristic of such an
assemblage; the rudely constructed dwelling, which was to suffice till a more commodious mansion
could be built; the marking out of fields; the attempt at cultivation; the eager curiosity to discover
unknown animals and herbs; the excursions for the sake of exploring the country? Our habitations
were palaces our food was ready stored in granaries-there was no need of labour, no
inquisitiveness, no restless desire to get on. If we had been assured that we should secure the lives of
our present numbers, there would have been more vivacity and hope in our councils. We should
have discussed as to the period when the existing produce for man's sustenance would no longer
suffice for us, and what mode of life we should then adopt. We should have considered more
carefully our future plans, and debated concerning the spot where we should in future dwell. But
summer and the plague were near, and we dared not look forward. Every heart sickened at the
thought of amusement; if the younger part of our community were ever impelled, by youthful and
untamed hilarity, to enter on any dance or song, to cheer the melancholy time, they would suddenly
break off, checked by a mournful look or agonizing sigh from any one among them, who was
prevented by sorrows and losses from mingling in the festivity. If laughter echoed under our roof, yet
the heart was vacant of joy; and, when ever it chanced that I witnessed such attempts at pastime,
they encreased instead of diminishing my sense of woe. In the midst of the pleasure-hunting throng,
I would close my eyes, and see before me the obscure cavern, where was garnered the mortality of
Idris, and the dead lay around, mouldering in hushed repose. When I again became aware of the
present hour, softest melody of Lydian flute, or harmonious maze of graceful dance, was but as the
demoniac chorus in the Wolf's Glen, and the caperings of the reptiles that surrounded the magic
circle. My dearest interval of peace occurred, when, released from the obligation of associating with the
crowd, I could repose in the dear home where my children lived. Children I say, for the tenderest
emotions of paternity bound me to Clara. She was now fourteen; sorrow, and deep insight into the
scenes around her, calmed the restless spirit of girlhood; while the remembrance of her father whom
she idolized, and respect for me and Adrian, implanted an high sense of duty in her young heart. Though serious she was not sad; the eager desire that makes us all, when young, plume our wings,
and stretch our necks, that we may more swiftly alight tiptoe on the height of maturity, was subdued
in her by early experience. All that she could spare of overflowing love from her parents' memory,
and attention to her living relatives, was spent upon religion. This was the hidden law of her heart,
which she concealed with childish reserve, and cherished the more because it was secret. What faith
so entire, what charity so pure, what hope so fervent, as that of early youth? and she, all love, all
tenderness and trust, who from infancy had been tossed on the wide sea of passion and misfortune,
saw the finger of apparent divinity in all, and her best hope was to make herself acceptable to the
power she worshipped. Evelyn was only five years old; his joyous heart was incapable of sorrow, and
he enlivened our house with the innocent mirth incident to his years. The aged Countess of Windsor had fallen from her dream of power, rank and grandeur; she had been
suddenly seized with the conviction, that love was the only good of life, virtue the only ennobling
distinction and enriching wealth. Such a lesson had been taught her by the dead lips of her neglected
daughter; and she devoted herself, with all the fiery violence of her character, to the obtaining the
affection of the remnants of her family. In early years the heart of Adrian had been chilled towards
her; and, though he observed a due respect, her coldness, mixed with the recollection of
disappointment and madness, caused him to feel even pain in her society. She saw this, and yet
determined to win his love; the obstacle served the rather to excite her ambition. As Henry, Emperor
of Germany, lay in the snow before Pope Leo's gate for three winter days and nights, so did she in
humility wait before the icy barriers of his closed heart, till he, the servant of love, and prince of
tender courtesy, opened it wide for her admittance, bestowing, with fervency and gratitude, the
tribute of filial affection she merited. Her understanding, courage, and presence of mind, became
powerful auxiliaries to him in the difficult task of ruling the tumultuous crowd, which were subjected
to his control, in truth by a single hair. The principal circumstances that disturbed our tranquillity during this interval, originated in the
vicinity of the impostor-prophet and his followers. They continued to reside at Paris; but missionaries
from among them often visited Versailles-and such was the power of assertions, however false, yet
vehemently iterated, over the ready credulity of the ignorant and fearful, that they seldom failed in
drawing over to their party some from among our numbers. An instance of this nature coming
immediately under our notice, we were led to consider the miserable state in which we should leave
our countrymen, when we should, at the approach of summer, move on towards Switzerland, and
leave a deluded crew behind us in the hands of their miscreant leader. The sense of the smallness of
our numbers, and expectation of decrease, pressed upon us; and, while it would be a subject of
congratulation to ourselves to add one to our party, it would be doubly gratifying to rescue from the
pernicious influence of superstition and unrelenting tyranny, the victims that now, though voluntarily
enchained, groaned beneath it. If we had considered the preacher as sincere in a belief of his own
denunciations, or only moderately actuated by kind feeling in the exercise of his assumed powers, we
should have immediately addressed ourselves to him, and endeavoured with our best arguments to
soften and humanize his views. But he was instigated by ambition, he desired to rule over these last
stragglers from the fold of death; his projects went so far, as to cause him to calculate that, if, from
these crushed remains, a few survived, so that a new race should spring up, he, by holding tight the
reins of belief, might be remembered by the post-pestilential race as a patriarch, a prophet, nay a
deity; such as of old among the post-diluvians were Jupiter the conqueror, Serapis the lawgiver, and
Vishnou the preserver. These ideas made him inflexible in his rule, and violent in his hate of any who
presumed to share with him his usurped empire. It is a strange fact, but incontestible, that the philanthropist, who ardent in his desire to do good,
who patient, reasonable and gentle, yet disdains to use other argument than truth, has less influence
over men's minds, than he who, grasping and selfish, refuses not to adopt any means, nor awaken
any passion, nor diffuse any falsehood, for the advancement of his cause. If this from time
immemorial has been the case, the contrast was infinitely greater, now that the one could bring
harrowing fears and transcendent hopes into play; while the other had few hopes to hold forth, nor
could influence the imagination to diminish the fears which he himself was the first to entertain. The
preacher had persuaded his followers, that their escape from the plague, the salvation of their
children, and the rise of a new race of men from their seed, depended on their faith in, and their
submission to him. They greedily imbibed this belief; and their over-weening credulity even rendered
them eager to make converts to the same faith. How to seduce any individuals from such an alliance of fraud, was a frequent subject of Adrian's
meditations and discourse. He formed many plans for the purpose; but his own troop kept him in full
occupation to ensure their fidelity and safety; beside which the preacher was as cautious and
prudent, as he was cruel. His victims lived under the strictest rules and laws, which either entirely
imprisoned them within the Tuileries, or let them out in such numbers, and under such leaders, as
precluded the possibility of controversy. There was one among them however whom I resolved to
save; she had been known to us in happier days; Idris had loved her; and her excellent nature made it
peculiarly lamentable that she should be sacrificed by this merciless cannibal of souls. This man had between two and three hundred persons enlisted under his banners. More than half of
them were women; there were about fifty children of all ages; and not more than eighty men. They
were mostly drawn from that which, when such distinctions existed, was denominated the lower
rank of society. The exceptions consisted of a few high-born females, who, panic-struck, and tamed
by sorrow, had joined him. Among these was one, young, lovely, and enthusiastic, whose very
goodness made her a more easy victim. I have mentioned her before: Juliet, the youngest daughter,
and now sole relic of the ducal house of L--. There are some beings, whom fate seems to select on
whom to pour, in unmeasured portion, the vials of her wrath, and whom she bathes even to the lips
in misery. Such a one was the ill-starred Juliet. She had lost her indulgent parents, her brothers and
sisters, companions of her youth; in one fell swoop they had been carried off from her. Yet she had
again dared to call herself happy; united to her admirer, to him who possessed and filled her whole
heart, she yielded to the lethean powers of love, and knew and felt only his life and presence. At the
very time when with keen delight she welcomed the tokens of maternity, this sole prop of her life
failed, her husband died of the plague. For a time she had been lulled in insanity; the birth of her
child restored her to the cruel reality of things, but gave her at the same time an object for whom to
preserve at once life and reason. Every friend and relative had died off, and she was reduced to
solitude and penury; deep melancholy and angry impatience distorted her judgment, so that she
could not persuade herself to disclose her distress to us. When she heard of the plan of universal
emigration, she resolved to remain behind with her child, and alone in wide England to live or die, as
fate might decree, beside the grave of her beloved. She had hidden herself in one of the many empty
habitations of London; it was she who rescued my Idris on the fatal twentieth of November, though
my immediate danger, and the subsequent illness of Idris, caused us to forget our hapless friend. This
circumstance had however brought her again in contact with her fellow-creatures; a slight illness of
her infant, proved to her that she was still bound to humanity by an indestructible tie; to preserve
this little creature's life became the object of her being, and she joined the first division of migrants
who went over to Paris. She became an easy prey to the methodist; her sensibility and acute fears rendered her accessible to
every impulse; her love for her child made her eager to cling to the merest straw held out to save
him. Her mind, once unstrung, and now tuned by roughest inharmonious hands, made her credulous:
beautiful as fabled goddess, with voice of unrivalled sweetness, burning with new lighted
enthusiasm, she became a stedfast proselyte, and powerful auxiliary to the leader of the elect. I had
remarked her in the crowd, on the day we met on the Place Vendome; and, recollecting suddenly her
providential rescue of my lost one, on the night of the twentieth of November, I reproached myself
for my neglect and ingratitude, and felt impelled to leave no means that I could adopt untried, to
recall her to her better self, and rescue her from the fangs of the hypocrite destroyer. I will not, at this period of my story, record the artifices I used to penetrate the asylum of the
Tuileries, or give what would be a tedious account of my stratagems, disappointments, and
perseverance. I at last succeeded in entering these walls, and roamed its halls and corridors in eager
hope to find my selected convert. In the evening I contrived to mingle unobserved with the
congregation, which assembled in the chapel to listen to the crafty and eloquent harangue of their
prophet. I saw Juliet near him. Her dark eyes, fearfully impressed with the restless glare of madness,
were fixed on him; she held her infant, not yet a year old, in her arms; and care of it alone could
distract her attention from the words to which she eagerly listened. After the sermon was over, the
congregation dispersed; all quitted the chapel except she whom I sought; her babe had fallen asleep;
so she placed it on a cushion, and sat on the floor beside, watching its tranquil slumber. I presented myself to her; for a moment natural feeling produced a sentiment of gladness, which
disappeared again, when with ardent and affectionate exhortation I besought her to accompany me
in flight from this den of superstition and misery. In a moment she relapsed into the delirium of
fanaticism, and, but that her gentle nature forbade, would have loaded me with execrations. She
conjured me, she commanded me to leave her- "Beware, O beware," she cried, "fly while yet your
escape is practicable. Now you are safe; but strange sounds and inspirations come on me at times,
and if the Eternal should in awful whisper reveal to me his will, that to save my child you must be
sacrificed, I would call in the satellites of him you call the tyrant; they would tear you limb from limb;
nor would I hallow the death of him whom Idris loved, by a single tear." She spoke hurriedly, with tuneless voice, and wild look; her child awoke, and, frightened, began to
cry; each sob went to the ill-fated mother's heart, and she mingled the epithets of endearment she
addressed to her infant, with angry commands that I should leave her. Had I had the means, I would
have risked all, have torn her by force from the murderer's den, and trusted to the healing balm of
reason and affection. But I had no choice, no power even of longer struggle; steps were heard along
the gallery, and the voice of the preacher drew near. Juliet, straining her child in a close embrace,
fled by another passage. Even then I would have followed her; but my foe and his satellites entered; I
was surrounded, and taken prisoner. I remembered the menace of the unhappy Juliet, and expected the full tempest of the man's
vengeance, and the awakened wrath of his followers, to fall instantly upon me. I was questioned. My
answers were simple and sincere. "His own mouth condemns him," exclaimed the impostor; "he
confesses that his intention was to seduce from the way of salvation our well-beloved sister in God;
away with him to the dungeon; to-morrow he dies the death; we are manifestly called upon to make
an example, tremendous and appalling, to scare the children of sin from our asylum of the saved." My heart revolted from his hypocritical jargon: but it was unworthy of me to combat in words with
the ruffian; and my answer was cool; while, far from being possessed with fear, methought, even at
the worst, a man true to himself, courageous and determined, could fight his way, even from the
boards of the scaffold, through the herd of these misguided maniacs. "Remember," I said, "who I am;
and be well assured that I shall not die unavenged. Your legal magistrate, the Lord Protector, knew of
my design, and is aware that I am here; the cry of blood will reach him, and you and your miserable
victims will long lament the tragedy you are about to act." My antagonist did not deign to reply, even by a look;-"You know your duty," he said to his
comrades,-"obey." In a moment I was thrown on the earth, bound, blindfolded, and hurried away -liberty of limb and
sight was only restored to me, when, surrounded by dungeon-walls, dark and impervious, I found
myself a prisoner and alone. Such was the result of my attempt to gain over the proselyte of this man of crime; I could not
conceive that he would dare put me to death.-Yet I was in his hands; the path of his ambition had
ever been dark and cruel; his power was founded upon fear; the one word which might cause me to
die, unheard, unseen, in the obscurity of my dungeon, might be easier to speak than the deed of
mercy to act. He would not risk probably a public execution; but a private assassination would at
once terrify any of my companions from attempting a like feat, at the same time that a cautious line
of conduct might enable him to avoid the enquiries and the vengeance of Adrian. Two months ago, in a vault more obscure than the one I now inhabited, I had revolved the design of
quietly laying me down to die; now I shuddered at the approach of fate. My imagination was busied
in shaping forth the kind of death he would inflict. Would he allow me to wear out life with famine;
or was the food administered to me to be medicined with death? Would he steal on me in my sleep;
or should I contend to the last with my murderers, knowing, even while I struggled, that I must be
overcome? I lived upon an earth whose diminished population a child's arithmetic might number; I
had lived through long months with death stalking close at my side, while at intervals the shadow of
his skeleton-shape darkened my path. I had believed that I despised the grim phantom, and laughed
his power to scorn. Any other fate I should have met with courage, nay, have gone out gallantly to encounter. But to be
murdered thus at the midnight hour by cold-blooded assassins, no friendly hand to close my eyes, or
receive my parting blessing-to die in combat, hate and execration-ah, why, my angel love, didst
thou restore me to life, when already I had stepped within the portals of the tomb, now that so soon
again I was to be flung back a mangled corpse! Hours passed-centuries. Could I give words to the many thoughts which occupied me in endless
succession during this interval, I should fill volumes. The air was dank, the dungeon-floor mildewed
and icy cold; hunger came upon me too, and no sound reached me from without. To-morrow the
ruffian had declared that I should die. When would to-morrow come? Was it not already here? My door was about to be opened. I heard the key turn, and the bars and bolts slowly removed. The
opening of intervening passages permitted sounds from the interior of the palace to reach me; and I
heard the clock strike one. They come to murder me, I thought; this hour does not befit a public
execution. I drew myself up against the wall opposite the entrance; I collected my forces, I rallied my
courage, I would not fall a tame prey. Slowly the door receded on its hinges-I was ready to spring
forward to seize and grapple with the intruder, till the sight of who it was changed at once the
temper of my mind. It was Juliet herself; pale and trembling she stood, a lamp in her hand, on the
threshold of the dungeon, looking at me with wistful countenance. But in a moment she re-assumed
her self-possession; and her languid eyes recovered their brilliancy. She said, "I am come to save you,
Verney." "And yourself also," I cried: "dearest friend, can we indeed be saved?" "Not a word," she replied, "follow me!" I obeyed instantly. We threaded with light steps many corridors, ascended several flights of stairs,
and passed through long galleries; at the end of one she unlocked a low portal; a rush of wind
extinguished our lamp; but, in lieu of it, we had the blessed moon-beams and the open face of
heaven. Then first Juliet spoke:-"You are safe," she said, "God bless you!- farewell!" I seized her reluctant hand-"Dear friend," I cried, "misguided victim, do you not intend to escape
with me? Have you not risked all in facilitating my flight? and do you think, that I will permit you to
return, and suffer alone the effects of that miscreant's rage? Never!" "Do not fear for me," replied the lovely girl mournfully, "and do not imagine that without the consent
of our chief you could be without these walls. It is he that has saved you; he assigned to me the part
of leading you hither, because I am best acquainted with your motives for coming here, and can best
appreciate his mercy in permitting you to depart." "And are you," I cried, "the dupe of this man? He dreads me alive as an enemy, and dead he fears my
avengers. By favouring this clandestine escape he preserves a shew of consistency to his followers;
but mercy is far from his heart. Do you forget his artifices, his cruelty, and fraud? As I am free, so are
you. Come, Juliet, the mother of our lost Idris will welcome you, the noble Adrian will rejoice to
receive you; you will find peace and love, and better hopes than fanaticism can afford. Come, and
fear not; long before day we shall be at Versailles; close the door on this abode of crime -come,
sweet Juliet, from hypocrisy and guilt to the society of the affectionate and good." I spoke hurriedly, but with fervour: and while with gentle violence I drew her from the portal, some
thought, some recollection of past scenes of youth and happiness, made her listen and yield to me;
suddenly she broke away with a piercing shriek:-"My child, my child! he has my child; my darling girl
is my hostage." She darted from me into the passage; the gate closed between us-she was left in the fangs of this
man of crime, a prisoner, still to inhale the pestilential atmosphere which adhered to his demoniac
nature; the unimpeded breeze played on my cheek, the moon shone graciously upon me, my path
was free. Glad to have escaped, yet melancholy in my very joy, I retrod my steps to Versailles. EVENTFUL winter passed; winter, the respite of our ills. By degrees the sun, which with slant beams
had before yielded the more extended reign to night, lengthened his diurnal journey, and mounted
his highest throne, at once the fosterer of earth's new beauty, and her lover. We who, like flies that
congregate upon a dry rock at the ebbing of the tide, had played wantonly with time, allowing our
passions, our hopes, and our mad desires to rule us, now heard the approaching roar of the ocean of
destruction, and would have fled to some sheltered crevice, before the first wave broke over us. We
resolved without delay, to commence our journey to Switzerland; we became eager to leave France. Under the icy vaults of the glaciers, beneath the shadow of the pines, the swinging of whose mighty
branches was arrested by a load of snow; beside the streams whose intense cold proclaimed their
origin to be from the slow-melting piles of congelated waters, amidst frequent storms which might
purify the air, we should find health, if in truth health were not herself diseased. We began our preparations at first with alacrity. We did not now bid adieu to our native country, to
the graves of those we loved, to the flowers, and streams, and trees, which had lived beside us from
infancy. Small sorrow would be ours on leaving Paris. A scene of shame, when we remembered our
late contentions, and thought that we left behind a flock of miserable, deluded victims, bending
under the tyranny of a selfish impostor. Small pangs should we feel in leaving the gardens, woods,
and halls of the palaces of the Bourbons at Versailles, which we feared would soon be tainted by the
dead, when we looked forward to vallies lovelier than any garden, to mighty forests and halls, built
not for mortal majesty, but palaces of nature's own, with the Alp of marmoreal whiteness for their
walls, the sky for their roof. Yet our spirits flagged, as the day drew near which we had fixed for our departure. Dire visions and
evil auguries, if such things were, thickened around us, so that in vain might men say-
These are their reasons, they are natural,
we felt them to be ominous, and dreaded the future event enchained to them. That the night owl
should screech before the noon-day sun, that the hard-winged bat should wheel around the bed of
beauty, that muttering thunder should in early spring startle the cloudless air, that sudden and
exterminating blight should fall on the tree and shrub, were unaccustomed, but physical events, less
horrible than the mental creations of almighty fear. Some had sight of funeral processions, and faces
all begrimed with tears, which flitted through the long avenues of the gardens, and drew aside the
curtains of the sleepers at dead of night. Some heard wailing and cries in the air; a mournful chaunt
would stream through the dark atmosphere, as if spirits above sang the requiem of the human race. What was there in all this, but that fear created other senses within our frames, making us see, hear,
and feel what was not? What was this, but the action of diseased imaginations and childish credulity? So might it be; but what was most real, was the existence of these very fears; the staring looks of
horror, the faces pale even to ghastliness, the voices struck dumb with harrowing dread, of those
among us who saw and heard these things. Of this number was Adrian, who knew the delusion, yet
could not cast off the clinging terror. Even ignorant infancy appeared with timorous shrieks and
convulsions to acknowledge the presence of unseen powers. We must go: in change of scene, in
occupation, and such security as we still hoped to find, we should discover a cure for these gathering
horrors. On mustering our company, we found them to consist of fourteen hundred souls, men, women, and
children. Until now therefore, we were undiminished in numbers, except by the desertion of those
who had attached themselves to the impostor-prophet, and remained behind in Paris. About fifty
French joined us. Our order of march was easily arranged; the ill success which had attended our
division, determined Adrian to keep all in one body. I, with an hundred men, went forward first as
purveyor, taking the road of the Cote d'Or, through Auxerre, Dijon, Dole, over the Jura to Geneva. I
was to make arrangements, at every ten miles, for the accommodation of such numbers as I found
the town or village would receive, leaving behind a messenger with a written order, signifying how
many were to be quartered there. The remainder of our tribe was then divided into bands of fifty
each, every division containing eighteen men, and the remainder, consisting of women and children. Each of these was headed by an officer, who carried the roll of names, by which they were each day
to be mustered. If the numbers were divided at night, in the morning those in the van waited for
those in the rear. At each of the large towns before mentioned, we were all to assemble; and a
conclave of the principal officers would hold council for the general weal. I went first, as I said; Adrian
last. His mother, with Clara and Evelyn under her protection, remained also with him. Thus our order
being determined, I departed. My plan was to go at first no further than Fontainebleau, where in a
few days I should be joined by Adrian, before I took flight again further eastward. My friend accompanied me a few miles from Versailles. He was sad; and, in a tone of unaccustomed
despondency, uttered a prayer for our speedy arrival among the Alps, accompanied with an
expression of vain regret that we were not already there. "In that case," I observed, "we can quicken
our march; why adhere to a plan whose dilatory proceeding you already disapprove?" "Nay," replied he, "it is too late now. A month ago, and we were masters of ourselves; now,-" he
turned his face from me; though gathering twilight had already veiled its expression, he turned it yet
more away, as he added -"a man died of the plague last night!" He spoke in a smothered voice, then suddenly clasping his hands, he exclaimed, "Swiftly, most swiftly
advances the last hour for us all; as the stars vanish before the sun, so will his near approach destroy
us. I have done my best; with grasping hands and impotent strength, I have hung on the wheel of the
chariot of plague; but she drags me along with it, while, like Juggernaut, she proceeds crushing out
the being of all who strew the high road of life. Would that it were over-would that her procession
achieved, we had all entered the tomb together!" Tears streamed from his eyes. "Again and again," he continued, "will the tragedy be acted; again I
must hear the groans of the dying, the wailing of the survivors; again witness the pangs, which,
consummating all, envelope an eternity in their evanescent existence.