Raymond was eminently social. All that he now enjoyed would have been devoid of pleasure to him,
had it been unparticipated. But in Perdita he possessed all that his heart could desire. Her love gave
birth to sympathy; her intelligence made her understand him at a word; her powers of intellect
enabled her to assist and guide him. He felt her worth. During the early years of their union, the
inequality of her temper, and yet unsubdued self-will which tarnished her character, had been a
slight drawback to the fulness of his sentiment. Now that unchanged serenity, and gentle compliance
were added to her other qualifications, his respect equalled his love. Years added to the strictness of
their union. They did not now guess at, and totter on the pathway, divining the mode to please,
hoping, yet fearing the continuance of bliss. Five years gave a sober certainty to their emotions,
though it did not rob them of their etherial nature. It had given them a child; but it had not detracted
from the personal attractions of my sister. Timidity, which in her had almost amounted to
awkwardness, was exchanged for a graceful decision of manner; frankness, instead of reserve,
characterized her physiognomy; and her voice was attuned to thrilling softness. She was now three
and twenty, in the pride of womanhood, fulfilling the precious duties of wife and mother, possessed
of all her heart had ever coveted. Raymond was ten years older; to his previous beauty, noble mien,
and commanding aspect, he now added gentlest benevolence, winning tenderness, graceful and
unwearied attention to the wishes of another. The first secret that had existed between them was the visits of Raymond to Evadne. He had been
struck by the fortitude and beauty of the ill-fated Greek; and, when her constant tenderness towards
him unfolded itself, he asked with astonishment, by what act of his he had merited this passionate
and unrequited love. She was for a while the sole object of his reveries; and Perdita became aware
that his thoughts and time were bestowed on a subject unparticipated by her. My sister was by
nature destitute of the common feelings of anxious, petulant jealousy. The treasure which she
possessed in the affections of Raymond, was more necessary to her being, than the life-blood that
animated her veins-more truly than Othello she might say,
  To be once in doubt,
  Is-once to be resolved. On the present occasion she did not suspect any alienation of affection; but she conjectured that
some circumstance connected with his high place, had occasioned this mystery. She was startled and
pained. She began to count the long days, and months, and years which must elapse, before he
would be restored to a private station, and unreservedly to her. She was not content that, even for a
time, he should practice concealment with her. She often repined; but her trust in the singleness of
his affection was undisturbed; and, when they were together, unchecked by fear, she opened her
heart to the fullest delight. Time went on. Raymond, stopping mid-way in his wild career, paused suddenly to think of
consequences. Two results presented themselves in the view he took of the future. That his
intercourse with Evadne should continue a secret to, or that finally it should be discovered by
Perdita. The destitute condition, and highly wrought feelings of his friend prevented him from
adverting to the possibility of exiling himself from her. In the first event he had bidden an eternal
farewell to open-hearted converse, and entire sympathy with the companion of his life. The veil must
be thicker than that invented by Turkish jealousy; the wall higher than the unscaleable tower of
Vathek, which should conceal from her the workings of his heart, and hide from her view the secret
of his actions. This idea was intolerably painful to him. Frankness and social feelings were the
essence of Raymond's nature; without them his qualities became common-place; without these to
spread glory over his intercourse with Perdita, his vaunted exchange of a throne for her love, was as
weak and empty as the rainbow hues which vanish when the sun is down. But there was no remedy. Genius, devotion, and courage; the adornments of his mind, and the energies of his soul, all exerted
to their uttermost stretch, could not roll back one hair's breadth the wheel of time's chariot; that
which had been was written with the adamantine pen of reality, on the everlasting volume of the
past; nor could agony and tears suffice to wash out one iota from the act fulfilled. But this was the best side of the question. What, if circumstance should lead Perdita to suspect, and
suspecting to be resolved? The fibres of his frame became relaxed, and cold dew stood on his
forehead, at this idea. Many men may scoff at his dread; but he read the future; and the peace of
Perdita was too dear to him, her speechless agony too certain, and too fearful, not to unman him. His
course was speedily decided upon. If the worst befell; if she learnt the truth, he would neither stand
her reproaches, or the anguish of her altered looks. He would forsake her, England, his friends, the
scenes of his youth, the hopes of coming time, he would seek another country, and in other scenes
begin life again. Having resolved on this, he became calmer. He endeavoured to guide with prudence
the steeds of destiny through the devious road which he had chosen, and bent all his efforts the
better to conceal what he could not alter. The perfect confidence that subsisted between Perdita and him, rendered every communication
common between them. They opened each other's letters, even as, until now, the inmost fold of the
heart of each was disclosed to the other. A letter came unawares, Perdita read it. Had it contained
confirmation, she must have been annihilated. As it was, trembling, cold, and pale, she sought
Raymond. He was alone, examining some petitions lately presented. She entered silently, sat on a
sofa opposite to him, and gazed on him with a look of such despair, that wildest shrieks and dire
moans would have been tame exhibitions of misery, compared to the living incarnation of the thing
itself exhibited by her. At first he did not take his eyes from the papers; when he raised them, he was struck by the
wretchedness manifest on her altered cheek; for a moment he forgot his own acts and fears, and
asked with consternation-"Dearest girl, what is the matter; what has happened?" "Nothing," she replied at first; "and yet not so," she continued, hurrying on in her speech; "you have
secrets, Raymond; where have you been lately, whom have you seen, what do you conceal from
me?-why am I banished from your confidence? Yet this is not it-I do not intend to entrap you with
questions-one will suffice-am I completely a wretch?" With trembling hand she gave him the paper, and sat white and motionless looking at him while he
read it. He recognised the hand-writing of Evadne, and the colour mounted in his cheeks. With
lightning-speed he conceived the contents of the letter; all was now cast on one die; falsehood and
artifice were trifles in comparison with the impending ruin. He would either entirely dispel Perdita's
suspicions, or quit her for ever. "My dear girl," he said, "I have been to blame; but you must pardon
me. I was in the wrong to commence a system of concealment; but I did it for the sake of sparing you
pain; and each day has rendered it more difficult for me to alter my plan. Besides, I was instigated by
delicacy towards the unhappy writer of these few lines." Perdita gasped: "Well," she cried, "well, go on!" "That is all-this paper tells all. I am placed in the most difficult circumstances. I have done my best,
though perhaps I have done wrong. My love for you is inviolate." Perdita shook her head doubtingly: "It cannot be," she cried, "I know that it is not. You would deceive
me, but I will not be deceived. I have lost you, myself, my life!" "Do you not believe me?" said Raymond haughtily. "To believe you," she exclaimed, "I would give up all, and expire with joy, so that in death I could feel
that you were true-but that cannot be!" "Perdita," continued Raymond, "you do not see the precipice on which you stand. You may believe
that I did not enter on my present line of conduct without reluctance and pain. I knew that it was
possible that your suspicions might be excited; but I trusted that my simple word would cause them
to disappear. I built my hope on your confidence. Do you think that I will be questioned, and my
replies disdainfully set aside? Do you think that I will be suspected, perhaps watched, cross-
questioned, and disbelieved? I am not yet fallen so low; my honour is not yet so tarnished. You have
loved me; I adored you. But all human sentiments come to an end. Let our affection expire-but let it
not be exchanged for distrust and recrimination. Heretofore we have been friends-lovers-let us
not become enemies, mutual spies. I cannot live the object of suspicion-you cannot believe me-let
us part!" "Exactly so," cried Perdita, "I knew that it would come to this! Are we not already parted? Does not a
stream, boundless as ocean, deep as vacuum, yawn between us?" Raymond rose, his voice was broken, his features convulsed, his manner calm as the earthquake-
cradling atmosphere, he replied: "I am rejoiced that you take my decision so philosophically. Doubtless you will play the part of the injured wife to admiration. Sometimes you may be stung with
the feeling that you have wronged me, but the condolence of your relatives, the pity of the world,
the complacency which the consciousness of your own immaculate innocence will bestow, will be
excellent balm;-me you will never see more!" Raymond moved towards the door. He forgot that each word he spoke was false. He personated his
assumption of innocence even to self-deception. Have not actors wept, as they pourtrayed imagined
passion? A more intense feeling of the reality of fiction possessed Raymond. He spoke with pride; he
felt injured. Perdita looked up; she saw his angry glance; his hand was on the lock of the door. She
started up, she threw herself on his neck, she gasped and sobbed; he took her hand, and leading her
to the sofa, sat down near her. Her head fell on his shoulder, she trembled, alternate changes of fire
and ice ran through her limbs: observing her emotion he spoke with softened accents:
"The blow is given. I will not part from you in anger;-I owe you too much. I owe you six years of
unalloyed happiness. But they are passed. I will not live the mark of suspicion, the object of jealousy. I love you too well. In an eternal separation only can either of us hope for dignity and propriety of
action. We shall not then be degraded from our true characters. Faith and devotion have hitherto
been the essence of our intercourse;-these lost, let us not cling to the seedless husk of life, the
unkernelled shell. You have your child, your brother, Idris, Adrian"-
"And you," cried Perdita, "the writer of that letter." Uncontrollable indignation flashed from the eyes of Raymond. He knew that this accusation at least
was false. "Entertain this belief," he cried, "hug it to your heart-make it a pillow to your head, an
opiate for your eyes -I am content. But, by the God that made me, hell is not more false than the
word you have spoken!" Perdita was struck by the impassioned seriousness of his asseverations. She replied with earnestness,
"I do not refuse to believe you, Raymond; on the contrary I promise to put implicit faith in your
simple word. Only assure me that your love and faith towards me have never been violated; and
suspicion, and doubt, and jealousy will at once be dispersed. We shall continue as we have ever
done, one heart, one hope, one life." "I have already assured you of my fidelity," said Raymond with disdainful coldness, "triple assertions
will avail nothing where one is despised. I will say no more; for I can add nothing to what I have
already said, to what you before contemptuously set aside. This contention is unworthy of both of
us; and I confess that I am weary of replying to charges at once unfounded and unkind." Perdita tried to read his countenance, which he angrily averted. There was so much of truth and
nature in his resentment, that her doubts were dispelled. Her countenance, which for years had not
expressed a feeling unallied to affection, became again radiant and satisfied. She found it however
no easy task to soften and reconcile Raymond. At first he refused to stay to hear her. But she would
not be put off; secure of his unaltered love, she was willing to undertake any labour, use any
entreaty, to dispel his anger. She obtained an hearing, he sat in haughty silence, but he listened. She
first assured him of her boundless confidence; of this he must be conscious, since but for that she
would not seek to detain him. She enumerated their years of happiness; she brought before him past
scenes of intimacy and happiness; she pictured their future life, she mentioned their child-tears
unbidden now filled her eyes. She tried to disperse them, but they refused to be checked-her
utterance was choaked. She had not wept before. Raymond could not resist these signs of distress:
he felt perhaps somewhat ashamed of the part he acted of the injured man, he who was in truth the
injurer. And then he devoutly loved Perdita; the bend of her head, her glossy ringlets, the turn of her
form were to him subjects of deep tenderness and admiration; as she spoke, her melodious tones
entered his soul; he soon softened towards her, comforting and caressing her, and endeavouring to
cheat himself into the belief that he had never wronged her. Raymond staggered forth from this scene, as a man might do, who had been just put to the torture,
and looked forward to when it would be again inflicted. He had sinned against his own honour, by
affirming, swearing to, a direct falsehood; true this he had palmed on a woman, and it might
therefore be deemed less base-by others-not by him;-for whom had he deceived?-his own
trusting, devoted, affectionate Perdita, whose generous belief galled him doubly, when he
remembered the parade of innocence with which it had been exacted. The mind of Raymond was not
so rough cast, nor had been so rudely handled, in the circumstance of life, as to make him proof to
these considerations-on the contrary, he was all nerve; his spirit was as a pure fire, which fades and
shrinks from every contagion of foul atmosphere: but now the contagion had become incorporated
with its essence, and the change was the more painful. Truth and falsehood, love and hate lost their
eternal boundaries, heaven rushed in to mingle with hell; while his sensitive mind, turned to a field
for such battle, was stung to madness. He heartily despised himself, he was angry with Perdita, and
the idea of Evadne was attended by all that was hideous and cruel. His passions, always his masters,
acquired fresh strength, from the long sleep in which love had cradled them, the clinging weight of
destiny bent him down; he was goaded, tortured, fiercely impatient of that worst of miseries, the
sense of remorse. This troubled state yielded by degrees, to sullen animosity, and depression of
spirits. His dependants, even his equals, if in his present post he had any, were startled to find anger,
derision, and bitterness in one, before distinguished for suavity and benevolence of manner. He
transacted public business with distaste, and hastened from it to the solitude which was at once his
bane and relief. He mounted a fiery horse, that which had borne him forward to victory in Greece; he
fatigued himself with deadening exercise, losing the pangs of a troubled mind in animal sensation. He slowly recovered himself; yet, at last, as one might from the effects of poison, he lifted his head
from above the vapours of fever and passion into the still atmosphere of calm reflection. He
meditated on what was best to be done. He was first struck by the space of time that had elapsed,
since madness, rather than any reasonable impulse, had regulated his actions. A month had gone by,
and during that time he had not seen Evadne. Her power, which was linked to few of the enduring
emotions of his heart, had greatly decayed. He was no longer her slave-no longer her lover: he
would never see her more, and by the completeness of his return, deserve the confidence of Perdita. Yet, as he thus determined, fancy conjured up the miserable abode of the Greek girl. An abode,
which from noble and lofty principle, she had refused to exchange for one of greater luxury. He
thought of the splendour of her situation and appearance when he first knew her; he thought of her
life at Constantinople, attended by every circumstance of oriental magnificence; of her present
penury, her daily task of industry, her lorn state, her faded, famine-struck cheek. Compassion swelled
his breast; he would see her once again; he would devise some plan for restoring her to society, and
the enjoyment of her rank; their separation would then follow, as a matter of course. Again he thought, how during this long month, he had avoided Perdita, flying from her as from the
stings of his own conscience. But he was awake now; all this should be remedied; and future
devotion erase the memory of this only blot on the serenity of their life. He became cheerful, as he
thought of this, and soberly and resolutely marked out the line of conduct he would adopt. He
remembered that he had promised Perdita to be present this very evening (the 19th of October,
anniversary of his election as Protector) at a festival given in his honour. Good augury should this
festival be of the happiness of future years. First, he would look in on Evadne; he would not stay; but
he owed her some account, some compensation for his long and unannounced absence; and then to
Perdita, to the forgotten world, to the duties of society, the splendour of rank, the enjoyment of
power. After the scene sketched in the preceding pages, Perdita had contemplated an entire change in the
manners and conduct of Raymond. She expected freedom of communication, and a return to those
habits of affectionate intercourse which had formed the delight of her life. But Raymond did not join
her in any of her avocations. He transacted the business of the day apart from her; he went out, she
knew not whither. The pain inflicted by this disappointment was tormenting and keen. She looked on
it as a deceitful dream, and tried to throw off the consciousness of it; but like the shirt of Nessus, it
clung to her very flesh, and ate with sharp agony into her vital principle. She possessed that (though
such an assertion may appear a paradox) which belongs to few, a capacity of happiness. Her delicate
organization and creative imagination rendered her peculiarly susceptible of pleasurable emotion. The overflowing warmth of her heart, by making love a plant of deep root and stately growth, had
attuned her whole soul to the reception of happiness, when she found in Raymond all that could
adorn love and satisfy her imagination. But if the sentiment on which the fabric of her existence was
founded, became common place through participation, the endless succession of attentions and
graceful action snapt by transfer, his universe of love wrested from her, happiness must depart, and
then be exchanged for its opposite. The same peculiarities of character rendered her sorrows
agonies; her fancy magnified them, her sensibility made her for ever open to their renewed
impression; love envenomed the heart-piercing sting. There was neither submission, patience, nor
self-abandonment in her grief; she fought with it, struggled beneath it, and rendered every pang
more sharp by resistance. Again and again the idea recurred, that he loved another. She did him
justice; she believed that he felt a tender affection for her; but give a paltry prize to him who in some
life-pending lottery has calculated on the possession of tens of thousands, and it will disappoint him
more than a blank. The affection and amity of a Raymond might be inestimable; but, beyond that
affection, embosomed deeper than friendship, was the indivisible treasure of love. Take the sum in
its completeness, and no arithmetic can calculate its price; take from it the smallest portion, give it
but the name of parts, separate it into degrees and sections, and like the magician's coin, the
valueless gold of the mine, is turned to vilest substance. There is a meaning in the eye of love; a
cadence in its voice, an irradiation in its smile, the talisman of whose enchantments one only can
possess; its spirit is elemental, its essence single, its divinity an unit. The very heart and soul of
Raymond and Perdita had mingled, even as two mountain brooks that join in their descent, and
murmuring and sparkling flow over shining pebbles, beside starry flowers; but let one desert its
primal course, or be dammed up by choaking obstruction, and the other shrinks in its altered banks. Perdita was sensible of the failing of the tide that fed her life. Unable to support the slow withering
of her hopes, she suddenly formed a plan, resolving to terminate at once the period of misery, and to
bring to an happy conclusion the late disastrous events. The anniversary was at hand of the exaltation of Raymond to the office of Protector; and it was
customary to celebrate this day by a splendid festival. A variety of feelings urged Perdita to shed
double magnificence over the scene; yet, as she arrayed herself for the evening gala, she wondered
herself at the pains she took, to render sumptuous the celebration of an event which appeared to
her the beginning of her sufferings. Woe befall the day, she thought, woe, tears, and mourning
betide the hour, that gave Raymond another hope than love, another wish than my devotion; and
thrice joyful the moment when he shall be restored to me! God knows, I put my trust in his vows,
and believe his asserted faith-but for that, I would not seek what I am now resolved to attain. Shall
two years more be thus passed, each day adding to our alienation, each act being another stone
piled on the barrier which separates us? No, my Raymond, my only beloved, sole possession of
Perdita! This night, this splendid assembly, these sumptuous apartments, and this adornment of your
tearful girl, are all united to celebrate your abdication. Once for me, you relinquished the prospect of
a crown. That was in days of early love, when I could only hold out the hope, not the assurance of
happiness. Now you have the experience of all that I can give, the heart's devotion, taintless love,
and unhesitating subjection to you. You must choose between these and your protectorate. This,
proud noble, is your last night! Perdita has bestowed on it all of magnificent and dazzling that your
heart best loves-but, from these gorgeous rooms, from this princely attendance, from power and
elevation, you must return with to-morrow's sun to our rural abode; for I would not buy an
immortality of joy, by the endurance of one more week sister to the last. Brooding over this plan, resolved when the hour should come, to propose, and insist upon its
accomplishment, secure of his consent, the heart of Perdita was lightened, or rather exalted. Her
cheek was flushed by the expectation of struggle; her eyes sparkled with the hope of triumph. Having
cast her fate upon a die, and feeling secure of winning, she, whom I have named as bearing the
stamp of queen of nations on her noble brow, now rose superior to humanity, and seemed in calm
power, to arrest with her finger, the wheel of destiny. She had never before looked so supremely
lovely. We, the Arcadian shepherds of the tale, had intended to be present at this festivity, but Perdita
wrote to entreat us not to come, or to absent ourselves from Windsor; for she (though she did not
reveal her scheme to us) resolved the next morning to return with Raymond to our dear circle, there
to renew a course of life in which she had found entire felicity. Late in the evening she entered the
apartments appropriated to the festival. Raymond had quitted the palace the night before; he had
promised to grace the assembly, but he had not yet returned. Still she felt sure that he would come
at last; and the wider the breach might appear at this crisis, the more secure she was of closing it for
ever. It was as I said, the nineteenth of October; the autumn was far advanced and dreary. The wind
howled; the half bare trees were despoiled of the remainder of their summer ornament; the state of
the air which induced the decay of vegetation, was hostile to cheerfulness or hope. Raymond had
been exalted by the determination he had made; but with the declining day his spirits declined. First
he was to visit Evadne, and then to hasten to the palace of the Protectorate. As he walked through
the wretched streets in the neighbourhood of the luckless Greek's abode, his heart smote him for the
whole course of his conduct towards her. First, his having entered into any engagement that should
permit her to remain in such a state of degradation; and then, after a short wild dream, having left
her to drear solitude, anxious conjecture, and bitter, still-disappointed expectation. What had she
done the while, how supported his absence and neglect? Light grew dim in these close streets, and
when the well known door was opened, the staircase was shrouded in perfect night. He groped his
way up, he entered the garret, he found Evadne stretched speechless, almost lifeless on her
wretched bed. He called for the people of the house, but could learn nothing from them, except that
they knew nothing. Her story was plain to him, plain and distinct as the remorse and horror that
darted their fangs into him. When she found herself forsaken by him, she lost the heart to pursue her
usual avocations; pride forbade every application to him; famine was welcomed as the kind porter to
the gates of death, within whose opening folds she should now, without sin, quickly repose. No
creature came near her, as her strength failed. If she died, where could there be found on record a murderer, whose cruel act might compare with
his? What fiend more wanton in his mischief, what damned soul more worthy of perdition! But he
was not reserved for this agony of self-reproach. He sent for medical assistance; the hours passed,
spun by suspense into ages; the darkness of the long autumnal night yielded to day, before her life
was secure. He had her then removed to a more commodious dwelling, and hovered about her,
again and again to assure himself that she was safe. In the midst of his greatest suspense and fear as to the event, he remembered the festival given in
his honour, by Perdita; in his honour then, when misery and death were affixing indelible disgrace to
his name, honour to him whose crimes deserved a scaffold; this was the worst mockery. Still Perdita
would expect him; he wrote a few incoherent words on a scrap of paper, testifying that he was well,
and bade the woman of the house take it to the palace, and deliver it into the hands of the wife of
the Lord Protector. The woman, who did not know him, contemptuously asked, how he thought she
should gain admittance, particularly on a festal night, to that lady's presence? Raymond gave her his
ring to ensure the respect of the menials. Thus, while Perdita was entertaining her guests, and
anxiously awaiting the arrival of her lord, his ring was brought her; and she was told that a poor
woman had a note to deliver to her from its wearer. The vanity of the old gossip was raised by her commission, which, after all, she did not understand,
since she had no suspicion, even now that Evadne's visitor was Lord Raymond. Perdita dreaded a fall
from his horse, or some similar accident-till the woman's answers woke other fears. From a feeling
of cunning blindly exercised, the officious, if not malignant messenger, did not speak of Evadne's
illness; but she garrulously gave an account of Raymond's frequent visits, adding to her narration
such circumstances, as, while they convinced Perdita of its truth, exaggerated the unkindness and
perfidy of Raymond. Worst of all, his absence now from the festival, his message wholly unaccounted
for, except by the disgraceful hints of the woman, appeared the deadliest insult. Again she looked at
the ring, it was a small ruby, almost heart-shaped, which she had herself given him. She looked at the
hand-writing, which she could not mistake, and repeated to herself the words-"Do not, I charge
you, I entreat you, permit your guests to wonder at my absence:" the while the old crone going on
with her talk, filled her ear with a strange medley of truth and falsehood. At length Perdita dismissed
her. The poor girl returned to the assembly, where her presence had not been missed. She glided into a
recess somewhat obscured, and leaning against an ornamental column there placed, tried to recover
herself. Her faculties were palsied. She gazed on some flowers that stood near in a carved vase: that
morning she had arranged them, they were rare and lovely plants; even now all aghast as she was,
she observed their brilliant colours and starry shapes.-"Divine infoliations of the spirit of beauty,"
she exclaimed, "Ye droop not, neither do ye mourn; the despair that clasps my heart, has not spread
contagion over you!-Why am I not a partner of your insensibility, a sharer in your calm!" She paused. "To my task," she continued mentally, "my guests must not perceive the reality, either
as it regards him or me. I obey; they shall not, though I die the moment they are gone. They shall
behold the antipodes of what is real-for I will appear to live-while I am-dead." It required all her
self-command, to suppress the gush of tears self-pity caused at this idea. After many struggles, she
succeeded, and turned to join the company. All her efforts were now directed to the dissembling her internal conflict. She had to play the part of
a courteous hostess; to attend to all; to shine the focus of enjoyment and grace. She had to do this,
while in deep woe she sighed for loneliness, and would gladly have exchanged her crowded rooms
for dark forest depths, or a drear, night-enshadowed heath. But she became gay. She could not keep
in the medium, nor be, as was usual with her, placidly content. Every one remarked her exhilaration
of spirits; as all actions appear graceful in the eye of rank, her guests surrounded her applaudingly,
although there was a sharpness in her laugh, and an abruptness in her sallies, which might have
betrayed her secret to an attentive observer. She went on, feeling that, if she had paused for a
moment, the checked waters of misery would have deluged her soul, that her wrecked hopes would
raise their wailing voices, and that those who now echoed her mirth, and provoked her repartees,
would have shrunk in fear from her convulsive despair. Her only consolation during the violence
which she did herself, was to watch the motions of an illuminated clock, and internally count the
moments which must elapse before she could be alone. At length the rooms began to thin. Mocking her own desires, she rallied her guests on their early
departure. One by one they left her-at length she pressed the hand of her last visitor. "How cold
and damp your hand is," said her friend; "you are over fatigued, pray hasten to rest." Perdita smiled
faintly-her guest left her; the carriage rolling down the street assured the final departure. Then, as if
pursued by an enemy, as if wings had been at her feet, she flew to her own apartment, she dismissed
her attendants, she locked the doors, she threw herself wildly on the floor, she bit her lips even to
blood to suppress her shrieks, and lay long a prey to the vulture of despair, striving not to think,
while multitudinous ideas made a home of her heart; and ideas, horrid as furies, cruel as vipers, and
poured in with such swift succession, that they seemed to jostle and wound each other, while they
worked her up to madness. At length she rose, more composed, not less miserable. She stood before a large mirror-she gazed
on her reflected image; her light and graceful dress, the jewels that studded her hair, and encircled
her beauteous arms and neck, her small feet shod in satin, her profuse and glossy tresses, all were to
her clouded brow and woe-begone countenance like a gorgeous frame to a dark tempest-
pourtraying picture. "Vase am I," she thought, "vase brimful of despair's direst essence. Farewell,
Perdita! farewell, poor girl! never again will you see yourself thus; luxury and wealth are no longer
yours; in the excess of your poverty you may envy the homeless beggar; most truly am I without a
home! I live on a barren desart, which, wide and interminable, brings forth neither fruit or flower; in
the midst is a solitary rock, to which thou, Perdita, art chained, and thou seest the dreary level
stretch far away." She threw open her window, which looked on the palace-garden. Light and darkness were struggling
together, and the orient was streaked by roseate and golden rays. One star only trembled in the
depth of the kindling atmosphere. The morning air blowing freshly over the dewy plants, rushed into
the heated room. "All things go on," thought Perdita, "all things proceed, decay, and perish! When
noontide has passed, and the weary day has driven her team to their western stalls, the fires of
heaven rise from the East, moving in their accustomed path, they ascend and descend the skiey hill. When their course is fulfilled, the dial begins to cast westward an uncertain shadow; the eye-lids of
day are opened, and birds and flowers, the startled vegetation, and fresh breeze awaken; the sun at
length appears, and in majestic procession climbs the capitol of heaven. All proceeds, changes and
dies, except the sense of misery in my bursting heart. "Ay, all proceeds and changes: what wonder then, that love has journied on to its setting, and that
the lord of my life has changed? We call the supernal lights fixed, yet they wander about yonder
plain, and if I look again where I looked an hour ago, the face of the eternal heavens is altered. The
silly moon and inconstant planets vary nightly their erratic dance; the sun itself, sovereign of the sky,
ever and anon deserts his throne, and leaves his dominion to night and winter. Nature grows old, and
shakes in her decaying limbs,-creation has become bankrupt! What wonder then, that eclipse and
death have led to destruction the light of thy life, O Perdita!" THUS sad and disarranged were the thoughts of my poor sister, when she became assured of the
infidelity of Raymond. All her virtues and all her defects tended to make the blow incurable. Her
affection for me, her brother, for Adrian and Idris, was subject as it were to the reigning passion of
her heart; even her maternal tenderness borrowed half its force from the delight she had in tracing
Raymond's features and expression in the infant's countenance. She had been reserved and even
stern in childhood; but love had softened the asperities of her character, and her union with
Raymond had caused her talents and affections to unfold themselves; the one betrayed, and the
other lost, she in some degree returned to her ancient disposition. The concentrated pride of her
nature, forgotten during her blissful dream, awoke, and with its adder's sting pierced her heart; her
humility of spirit augmented the power of the venom; she had been exalted in her own estimation,
while distinguished by his love: of what worth was she, now that he thrust her from this preferment? She had been proud of having won and preserved him-but another had won him from her, and her
exultation was as cold as a water quenched ember. We, in our retirement, remained long in ignorance of her misfortune. Soon after the festival she had
sent for her child, and then she seemed to have forgotten us. Adrian observed a change during a visit
that he afterward paid them; but he could not tell its extent, or divine the cause. They still appeared
in public together, and lived under the same roof. Raymond was as usual courteous, though there
was, on occasions, an unbidden haughtiness, or painful abruptness in his manners, which startled his
gentle friend; his brow was not clouded but disdain sat on his lips, and his voice was harsh. Perdita
was all kindness and attention to her lord; but she was silent, and beyond words sad. She had grown
thin and pale; and her eyes often filled with tears. Sometimes she looked at Raymond, as if to say-
That it should be so! At others her countenance expressed-I will still do all I can to make you happy. But Adrian read with uncertain aim the charactery of her face, and might mistake.-Clara was always
with her, and she seemed most at ease, when, in an obscure corner, she could sit holding her child's
hand, silent and lonely. Still Adrian was unable to guess the truth; he entreated them to visit us at
Windsor, and they promised to come during the following month. It was May before they arrived: the season had decked the forest trees with leaves, and its paths
with a thousand flowers. We had notice of their intention the day before; and, early in the morning,
Perdita arrived with her daughter. Raymond would follow soon, she said; he had been detained by
business. According to Adrian's account, I had expected to find her sad; but, on the contrary, she
appeared in the highest spirits: true, she had grown thin, her eyes were somewhat hollow, and her
cheeks sunk, though tinged by a bright glow. She was delighted to see us; caressed our children,
praised their growth and improvement; Clara also was pleased to meet again her young friend
Alfred; all kinds of childish games were entered into, in which Perdita joined. She communicated her
gaiety to us, and as we amused ourselves on the Castle Terrace, it appeared that a happier, less care-
worn party could not have been assembled. "This is better, Mamma," said Clara, "than being in that
dismal London, where you often cry, and never laugh as you do now. "-"Silence, little foolish thing,"
replied her mother, "and remember any one that mentions London is sent to Coventry for an hour." Soon after, Raymond arrived. He did not join as usual in the playful spirit of the rest; but, entering
into conversation with Adrian and myself, by degrees we seceded from our companions, and Idris
and Perdita only remained with the children. Raymond talked of his new buildings; of his plan for an
establishment for the better education of the poor; as usual Adrian and he entered into argument,
and the time slipped away unperceived. We assembled again towards evening, and Perdita insisted on our having recourse to music. She
wanted, she said, to give us a specimen of her new accomplishment; for since she had been in
London, she had applied herself to music, and sang, without much power, but with a great deal of
sweetness. We were not permitted by her to select any but light-hearted melodies; and all the
Operas of Mozart were called into service, that we might choose the most exhilarating of his airs. Among the other transcendant attributes of Mozart's music, it possesses more than any other that of
appearing to come from the heart; you enter into the passions expressed by him, and are
transported with grief, joy, anger, or confusion, as he, our soul's master, chooses to inspire. For some
time, the spirit of hilarity was kept up; but, at length, Perdita receded from the piano, for Raymond
had joined in the trio of "Taci ingiusto core," in Don Giovanni, whose arch entreaty was softened by
him into tenderness, and thrilled her heart with memories of the changed past; it was the same
voice, the same tone, the self-same sounds and words, which often before she had received, as the
homage of love to her-no longer was it that; and this concord of sound with its dissonance of
expression penetrated her with regret and despair. Soon after Idris, who was at the harp, turned to
that passionate and sorrowful air in Figaro, "Porgi, amor, qualche risforo," in which the deserted
Countess laments the change of the faithless Almaviva. The soul of tender sorrow is breathed forth in
this strain; and the sweet voice of Idris, sustained by the mournful chords of her instrument, added
to the expression of the words. During the pathetic appeal with which it concludes, a stifled sob
attracted our attention to Perdita, the cessation of the music recalled her to herself, she hastened
out of the hall-I followed her. At first, she seemed to wish to shun me; and then, yielding to my
earnest questioning, she threw herself on my neck, and wept aloud:-"Once more," she cried, "once
more on your friendly breast, my beloved brother, can the lost Perdita pour forth her sorrows. I had
imposed a law of silence on myself; and for months I have kept it. I do wrong in weeping now, and
greater wrong in giving words to my grief. I will not speak! Be it enough for you to know that I am
miserable-be it enough for you to know, that the painted veil of life is rent, that I sit for ever
shrouded in darkness and gloom, that grief is my sister, everlasting lamentation my mate!" I endeavoured to console her; I did not question her! but I caressed her, assured her of my deepest
affection and my intense interest in the changes of her fortune:-"Dear words," she cried,
"expressions of love come upon my ear, like the remembered sounds of forgotten music, that had
been dear to me. They are vain, I know; how very vain in their attempt to soothe or comfort me. Dearest Lionel, you cannot guess what I have suffered during these long months. I have read of
mourners in ancient days, who clothed themselves in sackcloth, scattered dust upon their heads, ate
their bread mingled with ashes, and took up their abode on the bleak mountain tops, reproaching
heaven and earth aloud with their misfortunes. Why this is the very luxury of sorrow! thus one might
go on from day to day contriving new extravagances, revelling in the paraphernalia of woe, wedded
to all the appurtenances of despair. Alas! I must for ever conceal the wretchedness that consumes
me. I must weave a veil of dazzling falsehood to hide my grief from vulgar eyes, smoothe my brow,
and paint my lips in deceitful smiles-even in solitude I dare not think how lost I am, lest I become
insane and rave." The tears and agitation of my poor sister had rendered her unfit to return to the circle we had left-
so I persuaded her to let me drive her through the park; and, during the ride, I induced her to confide
the tale of her unhappiness to me, fancying that talking of it would lighten the burthen, and certain
that, if there were a remedy, it should be found and secured to her. Several weeks had elapsed since the festival of the anniversary, and she had been unable to calm her
mind, or to subdue her thoughts to any regular train. Sometimes she reproached herself for taking
too bitterly to heart, that which many would esteem an imaginary evil; but this was no subject for
reason; and, ignorant as she was of the motives and true conduct of Raymond, things assumed for
her even a worse appearance, than the reality warranted. He was seldom at the palace; never, but
when he was assured that his public duties would prevent his remaining alone with Perdita. They
seldom addressed each other, shunning explanation, each fearing any communication the other
might make. Suddenly, however, the manners of Raymond changed; he appeared to desire to find
opportunities of bringing about a return to kindness and intimacy with my sister. The tide of love
towards her appeared to flow again; he could never forget, how once he had been devoted to her,
making her the shrine and storehouse wherein to place every thought and every sentiment. Shame
seemed to hold him back; yet he evidently wished to establish a renewal of confidence and affection. From the moment Perdita had sufficiently recovered herself to form any plan of action, she had laid
one down, which now she prepared to follow. She received these tokens of returning love with
gentleness; she did not shun his company; but she endeavoured to place a barrier in the way of
familiar intercourse or painful discussion, which mingled pride and shame prevented Raymond from
surmounting. He began at last to shew signs of angry impatience, and Perdita became aware that the
system she had adopted could not continue; she must explain herself to him; she could not summon
courage to speak-she wrote thus:-
"Read this letter with patience, I entreat you. It will contain no reproaches. Reproach is indeed an
idle word: for what should I reproach you? "Allow me in some degree to explain my feeling; without that, we shall both grope in the dark,
mistaking one another; erring from the path which may conduct, one of us at least, to a more eligible
mode of life than that led by either during the last few weeks. "I loved you-I love you-neither anger nor pride dictates these lines; but a feeling beyond, deeper,
and more unalterable than either. My affections are wounded; it is impossible to heal them:-cease
then the vain endeavour, if indeed that way your endeavours tend. Forgiveness!