I would with a few books, provisions, and my dog, embark in
one of these and float down the current of the stream into the sea; and then, keeping near land, I
would coast the beauteous shores and sunny promontories of the blue Mediterranean, pass Naples,
along Calabria, and would dare the twin perils of Scylla and Charybdis; then, with fearless aim, (for
what had I to lose?) skim ocean's surface towards Malta and the further Cyclades. I would avoid
Constantinople, the sight of whose well-known towers and inlets belonged to another state of
existence from my present one; I would coast Asia Minor, and Syria, and, passing the seven-mouthed
Nile, steer northward again, till losing sight of forgotten Carthage and deserted Lybia, I should reach
the pillars of Hercules. And then-no matter where-the oozy caves, and soundless depths of ocean
may be my dwelling, before I accomplish this long-drawn voyage, or the arrow of disease find my
heart as I float singly on the weltering Mediterranean; or, in some place I touch at, I may find what I
seek-a companion; or if this may not be-to endless time, decrepid and grey headed-youth
already in the grave with those I love- the lone wanderer will still unfurl his sail, and clasp the
tiller-and, still obeying the breezes of heaven, for ever round another and another promontory,
anchoring in another and another bay, still ploughing seedless ocean, leaving behind the verdant
land of native Europe, adown the tawny shore of Africa, having weathered the fierce seas of the
Cape, I may moor my worn skiff in a creek, shaded by spicy groves of the odorous islands of the far
Indian ocean. These are wild dreams. Yet since, now a week ago, they came on me, as I stood on the height of St.
Peter's, they have ruled my imagination. I have chosen my boat, and laid in my scant stores. I have
selected a few books; the principal are Homer and Shakespeare-But the libraries of the world are
thrown open to me-and in any port I can renew my stock. I form no expectation of alteration for
the better; but the monotonous present is intolerable to me. Neither hope nor joy are my pilots-
restless despair and fierce desire of change lead me on. I long to grapple with danger, to be excited
by fear, to have some task, however slight or voluntary, for each day's fulfilment. I shall witness all
the variety of appearance, that the elements can assume-I shall read fair augury in the rainbow-
menace in the cloud-some lesson or record dear to my heart in everything. Thus around the shores
of deserted earth, while the sun is high, and the moon waxes or wanes, angels, the spirits of the
dead, and the ever-open eye of the Supreme, will behold the tiny bark, freighted with Verney - the
LAST MAN