I had ancestors, the ornaments of the people among whom they were born. These ancestors had married and given in marriage, had received and conferred
obligations and benefits, and their memory was in odour and in favour through the neighbouring districts. I wished to adorn my ancestors, and to be adorned
by
them. This is the genuine idea of going to one's home. I was averse however to the idea of appearing in my own country in the character of a litigant, an individual unexpectedly calling his neighbour into contest
about

a property of which he believed himself to be lawfully possessed. I therefore instructed my correspondent to bring this question to a full decision, before I
should take my departure. My resolution was formed, as soon as I received intelligence of the death of my uncle. I immediately transmitted documents to
Zurich,
proving my parentage and identity, and directed my correspondent to serve the new claimant with a notice, that the true heir, who was supposed to be dead,
was
still living. He was exceedingly surprised, and somewhat chagrined with the intelligence, as he was a poor man, and burthened with a numerous family. He
consented however after the manner of the country, to go before the chief court of the canton, for the decision of the question. After a full and minute
investigation of the evidences, my claim was ultimately established. This point being gained, I dispatched to Zurich an

instrument, settling on the losing party in the contest, an annuity to one half of the value of the property of which he was dispossessed, accompanied with
bills of exchange destined to repurchase the lands which my uncle had sold, and to redeem them from the burthens he had laid upon them. These objects were in

most instances happily accomplished. While my affairs were going on thus auspiciously in Switzerland, I employed the time necessary for maturing them, in adjusting and transferring in the most
advantageous manner the commercial undertakings, in which more than twenty years of my life had been consumed, in Portugal. When every concern of this sort
was
now completed, and all things prepared for my reception in my native canton, I bade farewel to Lisbon, and prepared to return to Switzerland by way of
London. My business in England was to visit

your father. I found him the same in tastes, in moral dispositions, and in affection, as his father's death had left him. In many respects he was different. Ten years of added life had brought him to a nearer resemblance of my original preserver; and, as I remarked in him the tokens of advancing age, I felt the
agreeable sentiment of contemplating my venerable benefactor and my schoolboy associate blending themselves, as it were, in one person. Your father had also

married since I was in England, and yourself was born. I think I never saw so affectionate a husband and a father. In domestic life it was impossible to be
more fortunate than I found my beloved friend. He was not equally fortunate in every thing. He had experienced two or three severe miscarriages in his commercial concerns, and this, so far as I could
understand, without the smallest

fault on his part. In one instance he had connected himself with, and given large credit to, a house, where all appearances were fair, but where extravagance
and secret gaming brought about a ruin, the most sudden and unforeseen. In another instance a war had broken out at a time when he apprehended no such thing;

his transactions were multiplied in the country which was now declared an enemy; and all his investments failed. At a different time bankruptcy upon an
extensive scale took place in Holland, one great house drawing on the ruin of another, till half the most opulent merchants of the republic were destroyed:
your father suffered deeply in this calamity. I soon discovered a cast of melancholy in the demeanour of my quondam playmate, and that there was something which hung painfully on his mind. In truth I had
somewhat suspected his

real situation before I left Lisbon, and this contributed with other circumstances to hasten my conclusion of my affairs in that city. With difficulty and
effort I wrung from your father a full confession of his misfortune. Ruffigny, said he, I am a beggar. You and I set out together in life, but under different auspices.---He paused. No matter, added he. I hope I shall be able to discharge all my debts to the uttermost. A trifle will remain to me from the wreck. I will venture no more upon
the treacherous sea of commerce. What is the value of riches? I shall still have enough left, to retire with to some remote corner of the island, and
cultivate
a small farm in tranquillity. My dear wife will be perfectly contented with the exchange. She will give up her equipage and her liveries without a murmur. She
will not sigh for the amusements

of the court and the metropolis; and she will look more beautiful in my eyes clad in the plain attire of a rural housewife, than hung round as I have seen her,
with diamonds and rubies. My son shall be a peasant swain, not ignorant, not ambitious, viewing the storms of life from a distance, and fearless of
bankruptcies, shipwrecks and war. Is not this happiness? Your father never dropped a syllable which should sound toward the asking me to assist him in his adversity. He knew my ability in this respect, and the
prosperous event which had crowned my efforts. Perhaps he would have been willing to have made another experiment in the affairs of commerce, and not to have

quitted the world a bankrupt, had he known where to have raised a sum adequate to his purpose, and upon terms sufficiently eligible. But all that

I had I derived from the bounty of your grandfather, and this consideration sealed up his lips toward me. One morning I came to him early, and requested him to assist me in casting up the profits of my commerce, and the amount of my fortune. He turned upon me a
wistful eye, as I stated my proposal. At first sight it seemed to imply an insulting comparison between my success and his. On the other hand he perhaps half

suspected the true meaning of my visit. Come, my dear Fleetwood, said I; my affairs are in good order, and the task will not occasion you much trouble. Saying this, I opened again the door by which I had entered, and called to my servant to come in. He brought with him three or four pocket-books, and a box. He
put them down, and departed. Let us sit down! I opened the pocket-books, and explained their contents. Some were bills of exchange; some were warrants of capital in the English and Dutch stocks; and some
securities of various sorts. I explained to my friend, the nature of the commerce in which I had been engaged, the profits from year to year, and the
particulars of one or two fortunate speculations. I took pen and ink, and summed together the amount of my bills, warrants and securities. I then pushed aside the pocket-books, and drew toward me the black box. This, said I, I regard as peculiarly my own. It contained the evidences of my birth and
identity, the sentence of the judge who had awarded to me my estate, the ejectment of the late possessor, and the titles of the landed property which my
agent
had purchased for me in Switzerland. As I have now quitted trade, resumed

I, and am going to retire from the world, I have been trying to make my will. Here it is, pulling a pretty large parcel from my pocket: I will leave it with
you, Fleetwood; peruse it at your leisure. One thing only I have to say; I do not show it you to consult you upon it; I am peremptory in its contents, and
will
not alter a letter; but, between such old friends as we are, I think it right you should be acquainted with all my thoughts. Is it your will? said your father. Pooh, said I, smiling, do not let us deal in quibbles and disputes about a word! If however I must come to definitions, I will tell you, that by a will I
understand a paper or parchment, containing my final and irrevocable disposition of that property over which the municipal laws of Europe give me an empire;

and to tell you the truth, I hold a man's making his will and the different

provisos it contains, to be one of the most sacred and indispensible duties he can perform, and one of those circumstances which may best serve as a criterion
to distinguish the honest man and the knave, the man of narrow, and the man of capacious and liberal, views. The parcel I tendered to your father contained a regular and formal transfer to him of all the property which I had just put upon his table, with the exception
of the contents of the black box. It is not your will, said Fleetwood: I will not touch a farthing of your property. You shall not. My property is contained in this black box. The rest is a debt I am come to you to pay. Why will you make many words, in a case which common
sense decides in a moment? It is yours. The small germ from which it sprung was the gift of my father. The rest is the accumulation of your industry, the fruits of twenty years' occupation and labour. I insist upon it, that you take it away. Fleetwood, if I must speak on such a subject, hear me! Good God, it is the plainest question in the world! I have been your father's steward, and bring back
the fruits of my stewardship to his son. I have abstracted from it a considerable sum, which was necessary to my eligible settlement in my own country. I had

always determined to settle exactly in the way I am now executing. You have not disturbed my projects a jot. If I had retained the property which is now
yours,
I never would have spent an atom of it upon myself or any of my relations. I should have been a trustee for others, and a very laborious office I should have

had. As it is, the whole is yours. I have calculated the matter with great niceness, and I find that you will this

day be placed exactly where your father left you. We shall neither of us be the better or the worse for each other, except as I hope we shall be both gainers
in the possession of each other's friendship and affections. Did I say, that we shall neither of us be the better or the worse? Alas! how grievous an error
did
I commit! I am still indebted to your father and you, for my life, my education, my estimation in the world, the years of respectability and peace I have
enjoyed, and the power I have at last exerted to recover the property of my ancestors. When I owe you so vast a debt that I can never repay, how can you be
so
ungenerous as to endeavour to prevent me from reimbursing this insignificant portion of the obligation I owe you? I was peremptory, and your father was obliged to submit. We had each our place, assigned us by the destiny under

which we were born; and the arrangement I now made was restoration to us both. I wanted to end my life like my father, a citizen of Uri; it was proper that my
friend should live like his ancestors, a great English merchant, and, when he retired from active life, an opulent English country-gentleman. What had I, a
republican of the old model, to do with bonds, warrants and securities? To me they were an insupportable incumbrance; to your father they were necessary. You

perceive with me, my dear Casimir, that all the obligation was on one side. Your father and grandfather had done every thing for me; I did nothing for them. They had taken me in, an outcast; they had made me one of their family, equal with themselves; they had given me my education, and by consequence every
quality
that made me respectable in the eyes of my fellow beings: I had lived upon

them for twenty years in the style of a German sovereign. If the venerable Ambrose Fleetwood had been more actively my friend, I always considered the part
your father acted as not a whit less honourable. Human beings are in all cases so fond of their creatures! in the objects of their generosity they behold the

mirror of their own virtues, and are satisfied. Your grandfather made me his child, and doted on me as such. But your father, without the smallest pretence
to
this original merit, without any stimulus in the gratification of his own complacence, entered into the sentiment of my preserver, never uttered a murmur,
never felt a compunction, but fully approved of the lavish bounty which stripped him of so considerable a portion of his fortune. It was this feeling of his

heart which made us brothers, brothers by a dearer bond than that of nature, by a more sacred tie than that of a common

descent. My soul has always panted for an occasion of showing myself worthy of such a friend, of repaying some small part of the obligation I owe to the name
of Fleetwood; but I shall go down to the grave ungratified in this first wish of my heart. In such talk I and my friend spent the chief part of our journey to England. We reached Merionethshire, and found a desolated mansion and a tenanted grave. In
the one, and over the other, we united our tears. My friend! my father! most generous of men! were the epithets with which a thousand times we saluted the
shade of the departed. And here I beg leave to protest against the doctrine too commonly promulgated in the world, that we ought to call off our thoughts, as speedily as possible,
from the recollection of our deceased friends, and not waste our spirits in lamentation for irremediable losses. The persons from whom I have oftenest heard

this lesson, have been of the class of the

hard-hearted, who have sought in such "counsels of prudence" an apology for their own unfeeling serenity. He was a wiser man than they, who said, "It is good
to dwell in the house of mourning; for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better." Certainly I found a salutary and purifying effect, in
talking to the spirit of my father when I was alone, and in discoursing of his good deeds and his virtues when I came into society. I cannot accuse these
habits of having generated in me an inclination to indolence and inactivity; or, if they introduced a short interval of that sort, it was a heaven-born
inactivity, by which my whole character was improved. Woe to the man, who is always busy, ---hurried in a turmoil of engagements from occupation to
occupation,
and with no seasons interposed, of recollection, contemplation and repose! Such a man must inevitably be gross and vulgar and

hard and indelicate, the sort of man with whom no generous spirit would desire to hold intercourse. After having spent about two months with me in Merionethshire, M. Ruffigny consented to accompany me in an excursion, rendered necessary by particular
business, to London. I was not at first exactly aware of the motive of my venerable monitor to this new compliance. In the sequel it became sufficiently
evident. This was the first considerable visit I ever paid to the metropolis of England. Beside the change of scene, I had a new character to sustain. I had travelled
in France a young heir, and in a certain sense under a state of pupillage. In London I was obliged to regard myself as the head of a family, and in point of

fortune one of the most eminent country-gentlemen, of that part of the island where my estates lay. This was

calculated in its first impression to inspire me with a certain seriousness. But, beside this, I felt, by the death of my father, and the society of my
father's friend, purified from the dissipations which had too long engrossed me. I swore, in the views which I meditated for my future life, that I would
never
again yield to the degrading follies which had already cost me so bitter a pang. For some time I kept this resolution. By the persuasions of Ruffigny I frequented in a moderate degree the society of my equals; but the very mourning I wore
for my deceased parent, served as a memento, keeping alive in my heart the recollection of my duties. In one unfortunate moment I felt my good resolutions thawing before the flame of beauty. A friend who had made one with me in a rather numerous party at
dinner, persuaded me, when the

company broke up, to accompany him to a petit souper at the lodgings of his mistress. Wine is a most eloquent advocate; the Burgundy and Champaigne had been
pushed about somewhat briskly at our dinner; and I suffered myself to be persuaded in the gaiety of the moment. I said, No ill consequence can result from
this
deviation; I am fortified by a thousand arguments against a relapse into my former errors; why should I deny myself the sight of beauty? My inviter, sir George Bradshaw by name, had boasted of the charms of his mistress; but there happened to be present, as the friend of the lady of the house, a
female whose pretensions, at least in my eyes, outshone those which I had heard so vaunted, in an unspeakable degree. I will not allow myself to dwell upon
her
features or her figure: suffice it to say, that her motions were lighter and more graceful than those of

a fawn, that the playfulness of her manner and the sports of her fancy were inexhaustible, that her voice was more rich and harmonious than the lute of Apollo,
and that she sung twenty frolicsome and humorous songs in the course of the evening with an inexpressible charm. The lady was called mrs. Comorin; she had
lately cohabited with lord Mandeville; but she had quarrelled with her admirer, and her heart and her person were now vacant. By what infatuation was it, that I instantly felt myself attracted toward her? Surely, when nature kneaded my frame, she cast in a double portion of her most
combustible materials! Deep scars were left in my heart by my Parisian amours; and I believed it impossible that any of the sex could again possess herself
of
my inmost affections. I had argued myself into a contempt of their character, an opinion that to be a woman,

was the same thing as to be heartless, artificial and perfidious. But what a delightful plaything, what an inexhaustible amusement, should I find in the
bewitching mrs. Comorin!---This was the most dangerous stage of my character. The heart cannot be used for ever; after a certain number of experiments it
becomes obdurate and insensible; but, if I fell, as I now seemed on the point to do, into the mire of sensuality, I should become a gross and impudent
libertine for the term of my life, and remain a hoary and despicable lecher to the brink of the grave. I saw this alluring woman again and again; and every time I saw her I was more pleased than before. She was made up of pride of heart, ease of manners, and an
inexhaustible flow of spirits; of sentiment and real attachment she was wholly incapable. I saw her for such as she was; but, such as she was,

she won my partiality; and perhaps, owing to the dear-bought experience which I could not yet recollect without agony, I liked her the better, for her want of
those qualities, which had so fatally stung my tranquillity. I had strange qualms in my bosom, when the recollection of my inconsistency recurred to my thoughts. I, that had felt with such bitter remorse my debaucheries
at Paris, and the shameful way in which I had wasted my time when my father lay on his death-bed, to be so soon caught in the same toils!---Yet what, alas,
is
the firmness of twenty-one? Five years of licentiousness had laid the foundation in me, deep and broad, for a dissolute character. In my adventures in Paris
I
had lost all that ingenuous and decent shame, which so often and so happily stops a young man on the brink of the precipice. Even the original sensitiveness

and delicacy

of my character, rendered me but the more tremblingly audacious in certain situations. I was beyond all things alarmed that the caprice which had thus seized me, should remain unknown to M. Ruffigny. His thoughts on the other hand were
continually alive to watch. I had been in the habit, while I had nothing to conceal, of mentioning to this aged friend, the persons I saw and the places I
visited, whenever we were separated from each other. A practice of this sort once begun, cannot, without awkwardness and exciting suspicion, be broken off;
circumstanced therefore as I now was, I named to my monitor sir George Bradshaw and the other young men of fashion with whom I associated, but observed an
inviolable silence as to the female members of our parties. Ruffigny's suspicions were probably excited. Sir George Bradshaw was by no means

the ally he would have chosen for me. Once or twice he expostulated with me upon the new intimacies I seemed to be contracting. I assured him that they were
matters of convenience or accident merely, and that I felt no such partiality to the baronet, as a mere change of place would not immediately break off. One evening that I had left M. Ruffigny to his solitary avocations, the fancy took him to beguile a few hours at the opera. As he had no acquaintance among the
audience, he sat in the pit. I was with sir George Bradshaw, mrs. Comorin and her friend, in the baronet's box. Ruffigny perceived me, long before I had an
idea that I was become a spectacle to him. The publicity of the situation, restrained my familiarities with this new mistress of my affections, within
certain
bounds; but Ruffigny saw enough, to leave no doubt in his mind as to the

true explanation of the scene. My fair friend was of too vivacious a temperament, not to play a hundred whimsical tricks in the course of an hour; I caught the
tone from her, and made myself no less ridiculous. In the heyday of youthful blood I was capable of little restraint; and my infant passion inspired me with

unwonted eagerness and activity. In one of my idlest and most forward sallies I caught the eye of Ruffigny; my face instantly became as red as scarlet. The next morning at breakfast we met. Ruffigny charged me seriously with what he had discovered, with the disgrace I was bringing on my father's name, and the
weakness and frailty of the resolutions I had solemnly made. The infatuation under which I laboured, stung me to a defence of the situation in which I had
been
found. I more than half suspected that I was wrong;

and this rendered me tenfold the more peremptory and earnest in my vindication. Could I, asked Ruffigny, apologise for this recent misconduct, when I had expressed such bitter compunction for the errors I had fallen into at Paris? Very easily, and very consistently, I replied. Those errors I should ever regret, and regarded now with as much abhorrence as ever. With whom were they
committed? With women having husbands and children, and occupying a respectable situation in society. I could conceive nothing, which would be pronounced
more
atrocious by an uncorrupted mind. If the crimes, thus committed under a decent veil, and which, like the thefts of the Spartan youth, were commended, as long

as they were carried on with a dextrous obscurity, came to be detected, what misery and confusion would they produce in

families? But, detected or not detected, they poisoned every thing that was valuable in social ties. They depended for their perpetration upon one eternal
scene of hypocrisy and dissimulation. The guilty female, instead of being that exemplary character which her situation called upon her to fill, was devoted
to
licentious thoughts, and must in her cooler moments be the object of her own contempt. The children she brought into the world she could not love, and the
husband she received with personated caresses was the individual in the world she was conscious of most deeply injuring. Where such a state of society
prevailed, every lover must regard his mistress with moral disapprobation, and every husband suspect that by the partner of his bosom his confidence was
betrayed. But in the acquaintance I contracted with this English lady, I injured no one. No delusion was practised by any of the parties. She would not be made worse by any thing into which she was induced by me; and neither I nor any one else
understood her but for what she was. Unfortunately my adventures in Paris had led me to form such an idea of the sex, that I could never be reconciled to the

thoughts of marriage: must I on that account remain as solitary and continent as a priest? The conversation between me and Ruffigny gradually became warmer; but I was like Telemachus in the island of Calypso, so inflamed by the wiles of the God of
Love, so enamoured with the graces and witchcraft of my Eucharis, that all remonstrances were vain. In vain were the reasonings of honour and truth; in vain

the voice of my venerable instructor, to which I had vowed everlasting attention. I parted from him with peevishness and ill humour. Is it possible, said I, as I sallied into the street, to conceive any thing so unreasonable as Ruffigny? There are two principal crimes which, in the code of
just morality, respect the relations of the sexes, adultery and seduction. I know that puritans and monks have added a third to the class, and have inveighed

indiscriminately against all incontinence. I do not decide whether their censure is wholly destitute of foundation. But was ever any one so absurd, as to
place
simple incontinence, upon a level with incontinence attended by one or the other of these aggravations? And yet this obstinate old Swiss will not be beaten
out
of it! This argument no doubt was exceedingly demonstrative and satisfactory; but, as I passed and repassed it in my mind, I did not altogether like it. I hastened to
dine with sir George Bradshaw, and to visit mrs. Comorin. I believed

I should derive better lights on the subject from the brilliancy of her eyes, than from Burgersdicius or Condillac. My sensations of this day were in a high degree painful and perturbed. I confess that at moments mrs. Comorin never appeared to me so beautiful as now. I gazed
on her with extacy; but that very extacy was tempestuous, and interrupted with visions of my father and my father's friend. Nothing was clear and perspicuous

in my mind. I suspected that my present passion was a vapour only, was lighter than vanity; my thoughts whispered me, that all I had seen most worthy and
excellent on earth, was my deceased parent and Ruffigny. My soul was chaos. A certain sentiment of remorse led me, sooner than usual, to quit the company and hasten home. I tasked my thoughts as I went, Shall I be distant

and cold to Ruffigny? Shall I endeavour to soothe him, and appease his anger? or, Shall I sacrifice every thing at once to his invaluable friendship? I
enquired of my servant as I entered, Where is M. Ruffigny? Gone. Gone? Whither? Into the country. He has been employed all day in preparations, and set out in a post-chaise about half an hour ago. Impossible! Gone into the country, and say nothing to me of the matter! He has left a letter for you. I was impatient to peruse this letter. Yet, even while I opened it, a thousand contending thoughts were embattled in my mind. I felt that his going was
intimately connected with our dissension of that morning. I vehemently accused myself for having so far offended the good old man. I was full of resentment
against

him for having, at this first difference, conceived a mortal offence. It was not till after repeated efforts, that I found myself in a state sufficiently calm
to read the letter. CASIMIR FLEETWOOD,
The fact is at length ascertained. I have travelled from Switzerland to Britain, and my dear friend, your late father, has died,---in vain. Is it possible? Shall this be so? Casimir Fleetwood, you are called on to decide! I cannot descend to altercation. It is not seemly, that tried and hoary integrity should come into the lists, to chop logic with petulant and hot-blooded vice. If events, such as have lately been brought to strike upon your heart, will not waken you, in vain might a stronger impulse be sought in the deductions of
Zeno, and the homilies of Epictetus. Remember what I am, and how related

to your family; remember your late father; remember the day of the lake of Uri! On that day you said, "Would to God it were in my power to recal a few past months! My prospects and my pleasures are finished; my life is tarnished; my peace
is destroyed; I shall never again think of myself with approbation, or with patience!" And you are now returned to the course of life which you then censured

with so much bitterness. Was it you that said it? One of the worst symptoms on the present occasion, is the sophistry with which you defend your error. A beginning sinner offends, and accuses himself while he
offends; a veteran in wrong has still some flimsy, miserable dissertation, by which he proves that wrong is not wrong. Another symptom which almost bids me despair, is the recent date of your conversion and good resolutions. The

evening before we set out from Merionethshire, we wept together at your father's grave. The monitor whom you consented, at seventy years of age, to withdraw
from his native valley, and to bring along through various climes and states, has not yet quitted you. If you relapse, while all these things are green and
fresh before you, what shall be predicted of the actions and pursuits in which you will be engaged a few years hence? Shame, my dear Fleetwood, shame is ever the handmaid of vice. What is the language you have held to me for the last three weeks? What shall I name you? Mean
prevaricator! You pretended to inform me who were the persons with whom you associated. You mentioned all the men of your society; you did not hint at a
single
woman. You said, you felt no such partiality to sir George Bradshaw , as a mere change of place would not immediately break off.---Do you think, that there
is
no vice in the conduct,

which led you thus pitifully to juggle with your friend? Do you think, that such a juggler, is worthy the name of Fleetwood, or worthy the name of man? You say that in attaching yourself to the mistress of lord Mandeville, you neither seduce innocence, nor make yourself responsible for the violation of solemn
vows. Be it so. A sound mind would prompt you, not to describe your conduct by negatives, but to enquire, what it is that you do? You sacrifice the serenity
of
an honourable mind to the tumult of the lowest passions in man. It is as true of the connection you now propose, as of any of the past, that you cannot
esteem
the person with whom you form this warm and entire intimacy. Every creature that lives, derives some of the colour of his being, from the objects which are
continually and familiarly around him. You have heard it said, that no man can be a great poet, or an elevated and

generous writer, who is not first a good man. Goodness is the cornerstone of all true excellence. You cannot be blind enough to believe, that the course to
which you are returning, is consistent with goodness. Many of your most familiar thoughts will be sensual and groveling; not of the class of impulses of
sense,
which are purified by the most sacred charities of our nature; but of those which lead us to associate with the debauched, and to have our favourite resort
in
the haunts of profligacy. You will have a succession of mistresses; there will not be one vestige of the refined and the ideal, what is noblest in taste, and

most exquisite in moral feeling, left within you. By gross and vulgar souls you will be admitted for respectable; the men who do honour to the species to
which
they belong, with one consent will pity and will shun you. Fleetwood, you must now decide--- now, and for ever. Casimir, my heart bleeds for you. Think what my feelings are; the feelings of Ruffigny, to whom the name of Fleetwood is a name for every thing sacred, who
cannot be content that one spot should stain the lustre of its white, who lives only in hopes to discharge a small part of his obligations to your father and

grandfather, and whose aged heart will burst, the moment he is convinced the son is fixed to disgrace the virtues of his ancestors!---
You will recollect that I had a business which made it desirable for me to make an excursion into Devonshire, previously to my return to my native country. I
have seized this occasion for that purpose. I shall be absent a fortnight. Casimir, I cannot parley with you. I leave you to your reflections. When I return,
I
shall know, whether Ruffigny is to live or die. Yours, more than his own,
J. F. R.

Before I had half read this letter, I rung the bell, and ordered myself a post-chaise. I felt that I could suffer a thousand deaths sooner than pass this
fortnight in separation, or suffer my friend to remain a moment in doubt of my good resolutions, when I had formed them. I travelled all night, and overtook

Ruffigny at Basingstoke. I rushed into his arms; I could not utter a word; I sobbed on his bosom. When I could speak, I was endless in my professions of
gratitude, and in protestations of a future innocent and honourable life. I spoke of the recent delusion into which I had fallen, with accents of horror,
self-detestation and despair. Ruffigny was deeply affected. This prompt and decisive return to reason and virtue inspires me with the most sanguine hope, said he. M. Ruffigny continued with me several months; and during the remainder of his life, which was about six years, I generally made a visit once a year to the
canton of Uri. The relation which existed between his family and mine was of the most interesting sort. Never in any age or country were two parties bound
together by ties so noble. I looked in his face, and saw the features of the venerable Ambrose Fleetwood, and of my beloved father. What I remarked was not
the
thing we denominate family-likeness, the sort of cast of countenance by which descents and pedigrees, whether wise men or fools, whether knaves or honest,
are,
like the individuals of different nations, identified all

over the world. The resemblance I perceived, though less glaring at first sight, extended its root infinitely deeper. It was that their hearts had been cast in
the same mould. He must have been a very slight observer of men, who is not aware that two human creatures, equally good, that love each other, and have
during
long periods associated together, unavoidably contract a similarity of sentiments, of demeanour, and of physiognomonical expression. But, beside this
resemblance of Ruffigny to my parents, which some will regard as fantastical, the countenance of the venerable Swiss was a book where I could trace the
history
of my ancestors. It was like the book of the records of king Ahasuerus in the Bible, in which the good deeds and deserts of the virtuous were written, that
they might not perish from the memories of those who were indebted to them, unhonoured and forgotten. The benefits my father proposed for me from the counsels and intercourse of Ruffigny I extensively obtained. From this period I became an altered man. The
ebricty and extravagance of youth were at an end with me. The sobriety, the delicacy, the sentimental fastidiousness of my childish days, revived in my
bosom;
and I looked back with astonishment at my adolescence, that I could ever have departed so widely from my genuine character. The means employed for my conversion were indeed amply commensurate to the end proposed. There was something so venerable in the figure and appearance of
Ruffigny, and primitive and patriarchal in his manners and modes of thinking, that it was perhaps impossible to converse intimately with him, and yet
continue
whelmed in the mire of licentiousness. But, beside his general qualifications for the office, he came recommended

to me by considerations so sacred, as to render his expostulations, his persuasives, and his alarms to my virtue and honour, irresistible. What an unexampled
friendship was that which bound together the names of Fleetwood and Ruffigny! Could I listen, otherwise than as to the admonitions of a God, to the
discourses
of a man who had generously, in his life-time, and in the full vigour of his age, surrendered to my family a fortune almost princely, and tranquilly retired
to
the simplicity of his ancestors? In every word he spoke I felt this circumstance inforcing his remarks. The misery of admonition in general, is that it is so

difficult for the person whose benefit it professes, to be convinced of the disinterestedness of his monitor. Some suspicion of selfishness, of ostentation,
of
vanity, of false colours, and the disingenuousness of a pleader, lurks

within, and poisons every clause. Could I suspect any thing of that kind, in this living Curius, who had come from his Sabine farm, the voluntary obscurity to
which he had withdrawn his age, purposely to fulfil the last injunctions of my father, and to provide for the tranquillity and virtue of the son? While I
listened to his voice, my conscience whispered me, It is the voice of him, but for whose absolute selfdenial and heroic friendship, my father would have been

bankrupt of comforts and fortune, and myself a beggar. By degrees---let me venture to say--- I became assimilated, however imperfectly, to my admirable monitor. I whispered to my swelling heart, "Never, no, never,
will I belong to such men as these, and not make it the first object of my solicitude to become like them. Let other men talk of their heroic blood,

and swear they will not blot a long line of princes from whom they may be descended! Here is my patent of nobility, than which I defy all the monarchs of the
earth to show a brighter; not sealed by the ruin of provinces and empires, but by the purest and most godlike contempt of all selfish views that ever was
exhibited. In me the race of the Fleetwoods shall survive; I will become heir to the integrity and personal honour of the virtuous Ruffigny." Why do I write down these elevated vows, which, alas, I have never redeemed! I but the more sincerely subscribe to my own condemnation. My history, as I early
remarked, is a register of errors, the final record of my penitence and humiliation. From this period however, I ceased to practise the vices of a libertine. The faults I have further to confess are of a different nature. My heart was
henceforward

pure, my moral tastes revived in their genuine clearness, and the errors I committed were no longer those of a profligate. Thus far I became unequivocally a
gainer by this great event of my life. My education and travels had left me a confirmed misanthropist. This is easily accounted for.