"Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover screens, and net purses. I scarcely know anyone
who cannot do all this, and I am sure I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without
being informed that she was very accomplished." "Your list of the common extent of accomplishments," said Darcy, "has too much truth. The word is
applied to many a woman who deserves it no otherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen. But I am very far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general. I cannot boast of
knowing more than half-a-dozen, in the whole range of my acquaintance, that are really
accomplished." "Nor I, I am sure," said Miss Bingley. "Then," observed Elizabeth, "you must comprehend a great deal in your idea of an accomplished
woman." "Yes, I do comprehend a great deal in it." "Oh! certainly," cried his faithful assistant, "no one can be really esteemed accomplished who does
not greatly surpass what is usually met with. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music,
singing, drawing, dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and besides all this, she
must possess a certain something in her air and manner of walking, the tone of her voice, her
address and expressions, or the word will be but half-deserved." "All this she must possess," added Darcy, "and to all this she must yet add something more
substantial, in the improvement of her mind by extensive reading." "I am no longer surprised at your knowing only six accomplished women. I rather wonder now at
your knowing any." "Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of all this?" "I never saw such a woman. I never saw such capacity, and taste, and application, and elegance, as
you describe united." Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her implied doubt, and were both
protesting that they knew many women who answered this description, when Mr. Hurst called them
to order, with bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As all conversation
was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the room. "Elizabeth Bennet," said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her, "is one of those young ladies
who seek to recommend themselves to the other sex by undervaluing their own; and with many
men, I dare say, it succeeds. But, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art." "Undoubtedly," replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed, "there is a meanness
in all the arts which ladies sometimes condescend to employ for captivation. Whatever bears affinity
to cunning is despicable." Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to continue the subject. Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and that she could not leave her. Bingley urged Mr. Jones being sent for immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country
advice could be of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the most eminent
physicians. This she would not hear of; but she was not so unwilling to comply with their brother's
proposal; and it was settled that Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennet
were not decidedly better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters declared that they were
miserable. They solaced their wretchedness, however, by duets after supper, while he could find no
better relief to his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions that every attention might be
paid to the sick lady and her sister. Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister's room, and in the morning had the pleasure of
being able to send a tolerable answer to the inquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley
by a housemaid, and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on his sisters. In
spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have a note sent to Longbourn, desiring her
mother to visit Jane, and form her own judgement of her situation. The note was immediately
dispatched, and its contents as quickly complied with. Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by her two
youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast. Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have been very miserable; but being
satisfied on seeing her that her illness was not alarming, she had no wish of her recovering
immediately, as her restoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. She would
not listen, therefore, to her daughter's proposal of being carried home; neither did the apothecary,
who arrived about the same time, think it at all advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on
Miss Bingley's appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters all attended her into the
breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopes that Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse
than she expected. "Indeed I have, sir," was her answer. "She is a great deal too ill to be moved. Mr. Jones says we must
not think of moving her. We must trespass a little longer on your kindness." "Removed!" cried Bingley. "It must not be thought of. My sister, I am sure, will not hear of her
removal." "You may depend upon it, Madam," said Miss Bingley, with cold civility, "that Miss Bennet will
receive every possible attention while she remains with us." Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments. "I am sure," she added, "if it was not for such good friends I do not know what would become of her,
for she is very ill indeed, and suffers a vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world,
which is always the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetest temper I have ever
met with. I often tell my other girls they are nothing to her. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley,
and a charming prospect over the gravel walk. I do not know a place in the country that is equal to
Netherfield. You will not think of quitting it in a hurry, I hope, though you have but a short lease." "Whatever I do is done in a hurry," replied he; "and therefore if I should resolve to quit Netherfield, I
should probably be off in five minutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here." "That is exactly what I should have supposed of you," said Elizabeth. "You begin to comprehend me, do you?" cried he, turning towards her. "Oh! yes-I understand you perfectly." "I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seen through I am afraid is pitiful." "That is as it happens. It does not follow that a deep, intricate character is more or less estimable
than such a one as yours." "Lizzy," cried her mother, "remember where you are, and do not run on in the wild manner that you
are suffered to do at home." "I did not know before," continued Bingley immediately, "that you were a studier of character. It
must be an amusing study." "Yes, but intricate characters are the most amusing. They have at least that advantage." "The country," said Darcy, "can in general supply but a few subjects for such a study. In a country
neighbourhood you move in a very confined and unvarying society." "But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to be observed in them for ever." "Yes, indeed," cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioning a country neighbourhood. "I
assure you there is quite as much of that going on in the country as in town." Everybody was surprised, and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment, turned silently away. Mrs.
Bennet, who fancied she had gained a complete victory over him, continued her triumph. "I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, for my part, except the shops
and public places. The country is a vast deal pleasanter, is it not, Mr. Bingley?" "When I am in the country," he replied, "I never wish to leave it; and when I am in town it is pretty
much the same. They have each their advantages, and I can be equally happy in either." "Aye-that is because you have the right disposition. But that gentleman," looking at Darcy, "seemed
to think the country was nothing at all." "Indeed, Mamma, you are mistaken," said Elizabeth, blushing for her mother. "You quite mistook Mr.
Darcy. He only meant that there was not such a variety of people to be met with in the country as in
the town, which you must acknowledge to be true." "Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meeting with many people in this
neighbourhood, I believe there are few neighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty
families." Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep his countenance. His sister was less
delicate, and directed her eyes towards Mr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the
sake of saying something that might turn her mother's thoughts, now asked her if Charlotte Lucas
had been at Longbourn since her coming away. "Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man Sir William is, Mr. Bingley, is not
he? So much the man of fashion! So genteel and easy! He has always something to say to
everybody. That is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves very
important, and never open their mouths, quite mistake the matter." "Did Charlotte dine with you?" "No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. For my part, Mr. Bingley, I
always keep servants that can do their own work; my daughters are brought up very differently. But
everybody is to judge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls, I assure you. It is a
pity they are not handsome! Not that I think Charlotte so very plain-but then she is our particular
friend." "She seems a very pleasant young woman." "Oh! dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. Lady Lucas herself has often said so, and envied
me Jane's beauty. I do not like to boast of my own child, but to be sure, Jane-one does not often
see anybody better looking. It is what everybody says. I do not trust my own partiality. When she was
only fifteen, there was a man at my brother Gardiner's in town so much in love with her that my
sister-in-law was sure he would make her an offer before we came away. But, however, he did not. Perhaps he thought her too young. However, he wrote some verses on her, and very pretty they
were." "And so ended his affection," said Elizabeth impatiently. "There has been many a one, I fancy,
overcome in the same way. I wonder who first discovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away
love!" "I have been used to consider poetry as the food of love," said Darcy. "Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what is strong already. But if it be only a
slight, thin sort of inclination, I am convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away." Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabeth tremble lest her mother
should be exposing herself again. She longed to speak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a
short silence Mrs. Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley for his kindness to Jane, with an
apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Mr. Bingley was unaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced
his younger sister to be civil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her part indeed
without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, and soon afterwards ordered her
carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest of her daughters put herself forward. The two girls had been
whispering to each other during the whole visit, and the result of it was, that the youngest should tax
Mr. Bingley with having promised on his first coming into the country to give a ball at Netherfield. Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexion and good-humoured
countenance; a favourite with her mother, whose affection had brought her into public at an early
age. She had high animal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which the attention of the
officers, to whom her uncle's good dinners, and her own easy manners recommended her, had
increased into assurance. She was very equal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the
ball, and abruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be the most shameful thing in
the world if he did not keep it. His answer to this sudden attack was delightful to their mother's ear:
"I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and when your sister is recovered, you
shall, if you please, name the very day of the ball. But you would not wish to be dancing when she is
ill."
Lydia declared herself satisfied. "Oh! yes-it would be much better to wait till Jane was well, and by
that time most likely Captain Carter would be at Meryton again. And when you have given your ball,"
she added, "I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell Colonel Forster it will be quite a shame if
he does not." Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returned instantly to Jane, leaving her
own and her relations' behaviour to the remarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom,
however, could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of her, in spite of all Miss Bingley's
witticisms on fine eyes. The day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley had spent some hours
of the morning with the invalid, who continued, though slowly, to mend; and in the evening Elizabeth
joined their party in the drawing-room. The loo-table, however, did not appear. Mr. Darcy was
writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watching the progress of his letter and repeatedly
calling off his attention by messages to his sister. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley were at piquet, and Mrs.
Hurst was observing their game. Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused in attending to what passed
between Darcy and his companion. The perpetual commendations of the lady, either on his
handwriting, or on the evenness of his lines, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcern
with which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and was exactly in union with her
opinion of each. "How delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!" He made no answer. "You write uncommonly fast." "You are mistaken. I write rather slowly." "How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of a year! Letters of business, too! How odious I should think them!" "It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of yours." "Pray tell your sister that I long to see her." "I have already told her so once, by your desire." "I am afraid you do not like your pen. Let me mend it for you. I mend pens remarkably well." "Thank you-but I always mend my own." "How can you contrive to write so even?" He was silent. "Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp; and pray let her know that I
am quite in raptures with her beautiful little design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to
Miss Grantley's." "Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again? At present I have not room to do
them justice." "Oh! it is of no consequence. I shall see her in January. But do you always write such charming long
letters to her, Mr. Darcy?" "They are generally long; but whether always charming it is not for me to determine." "It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter with ease, cannot write ill."
"That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline," cried her brother, "because he does not write
with ease. He studies too much for words of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?" "My style of writing is very different from yours." "Oh!" cried Miss Bingley, "Charles writes in the most careless way imaginable. He leaves out half his
words, and blots the rest." "My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them-by which means my letters
sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents." "Your humility, Mr. Bingley," said Elizabeth, "must disarm reproof." "Nothing is more deceitful," said Darcy, "than the appearance of humility. It is often only
carelessness of opinion, and sometimes an indirect boast." "And which of the two do you call my little recent piece of modesty?" "The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects in writing, because you consider them as
proceeding from a rapidity of thought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, you
think at least highly interesting. The power of doing anything with quickness is always prized much by
the possessor, and often without any attention to the imperfection of the performance. When you
told Mrs. Bennet this morning that if you ever resolved upon quitting Netherfield you should be gone
in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort of panegyric, of compliment to yourself-and yet what is
there so very laudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary business undone, and can
be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?" "Nay," cried Bingley, "this is too much, to remember at night all the foolish things that were said in
the morning. And yet, upon my honour, I believe what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at
this moment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needless precipitance merely to
show off before the ladies." "I dare say you believed it; but I am by no means convinced that you would be gone with such
celerity. Your conduct would be quite as dependent on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as
you were mounting your horse, a friend were to say, 'Bingley, you had better stay till next week,' you
would probably do it, you would probably not go-and at another word, might stay a month." "You have only proved by this," cried Elizabeth, "that Mr. Bingley did not do justice to his own
disposition. You have shown him off now much more than he did himself." "I am exceedingly gratified," said Bingley, "by your converting what my friend says into a compliment
on the sweetness of my temper. But I am afraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by
no means intend; for he would certainly think better of me, if under such a circumstance I were to
give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as I could." "Would Mr. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original intentions as atoned for by your
obstinacy in adhering to it?" "Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter; Darcy must speak for himself." "You expect me to account for opinions which you choose to call mine, but which I have never
acknowledged. Allowing the case, however, to stand according to your representation, you must
remember, Miss Bennet, that the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house, and the
delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offering one argument in favour of its
propriety." "To yield readily-easily-to the persuasion of a friend is no merit with you." "To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding of either." "You appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence of friendship and affection. A regard
for the requester would often make one readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to
reason one into it. I am not particularly speaking of such a case as you have supposed about Mr.
Bingley. We may as well wait, perhaps, till the circumstance occurs before we discuss the discretion
of his behaviour thereupon. But in general and ordinary cases between friend and friend, where one
of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of no very great moment, should you think ill
of that person for complying with the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?" "Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, to arrange with rather more precision
the degree of importance which is to appertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy
subsisting between the parties?" "By all means," cried Bingley; "let us hear all the particulars, not forgetting their comparative height
and size; for that will have more weight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I
assure you, that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in comparison with myself, I should not
pay him half so much deference. I declare I do not know a more awful object than Darcy, on
particular occasions, and in particular places; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening,
when he has nothing to do." Mr. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he was rather offended, and
therefore checked her laugh. Miss Bingley warmly resented the indignity he had received, in an
expostulation with her brother for talking such nonsense. "I see your design, Bingley," said his friend. "You dislike an argument, and want to silence this." "Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like disputes. If you and Miss Bennet will defer yours till I am
out of the room, I shall be very thankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me." "What you ask," said Elizabeth, "is no sacrifice on my side; and Mr. Darcy had much better finish his
letter." Mr. Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter. When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabeth for an indulgence of some
music. Miss Bingley moved with some alacrity to the pianoforte; and, after a polite request that
Elizabeth would lead the way which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, she seated
herself. Mrs. Hurst sang with her sister, and while they were thus employed, Elizabeth could not help
observing, as she turned over some music-books that lay on the instrument, how frequently Mr.
Darcy's eyes were fixed on her. She hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object of
admiration to so great a man; and yet that he should look at her because he disliked her, was still
more strange. She could only imagine, however, at last that she drew his notice because there was
something more wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than in any other person
present. The supposition did not pain her. She liked him too little to care for his approbation. After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm by a lively Scotch air; and soon
afterwards Mr. Darcy, drawing near Elizabeth, said to her:
"Do not you feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet, to seize such an opportunity of dancing a reel?" She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the question, with some surprise at her silence. "Oh!" said she, "I heard you before, but I could not immediately determine what to say in reply. You
wanted me, I know, to say 'Yes,' that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I always
delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person of their premeditated
contempt. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tell you, that I do not want to dance a reel at all-
and now despise me if you dare." "Indeed I do not dare." Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at his gallantry; but there was a
mixture of sweetness and archness in her manner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody;
and Darcy had never been so bewitched by any woman as he was by her. He really believed, that
were it not for the inferiority of her connections, he should be in some danger. Miss Bingley saw, or suspected enough to be jealous; and her great anxiety for the recovery of her
dear friend Jane received some assistance from her desire of getting rid of Elizabeth. She often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking her guest, by talking of their supposed marriage, and
planning his happiness in such an alliance. "I hope," said she, as they were walking together in the shrubbery the next day, "you will give your
mother-in-law a few hints, when this desirable event takes place, as to the advantage of holding her
tongue; and if you can compass it, do cure the younger girls of running after officers. And, if I may
mention so delicate a subject, endeavour to check that little something, bordering on conceit and
impertinence, which your lady possesses." "Have you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity?" "Oh! yes. Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Phillips be placed in the gallery at Pemberley. Put them next to your great-uncle the judge. They are in the same profession, you know, only in
different lines. As for your Elizabeth's picture, you must not have it taken, for what painter could do
justice to those beautiful eyes?" "It would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression, but their colour and shape, and the
eyelashes, so remarkably fine, might be copied." At that moment they were met from another walk by Mrs. Hurst and Elizabeth herself. "I did not know that you intended to walk," said Miss Bingley, in some confusion, lest they had been
overheard. "You used us abominably ill," answered Mrs. Hurst, "running away without telling us that you were
coming out." Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walk by herself. The path just
admitted three. Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness, and immediately said:
"This walk is not wide enough for our party. We had better go into the avenue." But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them, laughingly answered:
"No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly grouped, and appear to uncommon advantage. The
picturesque would be spoilt by admitting a fourth. Good-bye." She then ran gaily off, rejoicing as she rambled about, in the hope of being at home again in a day or
two. Jane was already so much recovered as to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that
evening. When the ladies removed after dinner, Elizabeth ran up to her sister, and seeing her well guarded
from cold, attended her into the drawing-room, where she was welcomed by her two friends with
many professions of pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeable as they were during
the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared. Their powers of conversation were
considerable. They could describe an entertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour,
and laugh at their acquaintance with spirit. But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object; Miss Bingley's eyes were
instantly turned toward Darcy, and she had something to say to him before he had advanced many
steps. He addressed himself to Miss Bennet, with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst also made her a
slight bow, and said he was "very glad;" but diffuseness and warmth remained for Bingley's
salutation. He was full of joy and attention. The first half-hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest she
should suffer from the change of room; and she removed at his desire to the other side of the
fireplace, that she might be further from the door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to
anyone else. Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with great delight. When tea was over, Mr. Hurst reminded his sister-in-law of the card-table-but in vain. She had
obtained private intelligence that Mr. Darcy did not wish for cards; and Mr. Hurst soon found even
his open petition rejected. She assured him that no one intended to play, and the silence of the
whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Mr. Hurst had therefore nothing to do, but to
stretch himself on one of the sofas and go to sleep. Darcy took up a book; Miss Bingley did the same;
and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupied in playing with her bracelets and rings, joined now and then in
her brother's conversation with Miss Bennet. Miss Bingley's attention was quite as much engaged in watching Mr. Darcy's progress
through his book, as in reading her own; and she was perpetually either making some inquiry, or
looking at his page. She could not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered her
question, and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to be amused with her own book,
which she had only chosen because it was the second volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said,
"How pleasant it is to spend an evening in this way! I declare after all there is no enjoyment like
reading! How much sooner one tires of anything than of a book! When I have a house of my own, I
shall be miserable if I have not an excellent library." No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, and cast her eyes round the
room in quest for some amusement; when hearing her brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she
turned suddenly towards him and said:
"By the bye, Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance at Netherfield? I would advise you,
before you determine on it, to consult the wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there
are not some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than a pleasure." "If you mean Darcy," cried her brother, "he may go to bed, if he chooses, before it begins-but as for
the ball, it is quite a settled thing; and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough, I shall send
round my cards." "I should like balls infinitely better," she replied, "if they were carried on in a different manner; but
there is something insufferably tedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be
much more rational if conversation instead of dancing were made the order of the day." "Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say, but it would not be near so much like a ball." Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards she got up and walked about the room. Her
figure was elegant, and she walked well; but Darcy, at whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly
studious. In the desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more, and, turning to
Elizabeth, said:
"Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take a turn about the room. I
assure you it is very refreshing after sitting so long in one attitude." Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Miss Bingley succeeded no less in the real
object of her civility; Mr. Darcy looked up. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that
quarter as Elizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. He was directly invited to
join their party, but he declined it, observing that he could imagine but two motives for their
choosing to walk up and down the room together, with either of which motives his joining them
would interfere. "What could he mean? She was dying to know what could be his meaning?