She had never
heard of him before his entrance into the --shire Militia, in which he had engaged at the
persuasion of the young man who, on meeting him accidentally in town, had there renewed a slight
acquaintance. Of his former way of life nothing had been known in Hertfordshire but what he told
himself. As to his real character, had information been in her power, she had never felt a wish of
inquiring. His countenance, voice, and manner had established him at once in the possession of every
virtue. She tried to recollect some instance of goodness, some distinguished trait of integrity or
benevolence, that might rescue him from the attacks of Mr. Darcy; or at least, by the predominance
of virtue, atone for those casual errors under which she would endeavour to class what Mr. Darcy
had described as the idleness and vice of many years' continuance. But no such recollection
befriended her. She could see him instantly before her, in every charm of air and address; but she
could remember no more substantial good than the general approbation of the neighbourhood, and
the regard which his social powers had gained him in the mess. After pausing on this point a
considerable while, she once more continued to read. But, alas! the story which followed, of his
designs on Miss Darcy, received some confirmation from what had passed between Colonel
Fitzwilliam and herself only the morning before; and at last she was referred for the truth of every
particular to Colonel Fitzwilliam himself-from whom she had previously received the information of
his near concern in all his cousin's affairs, and whose character she had no reason to question. At one
time she had almost resolved on applying to him, but the idea was checked by the awkwardness of
the application, and at length wholly banished by the conviction that Mr. Darcy would never have
hazarded such a proposal, if he had not been well assured of his cousin's corroboration. She perfectly remembered everything that had passed in conversation between Wickham and
herself, in their first evening at Mr. Phillips's. Many of his expressions were still fresh in her memory. She was now struck with the impropriety of such communications to a stranger, and wondered it had
escaped her before. She saw the indelicacy of putting himself forward as he had done, and the
inconsistency of his professions with his conduct. She remembered that he had boasted of having no
fear of seeing Mr. Darcy-that Mr. Darcy might leave the country, but that he should stand his
ground; yet he had avoided the Netherfield ball the very next week. She remembered also that, till
the Netherfield family had quitted the country, he had told his story to no one but herself; but that
after their removal it had been everywhere discussed; that he had then no reserves, no scruples in
sinking Mr. Darcy's character, though he had assured her that respect for the father would always
prevent his exposing the son. How differently did everything now appear in which he was concerned! His attentions to Miss King
were now the consequence of views solely and hatefully mercenary; and the mediocrity of her
fortune proved no longer the moderation of his wishes, but his eagerness to grasp at anything. His
behaviour to herself could now have had no tolerable motive; he had either been deceived with
regard to her fortune, or had been gratifying his vanity by encouraging the preference which she
believed she had most incautiously shown. Every lingering struggle in his favour grew fainter and
fainter; and in farther justification of Mr. Darcy, she could not but allow that Mr. Bingley, when
questioned by Jane, had long ago asserted his blamelessness in the affair; that proud and repulsive as
were his manners, she had never, in the whole course of their acquaintance-an acquaintance which
had latterly brought them much together, and given her a sort of intimacy with his ways-seen
anything that betrayed him to be unprincipled or unjust-anything that spoke him of irreligious or
immoral habits; that among his own connections he was esteemed and valued-that even Wickham
had allowed him merit as a brother, and that she had often heard him speak so affectionately of his
sister as to prove him capable of some amiable feeling; that had his actions been what Mr. Wickham
represented them, so gross a violation of everything right could hardly have been concealed from the
world; and that friendship between a person capable of it, and such an amiable man as Mr. Bingley,
was incomprehensible. She grew absolutely ashamed of herself. Of neither Darcy nor Wickham could she think without
feeling she had been blind, partial, prejudiced, absurd. "How despicably I have acted!" she cried; "I, who have prided myself on my discernment! I, who have
valued myself on my abilities! who have often disdained the generous candour of my sister, and
gratified my vanity in useless or blameable mistrust! How humiliating is this discovery! Yet, how just
a humiliation! Had I been in love, I could not have been more wretchedly blind! But vanity, not love,
has been my folly. Pleased with the preference of one, and offended by the neglect of the other, on
the very beginning of our acquaintance, I have courted prepossession and ignorance, and driven
reason away, where either were concerned. Till this moment I never knew myself." From herself to Jane-from Jane to Bingley, her thoughts were in a line which soon brought to her
recollection that Mr. Darcy's explanation there had appeared very insufficient, and she read it again. Widely different was the effect of a second perusal. How could she deny that credit to his assertions
in one instance, which she had been obliged to give in the other? He declared himself to be totally
unsuspicious of her sister's attachment; and she could not help remembering what Charlotte's
opinion had always been. Neither could she deny the justice of his description of Jane. She felt that
Jane's feelings, though fervent, were little displayed, and that there was a constant complacency in
her air and manner not often united with great sensibility. When she came to that part of the letter in which her family were mentioned in terms of such
mortifying, yet merited reproach, her sense of shame was severe. The justice of the charge struck her
too forcibly for denial, and the circumstances to which he particularly alluded as having passed at the
Netherfield ball, and as confirming all his first disapprobation, could not have made a stronger
impression on his mind than on hers. The compliment to herself and her sister was not unfelt. It soothed, but it could not console her for
the contempt which had thus been self-attracted by the rest of her family; and as she considered
that Jane's disappointment had in fact been the work of her nearest relations, and reflected how
materially the credit of both must be hurt by such impropriety of conduct, she felt depressed beyond
anything she had ever known before. After wandering along the lane for two hours, giving way to every variety of thought-re-considering
events, determining probabilities, and reconciling herself, as well as she could, to a change so sudden
and so important, fatigue, and a recollection of her long absence, made her at length return home;
and she entered the house with the wish of appearing cheerful as usual, and the resolution of
repressing such reflections as must make her unfit for conversation. She was immediately told that the two gentlemen from Rosings had each called during her absence;
Mr. Darcy, only for a few minutes, to take leave-but that Colonel Fitzwilliam had been sitting with
them at least an hour, hoping for her return, and almost resolving to walk after her till she could be
found. Elizabeth could but just affect concern in missing him; she really rejoiced at it. Colonel
Fitzwilliam was no longer an object; she could think only of her letter. The two gentlemen left Rosings the next morning, and Mr. Collins having been in waiting near the
lodges, to make them his parting obeisance, was able to bring home the pleasing intelligence, of their
appearing in very good health, and in as tolerable spirits as could be expected, after the melancholy
scene so lately gone through at Rosings. To Rosings he then hastened, to console Lady Catherine and
her daughter; and on his return brought back, with great satisfaction, a message from her ladyship,
importing that she felt herself so dull as to make her very desirous of having them all to dine with
her. Elizabeth could not see Lady Catherine without recollecting that, had she chosen it, she might by this
time have been presented to her as her future niece; nor could she think, without a smile, of what
her ladyship's indignation would have been. "What would she have said? how would she have
behaved?" were questions with which she amused herself. Their first subject was the diminution of the Rosings party. "I assure you, I feel it exceedingly," said
Lady Catherine; "I believe no one feels the loss of friends so much as I do. But I am particularly
attached to these young men, and know them to be so much attached to me! They were excessively
sorry to go! But so they always are. The dear Colonel rallied his spirits tolerably till just at last; but
Darcy seemed to feel it most acutely, more, I think, than last year. His attachment to Rosings
certainly increases." Mr. Collins had a compliment, and an allusion to throw in here, which were kindly smiled on by the
mother and daughter. Lady Catherine observed, after dinner, that Miss Bennet seemed out of spirits, and immediately
accounting for it by herself, by supposing that she did not like to go home again so soon, she added:
"But if that is the case, you must write to your mother and beg that you may stay a little longer. Mrs.
Collins will be very glad of your company, I am sure." "I am much obliged to your ladyship for your kind invitation," replied Elizabeth, "but it is not in my
power to accept it. I must be in town next Saturday." "Why, at that rate, you will have been here only six weeks. I expected you to stay two months. I told
Mrs. Collins so before you came. There can be no occasion for your going so soon. Mrs. Bennet could
certainly spare you for another fortnight." "But my father cannot. He wrote last week to hurry my return." "Oh! your father of course may spare you, if your mother can. Daughters are never of so much
consequence to a father. And if you will stay another month complete, it will be in my power to take
one of you as far as London, for I am going there early in June, for a week; and as Dawson does not
object to the barouche-box, there will be very good room for one of you-and indeed, if the weather
should happen to be cool, I should not object to taking you both, as you are neither of you large." "You are all kindness, madam; but I believe we must abide by our original plan." Lady Catherine seemed resigned. "Mrs. Collins, you must send a servant with them. You know I
always speak my mind, and I cannot bear the idea of two young women travelling post by
themselves. It is highly improper. You must contrive to send somebody. I have the greatest dislike in
the world to that sort of thing. Young women should always be properly guarded and attended,
according to their situation in life. When my niece Georgiana went to Ramsgate last summer, I made
a point of her having two men-servants go with her. Miss Darcy, the daughter of Mr. Darcy, of
Pemberley, and Lady Anne, could not have appeared with propriety in a different manner. I am
excessively attentive to all those things. You must send John with the young ladies, Mrs. Collins. I am
glad it occurred to me to mention it; for it would really be discreditable to you to let them go alone." "My uncle is to send a servant for us." "Oh! Your uncle! He keeps a man-servant, does he? I am very glad you have somebody who thinks of
these things. Where shall you change horses? Oh! Bromley, of course. If you mention my name at the
Bell, you will be attended to." Lady Catherine had many other questions to ask respecting their journey, and as she did not answer
them all herself, attention was necessary, which Elizabeth believed to be lucky for her; or, with a
mind so occupied, she might have forgotten where she was. Reflection must be reserved for solitary
hours; whenever she was alone, she gave way to it as the greatest relief; and not a day went by
without a solitary walk, in which she might indulge in all the delight of unpleasant recollections. Mr. Darcy's letter she was in a fair way of soon knowing by heart. She studied every sentence; and
her feelings towards its writer were at times widely different. When she remembered the style of his
address, she was still full of indignation; but when she considered how unjustly she had condemned
and upbraided him, her anger was turned against herself; and his disappointed feelings became the
object of compassion. His attachment excited gratitude, his general character respect; but she could
not approve him; nor could she for a moment repent her refusal, or feel the slightest inclination ever
to see him again. In her own past behaviour, there was a constant source of vexation and regret; and
in the unhappy defects of her family, a subject of yet heavier chagrin. They were hopeless of remedy. Her father, contented with laughing at them, would never exert himself to restrain the wild giddiness
of his youngest daughters; and her mother, with manners so far from right herself, was entirely
insensible of the evil. Elizabeth had frequently united with Jane in an endeavour to check the
imprudence of Catherine and Lydia; but while they were supported by their mother's indulgence,
what chance could there be of improvement? Catherine, weak-spirited, irritable, and completely
under Lydia's guidance, had been always affronted by their advice; and Lydia, self-willed and
careless, would scarcely give them a hearing. They were ignorant, idle, and vain. While there was an
officer in Meryton, they would flirt with him; and while Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn,
they would be going there forever. Anxiety on Jane's behalf was another prevailing concern; and Mr. Darcy's explanation, by restoring
Bingley to all her former good opinion, heightened the sense of what Jane had lost. His affection was
proved to have been sincere, and his conduct cleared of all blame, unless any could attach to the
implicitness of his confidence in his friend. How grievous then was the thought that, of a situation so
desirable in every respect, so replete with advantage, so promising for happiness, Jane had been
deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her own family! When to these recollections was added the development of Wickham's character, it may be easily
believed that the happy spirits which had seldom been depressed before, were now so much
affected as to make it almost impossible for her to appear tolerably cheerful. Their engagements at Rosings were as frequent during the last week of her stay as they had been at
first. The very last evening was spent there; and her ladyship again inquired minutely into the
particulars of their journey, gave them directions as to the best method of packing, and was so
urgent on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right way, that Maria thought herself obliged, on
her return, to undo all the work of the morning, and pack her trunk afresh. When they parted, Lady Catherine, with great condescension, wished them a good journey, and
invited them to come to Hunsford again next year; and Miss de Bourgh exerted herself so far as to
curtsey and hold out her hand to both. On Saturday morning Elizabeth and Mr. Collins met for breakfast a few minutes before the others
appeared; and he took the opportunity of paying the parting civilities which he deemed
indispensably necessary. "I know not, Miss Elizabeth," said he, "whether Mrs. Collins has yet expressed her sense of your
kindness in coming to us; but I am very certain you will not leave the house without receiving her
thanks for it. The favour of your company has been much felt, I assure you. We know how little there
is to tempt anyone to our humble abode. Our plain manner of living, our small rooms and few
domestics, and the little we see of the world, must make Hunsford extremely dull to a young lady like
yourself; but I hope you will believe us grateful for the condescension, and that we have done
everything in our power to prevent your spending your time unpleasantly." Elizabeth was eager with her thanks and assurances of happiness. She had spent six weeks with great
enjoyment; and the pleasure of being with Charlotte, and the kind attentions she had received, must
make her feel the obliged. Mr. Collins was gratified, and with a more smiling solemnity replied:
"It gives me great pleasure to hear that you have passed your time not disagreeably. We have
certainly done our best; and most fortunately having it in our power to introduce you to very
superior society, and, from our connection with Rosings, the frequent means of varying the humble
home scene, I think we may flatter ourselves that your Hunsford visit cannot have been entirely
irksome. Our situation with regard to Lady Catherine's family is indeed the sort of extraordinary
advantage and blessing which few can boast. You see on what a footing we are. You see how
continually we are engaged there. In truth I must acknowledge that, with all the disadvantages of this
humble parsonage, I should not think anyone abiding in it an object of compassion, while they are
sharers of our intimacy at Rosings." Words were insufficient for the elevation of his feelings; and he was obliged to walk about the room,
while Elizabeth tried to unite civility and truth in a few short sentences. "You may, in fact, carry a very favourable report of us into Hertfordshire, my dear cousin. I flatter
myself at least that you will be able to do so. Lady Catherine's great attentions to Mrs. Collins you
have been a daily witness of; and altogether I trust it does not appear that your friend has drawn an
unfortunate-but on this point it will be as well to be silent. Only let me assure you, my dear Miss
Elizabeth, that I can from my heart most cordially wish you equal felicity in marriage. My dear
Charlotte and I have but one mind and one way of thinking. There is in everything a most remarkable
resemblance of character and ideas between us. We seem to have been designed for each other." Elizabeth could safely say that it was a great happiness where that was the case, and with equal
sincerity could add, that she firmly believed and rejoiced in his domestic comforts. She was not sorry,
however, to have the recital of them interrupted by the lady from whom they sprang. Poor
Charlotte! it was melancholy to leave her to such society! But she had chosen it with her eyes open;
and though evidently regretting that her visitors were to go, she did not seem to ask for compassion. Her home and her housekeeping, her parish and her poultry, and all their dependent concerns, had
not yet lost their charms. At length the chaise arrived, the trunks were fastened on, the parcels placed within, and it was
pronounced to be ready. After an affectionate parting between the friends, Elizabeth was attended
to the carriage by Mr. Collins, and as they walked down the garden he was commissioning her with
his best respects to all her family, not forgetting his thanks for the kindness he had received at
Longbourn in the winter, and his compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, though unknown. He then
handed her in, Maria followed, and the door was on the point of being closed, when he suddenly
reminded them, with some consternation, that they had hitherto forgotten to leave any message for
the ladies at Rosings. "But," he added, "you will of course wish to have your humble respects delivered to them, with your
grateful thanks for their kindness to you while you have been here." Elizabeth made no objection; the door was then allowed to be shut, and the carriage drove off. "Good gracious!" cried Maria, after a few minutes' silence, "it seems but a day or two since we first
came! and yet how many things have happened!" "A great many indeed," said her companion with a sigh. "We have dined nine times at Rosings, besides drinking tea there twice! How much I shall have to
tell!" Elizabeth added privately, "And how much I shall have to conceal!" Their journey was performed without much conversation, or any alarm; and within four hours of
their leaving Hunsford they reached Mr. Gardiner's house, where they were to remain a few days. Jane looked well, and Elizabeth had little opportunity of studying her spirits, amidst the various
engagements which the kindness of her aunt had reserved for them. But Jane was to go home with
her, and at Longbourn there would be leisure enough for observation. It was not without an effort, meanwhile, that she could wait even for Longbourn, before she told her
sister of Mr. Darcy's proposals. To know that she had the power of revealing what would so
exceedingly astonish Jane, and must, at the same time, so highly gratify whatever of her own vanity
she had not yet been able to reason away, was such a temptation to openness as nothing could have
conquered but the state of indecision in which she remained as to the extent of what she should
communicate; and her fear, if she once entered on the subject, of being hurried into repeating
something of Bingley which might only grieve her sister further. It was the second week in May, in which the three young ladies set out together from Gracechurch
Street for the town of --, in Hertfordshire; and, as they drew near the appointed inn where Mr.
Bennet's carriage was to meet them, they quickly perceived, in token of the coachman's punctuality,
both Kitty and Lydia looking out of a dining-room up stairs. These two girls had been above an hour
in the place, happily employed in visiting an opposite milliner, watching the sentinel on guard, and
dressing a salad and cucumber. After welcoming their sisters, they triumphantly displayed a table set out with such cold meat as an
inn larder usually affords, exclaiming, "Is not this nice? Is not this an agreeable surprise?" "And we mean to treat you all," added Lydia, "but you must lend us the money, for we have just
spent ours at the shop out there." Then, showing her purchases-"Look here, I have bought this
bonnet. I do not think it is very pretty; but I thought I might as well buy it as not. I shall pull it to
pieces as soon as I get home, and see if I can make it up any better." And when her sisters abused it as ugly, she added, with perfect unconcern, "Oh! but there were two
or three much uglier in the shop; and when I have bought some prettier-coloured satin to trim it with
fresh, I think it will be very tolerable. Besides, it will not much signify what one wears this summer,
after the --shire have left Meryton, and they are going in a fortnight." "Are they indeed!" cried Elizabeth, with the greatest satisfaction. "They are going to be encamped near Brighton; and I do so want papa to take us all there for the
summer! It would be such a delicious scheme; and I dare say would hardly cost anything at all. Mamma would like to go too of all things! Only think what a miserable summer else we shall have!" "Yes," thought Elizabeth, "that would be a delightful scheme indeed, and completely do for us at
once. Good Heaven! Brighton, and a whole campful of soldiers, to us, who have been overset already
by one poor regiment of militia, and the monthly balls of Meryton!" "Now I have got some news for you," said Lydia, as they sat down at table. "What do you think? It is
excellent news-capital news-and about a certain person we all like!" Jane and Elizabeth looked at each other, and the waiter was told he need not stay. Lydia laughed,
and said:
"Aye, that is just like your formality and discretion. You thought the waiter must not hear, as if he
cared! I dare say he often hears worse things said than I am going to say. But he is an ugly fellow! I
am glad he is gone. I never saw such a long chin in my life. Well, but now for my news; it is about
dear Wickham; too good for the waiter, is it not? There is no danger of Wickham's marrying Mary
King. There's for you! She is gone down to her uncle at Liverpool: gone to stay. Wickham is safe." "And Mary King is safe!" added Elizabeth; "safe from a connection imprudent as to fortune." "She is a great fool for going away, if she liked him." "But I hope there is no strong attachment on either side," said Jane. "I am sure there is not on his. I will answer for it, he never cared three straws about her-who could
about such a nasty little freckled thing?" Elizabeth was shocked to think that, however incapable of such coarseness of expression herself, the
coarseness of the sentiment was little other than her own breast had harboured and fancied liberal! As soon as all had ate, and the elder ones paid, the carriage was ordered; and after some
contrivance, the whole party, with all their boxes, work-bags, and parcels, and the unwelcome
addition of Kitty's and Lydia's purchases, were seated in it. "How nicely we are all crammed in," cried Lydia. "I am glad I bought my bonnet, if it is only for the
fun of having another bandbox! Well, now let us be quite comfortable and snug, and talk and laugh
all the way home. And in the first place, let us hear what has happened to you all since you went
away. Have you seen any pleasant men? Have you had any flirting? I was in great hopes that one of
you would have got a husband before you came back. Jane will be quite an old maid soon, I declare. She is almost three-and-twenty! Lord, how ashamed I should be of not being married before three-
and-twenty! My aunt Phillips wants you so to get husbands, you can't think. She says Lizzy had better
have taken Mr. Collins; but I do not think there would have been any fun in it. Lord! how I should like
to be married before any of you; and then I would chaperon you about to all the balls. Dear me! we
had such a good piece of fun the other day at Colonel Forster's. Kitty and me were to spend the day
there, and Mrs. Forster promised to have a little dance in the evening; (by the bye, Mrs. Forster and
me are such friends!) and so she asked the two Harringtons to come, but Harriet was ill, and so Pen
was forced to come by herself; and then, what do you think we did? We dressed up Chamberlayne in
woman's clothes on purpose to pass for a lady, only think what fun! Not a soul knew of it, but
Colonel and Mrs. Forster, and Kitty and me, except my aunt, for we were forced to borrow one of her
gowns; and you cannot imagine how well he looked! When Denny, and Wickham, and Pratt, and two
or three more of the men came in, they did not know him in the least. Lord! how I laughed! and so
did Mrs. Forster. I thought I should have died. And that made the men suspect something, and then
they soon found out what was the matter." With such kinds of histories of their parties and good jokes, did Lydia, assisted by Kitty's hints and
additions, endeavour to amuse her companions all the way to Longbourn. Elizabeth listened as little
as she could, but there was no escaping the frequent mention of Wickham's name. Their reception at home was most kind. Mrs. Bennet rejoiced to see Jane in undiminished beauty;
and more than once during dinner did Mr. Bennet say voluntarily to Elizabeth:
"I am glad you are come back, Lizzy." Their party in the dining-room was large, for almost all the Lucases came to meet Maria and hear the
news; and various were the subjects that occupied them: Lady Lucas was inquiring of Maria, after the
welfare and poultry of her eldest daughter; Mrs. Bennet was doubly engaged, on one hand collecting
an account of the present fashions from Jane, who sat some way below her, and, on the other,
retailing them all to the younger Lucases; and Lydia, in a voice rather louder than any other person's,
was enumerating the various pleasures of the morning to anybody who would hear her. "Oh! Mary," said she, "I wish you had gone with us, for we had such fun! As we went along, Kitty and
I drew up the blinds, and pretended there was nobody in the coach; and I should have gone so all the
way, if Kitty had not been sick; and when we got to the George, I do think we behaved very
handsomely, for we treated the other three with the nicest cold luncheon in the world, and if you
would have gone, we would have treated you too. And then when we came away it was such fun! I
thought we never should have got into the coach. I was ready to die of laughter. And then we were
so merry all the way home! we talked and laughed so loud, that anybody might have heard us ten
miles off!" To this Mary very gravely replied, "Far be it from me, my dear sister, to depreciate such pleasures! They would doubtless be congenial with the generality of female minds. But I confess they would
have no charms for me-I should infinitely prefer a book." But of this answer Lydia heard not a word. She seldom listened to anybody for more than half a
minute, and never attended to Mary at all. In the afternoon Lydia was urgent with the rest of the girls to walk to Meryton, and to see how
everybody went on; but Elizabeth steadily opposed the scheme. It should not be said that the Miss
Bennets could not be at home half a day before they were in pursuit of the officers. There was
another reason too for her opposition. She dreaded seeing Mr. Wickham again, and was resolved to
avoid it as long as possible. The comfort to her of the regiment's approaching removal was indeed
beyond expression. In a fortnight they were to go-and once gone, she hoped there could be nothing
more to plague her on his account. She had not been many hours at home before she found that the Brighton scheme, of which Lydia
had given them a hint at the inn, was under frequent discussion between her parents. Elizabeth saw
directly that her father had not the smallest intention of yielding; but his answers were at the same
time so vague and equivocal, that her mother, though often disheartened, had never yet despaired
of succeeding at last. Elizabeth's impatience to acquaint Jane with what had happened could no longer be overcome; and
at length, resolving to suppress every particular in which her sister was concerned, and preparing her
to be surprised, she related to her the next morning the chief of the scene between Mr. Darcy and
herself. Miss Bennet's astonishment was soon lessened by the strong sisterly partiality which made any
admiration of Elizabeth appear perfectly natural; and all surprise was shortly lost in other feelings. She was sorry that Mr. Darcy should have delivered his sentiments in a manner so little suited to
recommend them; but still more was she grieved for the unhappiness which her sister's refusal must
have given him. "His being so sure of succeeding was wrong," said she, "and certainly ought not to have appeared;
but consider how much it must increase his disappointment!" "Indeed," replied Elizabeth, "I am heartily sorry for him; but he has other feelings, which will
probably soon drive away his regard for me. You do not blame me, however, for refusing him?" "Blame you! Oh, no." "But you blame me for having spoken so warmly of Wickham?" "No-I do not know that you were wrong in saying what you did." "But you will know it, when I tell you what happened the very next day." She then spoke of the letter, repeating the whole of its contents as far as they concerned George
Wickham. What a stroke was this for poor Jane! who would willingly have gone through the world
without believing that so much wickedness existed in the whole race of mankind, as was here
collected in one individual. Nor was Darcy's vindication, though grateful to her feelings, capable of
consoling her for such discovery. Most earnestly did she labour to prove the probability of error, and
seek to clear the one without involving the other. "This will not do," said Elizabeth; "you never will be able to make both of them good for anything. Take your choice, but you must be satisfied with only one. There is but such a quantity of merit
between them; just enough to make one good sort of man; and of late it has been shifting about
pretty much. For my part, I am inclined to believe it all Darcy's; but you shall do as you choose." It was some time, however, before a smile could be extorted from Jane. "I do not know when I have been more shocked," said she. "Wickham so very bad! It is almost past
belief. And poor Mr. Darcy! Dear Lizzy, only consider what he must have suffered. Such a
disappointment! and with the knowledge of your ill opinion, too! and having to relate such a thing of
his sister! It is really too distressing. I am sure you must feel it so." "Oh! no, my regret and compassion are all done away by seeing you so full of both. I know you will
do him such ample justice, that I am growing every moment more unconcerned and indifferent. Your
profusion makes me saving; and if you lament over him much longer, my heart will be as light as a
feather." "Poor Wickham! there is such an expression of goodness in his countenance! such an openness and
gentleness in his manner!" "There certainly was some great mismanagement in the education of those two young men. One has
got all the goodness, and the other all the appearance of it." "I never thought Mr. Darcy so deficient in the appearance of it as you used to do."