Having thus gotten the thing determined upon, I then proposed that we
should have the work done by contract, and that notice should be given
publicly of such being our intent. Some boggling was made to this
proposal, it never having been the use and wont of the corporation, in
time past, to do any thing by contract, but just to put whatever was
required into the hands of one of the council, who got the work done in
the best way he could; by which loose manner of administration great
abuses were often allowed to pass unreproved. But I persisted in my
resolution to have the causey renewed by contract; and all the
inhabitants of the town gave me credit for introducing such a great
reformation into the management of public affairs. When it was made known that we would receive offers to contract, divers
persons came forward; and I was a little at a loss, when I saw such
competition, as to which ought to be preferred. At last, I bethought me,
to send for the different competitors, and converse with them on the
subject quietly; and I found in Thomas Shovel, the tacksman of Whinstone-
quarry, a discreet and considerate man. His offer was, it is true, not
so low as some of the others; but he had facilities to do the work
quickly, that none of the rest could pretend to; so, upon a clear
understanding of that, with the help of the dean of guild M'Lucre's
advocacy, Thomas Shovel got the contract. At first, I could not divine
what interest my old friend, the dean of guild, had to be so earnest in
behalf of the offering contractor; in course of time, however, it spunkit
out that he was a sleeping partner in the business, by which he made a
power of profit. But saving two three carts of stones to big a dyke
round the new steading which I had bought a short time before at the town-
end, I had no benefit whatever. Indeed, I may take it upon me to say,
that should not say it, few provosts, in so great a concern, could have
acted more on a principle than I did in this; and if Thomas Shovel, of
his free-will, did, at the instigation of the dean of guild, lay down the
stones on my ground as aforesaid, the town was not wronged; for, no
doubt, he paid me the compliment at some expense of his own profit. The repair of the kirk, the next job I took in hand, was not so easily
managed as that of the causey; for it seems, in former times, the whole
space of the area had been free to the parish in general, and that the
lofts were constructions, raised at the special expense of the heritors
for themselves. The fronts being for their families, and the back seats
for their servants and tenants. In those times there were no such things
as pews; but only forms, removeable, as I have heard say, at pleasure. It, however, happened, in the course of nature, that certain forms came
to be sabbathly frequented by the same persons; who, in this manner,
acquired a sort of prescriptive right to them. And those persons or
families, one after another, finding it would be an ease and convenience
to them during divine worship, put up backs to their forms. But still,
for many a year, there was no inclosure of pews; the first, indeed, that
made a pew, as I have been told, was one Archibald Rafter, a wright, and
the grandfather of Mr Rafter, the architect, who has had so much to do
with the edification of the new town of Edinburgh. This Archibald's form
happened to be near the door, on the left side of the pulpit; and in the
winter, when the wind was in the north, it was a very cold seat, which
induced him to inclose it round and round, with certain old doors and
shutters, which he had acquired in taking down and rebuilding the left
wing of the whinny hill house. The comfort in which this enabled him and
his family to listen to the worship, had an immediate effect; and the
example being of a taking nature, in the course of little more than
twenty years from the time, the whole area of the kirk had been pewed in
a very creditable manner. Families thus getting, as it were, portions of the church, some, when
removing from the town, gave them up to their neighbours on receiving a
consideration for the expense they had been at in making the pews; so
that, from less to more, the pews so formed became a lettable and a
vendible property. It was, therefore, thought a hard thing, that in the
reparation which the seats had come to require in my time, the heritors
and corporation should be obligated to pay the cost and expense of what
was so clearly the property of others; while it seemed an impossibility
to get the whole tot of the proprietors of the pews to bear the expense
of new-seating the kirk. We had in the council many a long and weighty
sederunt on the subject, without coming to any practical conclusion. At
last, I thought the best way, as the kirk was really become a disgrace to
the town, would be, for the corporation to undertake the repair entirely,
upon an understanding that we were to be paid eighteen pence a bottom-
room, per _annum_, by the proprietors of the pews; and, on sounding the
heritors, I found them all most willing to consent thereto, glad to be
relieved from the awful expense of gutting and replenishing such a great
concern as the kirk was. Accordingly the council having agreed to this
proposal, we had plans and estimates made, and notice given to the owners
of pews of our intention. The whole proceedings gave the greatest
satisfaction possible to the inhabitants in general, who lauded and
approved of my discernment more and more. By the estimate, it was found that the repairs would cost about a
thousand pounds; and by the plan, that the seats, at eighteen pence a
sitter, would yield better than a hundred pounds a-year; so that there
was no scruple, on the part of the town-council, in borrowing the money
wanted. This was the first public debt ever contracted by the
corporation, and people were very fain to get their money lodged at five
per cent. on such good security; in so much, that we had a great deal
more offered than we required at that time and epoch. The repair of the kirk was undertaken by contract with William Plane, the
joiner, with whom I was in terms at the time anent the bigging of a land
of houses on my new steading at the town-end. A most reasonable man in
all things he was, and in no concern of my own had I a better
satisfaction than in the house he built for me at the conjuncture when he
had the town's work in the kirk; but there was at that period among us a
certain person, of the name of Nabal Smeddum, a tobacconist by calling,
who, up to this season, had been regarded but as a droll and comical body
at a coothy crack. He was, in stature, of the lower order of mankind,
but endowed with an inclination towards corpulency, by which he had
acquired some show of a belly, and his face was round, and his cheeks
both red and sleeky. He was, however, in his personalities, chiefly
remarkable for two queer and twinkling little eyes, and for a habitual
custom of licking his lips whenever he said any thing of pith or
jocosity, or thought that he had done so, which was very often the case. In his apparel, as befitted his trade, he wore a suit of snuff-coloured
cloth, and a brown round-eared wig, that curled close in to his neck. Mr Smeddum, as I have related, was in some estimation for his comicality;
but he was a dure hand at an argument, and would not see the plainest
truth when it was not on his side of the debate. No occasion or cause,
however, had come to pass by which this inherent cross-grainedness was
stirred into action, till the affair of reseating the kirk--a measure, as
I have mentioned, which gave the best satisfaction; but it happened that,
on a Saturday night, as I was going soberly home from a meeting of the
magistrates in the clerk's chamber, I by chance recollected that I stood
in need of having my box replenished; and accordingly, in the most
innocent and harmless manner that it was possible for a man to do, I
stepped into this Mr Smeddum, the tobacconist's shop, and while he was
compounding my mixture from the two canisters that stood on his counter,
and I was in a manner doing nothing but looking at the number of
counterfeit sixpences and shillings that were nailed thereon as an
admonishment to his customers, he said to me, "So, provost, we're to hae
a new lining to the kirk. I wonder, when ye were at it, that ye didna
rather think of bigging another frae the fundament, for I'm thinking the
walls are no o' a capacity of strength to outlast this seating." Knowing, as I did, the tough temper of the body, I can attribute my
entering into an argument with him on the subject to nothing but some
inconsiderate infatuation; for when I said heedlessly, the walls are very
good, he threw the brass snuff-spoon with an ecstasy in to one of the
canisters, and lifting his two hands into a posture of admiration,--cried,
as if he had seen an unco--

"Good! surely, provost, ye hae na had an inspection; they're crackit in
divers places; they're shotten out wi' infirmity in others. In short,
the whole kirk, frae the coping to the fundament, is a fabric smitten wi'
a paralytic." "It's very extraordinar, Mr Smeddum," was my reply, "that nobody has seen
a' this but yoursel'." "Na, if ye will deny the fact, provost," quo' he, "it's o' no service for
me to say a word; but there has to a moral certainty been a slackness
somewhere, or how has it happened that the wa's were na subjected to a
right inspection before this job o' the seating?" By this time, I had seen the great error into the which I had fallen, by
entering on a confabulation with Mr Smeddum; so I said to him, "It' no a
matter for you and me to dispute about, so I'll thank you to fill my
box;" the which manner of putting an end to the debate he took very ill;
and after I left the shop, he laid the marrow of our discourse open to Mr
Threeper the writer, who by chance went in, like mysel', to get a supply
of rappee for the Sabbath. That limb of the law discerning a sediment of
litigation in the case, eggit on Mr Smeddum into a persuasion that the
seating of the kirk was a thing which the magistrates had no legal
authority to undertake. At this critical moment, my ancient adversary
and seeming friend, the dean of guild, happened to pass the door, and the
bickering snuff-man seeing him, cried to him to come in. It was a very
unfortunate occurrence; for Mr M'Lucre having a secret interest, as I
have intimated, in the Whinstone quarry, when he heard of taking down
walls and bigging them up again, he listened with greedy ears to the
dubieties of Mr Threeper, and loudly, and to the heart's content of Mr
Smeddum, condemned the frailty and infirmity of the kirk, as a building
in general. It would be overly tedious to mention, however, all the outs and ins of
the affair; but, from less to more, a faction was begotten, and grew to
head, and stirring among the inhabitants of the town, not only with
regard to the putting of new seats within the old walls, but likewise as
to the power of the magistrates to lay out any part of the public funds
in the reparation of the kirk; and the upshot was, a contribution among
certain malecontents, to enable Mr Threeper to consult on all the points. As in all similar cases, the parties applying for legal advice were
heartened into a plea by the opinion they got, and the town-council was
thrown into the greatest consternation by receiving notice that the
malecontents were going to extremities. Two things I saw it was obligational on me to urge forward; the one was
to go on still with the reparations, and the other to contest the law-
suit, although some were for waiting in the first case till the plea was
settled, and in the second to make no defence, but to give up our
intention anent the new-seating. But I thought that, as we had borrowed
the money for the repairs, we should proceed; and I had a vista that the
contribution raised by the Smeddumites, as they were caller, would run
out, being from their own pockets, whereas we fought with the public
purse in our hand; and by dint of exhortation to that effect, I carried
the majority to go into my plan, which in the end was most gratifying,
for the kirk was in a manner made as good as new, and the contributional
stock of the Smeddumites was entirely rookit by the lawyers, who would
fain have them to form another, assuring them that, no doubt, the legal
point was in their favour. But every body knows the uncertainty of a
legal opinion; and although the case was given up, for lack of a fund to
carry it on, there was a living ember of discontent left in its ashes,
ready to kindle into a flame on the first puff of popular
dissatisfaction. The spirit by which the Smeddumites were actuated in ecclesiastical
affairs, was a type and taste of the great distemper with which all the
world was, more or less, at the time inflamed, and which cast the ancient
state and monarchy of France into the perdition of anarchy and confusion. I think, upon the whole, however, that our royal burgh was not afflicted
to any very dangerous degree, though there was a sort of itch of it among
a few of the sedentary orders, such as the weavers and shoemakers, who,
by the nature of sitting long in one posture, are apt to become subject
to the flatulence of theoretical opinions; but although this was my
notion, yet knowing how much better the king and government were
acquainted with the true condition of things than I could to a certainty
be, I kept a steady eye on the proceedings of the ministers and
parliament at London, taking them for an index and model for the
management of the public concerns, which, by the grace of God, and the
handling of my friends, I was raised up and set forward to undertake. Seeing the great dread and anxiety that was above, as to the inordinate
liberty of the multitude, and how necessary it was to bridle popularity,
which was become rampant and ill to ride, kicking at all established
order, and trying to throw both king and nobles from the saddle, I
resolved to discountenance all tumultuous meetings, and to place every
reasonable impediment in the way of multitudes assembling together:
indeed, I had for many years been of opinion, that fairs were become a
great political evil to the regular shop-keepers, by reason of the
packmen, and other travelling merchants, coming with their wares and
under-selling us; so that both private interest and public principle
incited me on to do all in my power to bring our fair-days into
disrepute.