Immediately on our departure, I was delighted to find a change in Idris, which I fondly hoped
prognosticated the happiest results. All the cheerfulness and gentle gaiety natural to her revived. She
was weak, and this alteration was rather displayed in looks and voice than in acts; but it was
permanent and real. My recovery from the plague and confirmed health instilled into her a firm
belief that I was now secure from this dread enemy. She told me that she was sure she should
recover. That she had a presentiment, that the tide of calamity which deluged our unhappy race had
now turned. That the remnant would be preserved, and among them the dear objects of her tender
affection; and that in some selected spot we should wear out our lives together in pleasant society. "Do not let my state of feebleness deceive you," she said; "I feel that I am better; there is a quick life
within me, and a spirit of anticipation that assures me, that I shall continue long to make a part of
this world. I shall throw off this degrading weakness of body, which infects even my mind with
debility, and I shall enter again on the performance of my duties. I was sorry to leave Windsor: but
now I am weaned from this local attachment; I am content to remove to a mild climate, which will
complete my recovery. Trust me, dearest, I shall neither leave you, nor my brother, nor these dear
children; my firm determination to remain with you to the last, and to continue to contribute to your
happiness and welfare, would keep me alive, even if grim death were nearer at hand than he really
is." I was only half re-assured by these expressions; I could not believe that the over-quick flow of her
blood was a sign of health, or that her burning cheeks denoted convalescence. But I had no fears of
an immediate catastrophe; nay, I persuaded myself that she would ultimately recover. And thus
cheerfulness reigned in our little society. Idris conversed with animation on a thousand topics. Her
chief desire was to lead our thoughts from melancholy reflections; so she drew charming pictures of
a tranquil solitude, of a beauteous retreat, of the simple manners of our little tribe, and of the
patriarchal brotherhood of love, which would survive the ruins of the populous nations which had
lately existed. We shut out from our thoughts the present, and withdrew our eyes from the dreary
landscape we traversed. Winter reigned in all its gloom. The leafless trees lay without motion against
the dun sky; the forms of frost, mimicking the foliage of summer, strewed the ground; the paths
were overgrown; the unploughed cornfields were patched with grass and weeds; the sheep
congregated at the threshold of the cottage, the horned ox thrust his head from the window. The
wind was bleak, and frequent sleet or snow-storms, added to the melancholy appearance wintry
nature assumed. We arrived at Rochester, and an accident caused us to be detained there a day. During that time, a
circumstance occurred that changed our plans, and which, alas! in its result changed the eternal
course of events, turning me from the pleasant new sprung hope I enjoyed, to an obscure and
gloomy desert. But I must give some little explanation before I proceed with the final cause of our
temporary alteration of plan, and refer again to those times when man walked the earth fearless,
before Plague had become Queen of the World. There resided a family in the neighbourhood of Windsor, of very humble pretensions, but which had
been an object of interest to us on account of one of the persons of whom it was composed. The
family of the Claytons had known better days; but, after a series of reverses, the father died a
bankrupt, and the mother heartbroken, and a confirmed invalid, retired with her five children to a
little cottage between Eton and Salt Hill. The eldest of these children, who was thirteen years old,
seemed at once from the influence of adversity, to acquire the sagacity and principle belonging to a
more mature age. Her mother grew worse and worse in health, but Lucy attended on her, and was as
a tender parent to her younger brothers and sisters, and in the meantime shewed herself so good-
humoured, social, and benevolent, that she was beloved as well as honoured, in her little
neighbourhood. Lucy was besides extremely pretty; so when she grew to be sixteen, it was to be supposed,
notwithstanding her poverty, that she should have admirers. One of these was the son of a country-
curate; he was a generous, frank-hearted youth, with an ardent love of knowledge, and no mean
acquirements. Though Lucy was untaught, her mother's conversation and manners gave her a taste
for refinements superior to her present situation. She loved the youth even without knowing it,
except that in any difficulty she naturally turned to him for aid, and awoke with a lighter heart every
Sunday, because she knew that she would be met and accompanied by him in her evening walk with
her sisters. She had another admirer, one of the head-waiters at the inn at Salt Hill. He also was not
without pretensions to urbane superiority, such as he learnt from gentlemen's servants and waiting-
maids, who initiating him in all the slang of high life below stairs, rendered his arrogant temper ten
times more intrusive. Lucy did not disclaim him-she was incapable of that feeling; but she was sorry
when she saw him approach, and quietly resisted all his endeavours to establish an intimacy. The
fellow soon discovered that his rival was preferred to him; and this changed what was at first a
chance admiration into a passion, whose main springs were envy, and a base desire to deprive his
competitor of the advantage he enjoyed over himself. Poor Lucy's sad story was but a common one. Her lover's father died; and he was left destitute. He
accepted the offer of a gentleman to go to India with him, feeling secure that he should soon acquire
an independence, and return to claim the hand of his beloved. He became involved in the war carried
on there, was taken prisoner, and years elapsed before tidings of his existence were received in his
native land. In the meantime disastrous poverty came on Lucy. Her little cottage, which stood looking
from its trellice, covered with woodbine and jessamine, was burnt down; and the whole of their little
property was included in the destruction. Whither betake them? By what exertion of industry could
Lucy procure them another abode? Her mother nearly bed-rid, could not survive any extreme of
famine-struck poverty. At this time her other admirer stept forward, and renewed his offer of
marriage. He had saved money, and was going to set up a little inn at Datchet. There was nothing
alluring to Lucy in this offer, except the home it secured to her mother; and she felt more sure of
this, since she was struck by the apparent generosity which occasioned the present offer. She
accepted it; thus sacrificing herself for the comfort and welfare of her parent. It was some years after her marriage that we became acquainted with her. The accident of a storm
caused us to take refuge in the inn, where we witnessed the brutal and quarrelsome behaviour of her
husband, and her patient endurance. Her lot was not a fortunate one. Her first lover had returned
with the hope of making her his own, and met her by accident, for the first time, as the mistress of
his country inn, and the wife of another. He withdrew despairingly to foreign parts; nothing went
well with him; at last he enlisted, and came back again wounded and sick, and yet Lucy was debarred
from nursing him. Her husband's brutal disposition was aggravated by his yielding to the many
temptations held out by his situation, and the consequent disarrangement of his affairs. Fortunately
she had no children; but her heart was bound up in her brothers and sisters, and these his avarice
and ill temper soon drove from the house; they were dispersed about the country, earning their
livelihood with toil and care. He even shewed an inclination to get rid of her mother-but Lucy was
firm here-she had sacrificed herself for her; she lived for her -she would not part with her-if the
mother went, she would also go beg bread for her, die with her, but never desert her. The presence
of Lucy was too necessary in keeping up the order of the house, and in preventing the whole
establishment from going to wreck, for him to permit her to leave him. He yielded the point; but in
all accesses of anger, or in his drunken fits, he recurred to the old topic, and stung poor Lucy's heart
by opprobrious epithets bestowed on her parent. A passion however, if it be wholly pure, entire, and reciprocal, brings with it its own solace. Lucy was
truly, and from the depth of heart, devoted to her mother; the sole end she proposed to herself in
life, was the comfort and preservation of this parent. Though she grieved for the result, yet she did
not repent of her marriage, even when her lover returned to bestow competence on her. Three years
had intervened, and how, in their pennyless state, could her mother have existed during this time? This excellent woman was worthy of her child's devotion. A perfect confidence and friendship existed
between them; besides, she was by no means illiterate; and Lucy, whose mind had been in some
degree cultivated by her former lover, now found in her the only person who could understand and
appreciate her. Thus, though suffering, she was by no means desolate, and when, during fine
summer days, she led her mother into the flowery and shady lanes near their abode, a gleam of
unmixed joy enlightened her countenance; she saw that her parent was happy, and she knew that
this happiness was of her sole creating. Meanwhile her husband's affairs grew more and more involved; ruin was near at hand, and she was
about to lose the fruit of all her labours, when pestilence came to change the aspect of the world. Her husband reaped benefit from the universal misery; but, as the disaster encreased, the spirit of
lawlessness seized him; he deserted his home to revel in the luxuries promised him in London, and
found there a grave. Her former lover had been one of the first victims of the disease. But Lucy
continued to live for and in her mother. Her courage only failed when she dreaded peril for her
parent, or feared that death might prevent her from performing those duties to which she was
unalterably devoted. When we had quitted Windsor for London, as the previous step to our final emigration, we visited
Lucy, and arranged with her the plan of her own and her mother's removal. Lucy was sorry at the
necessity which forced her to quit her native lanes and village, and to drag an infirm parent from her
comforts at home, to the homeless waste of depopulate earth; but she was too well disciplined by
adversity, and of too sweet a temper, to indulge in repinings at what was inevitable. Subsequent circumstances, my illness and that of Idris, drove her from our remembrance; and we
called her to mind at last, only to conclude that she made one of the few who came from Windsor to
join the emigrants, and that she was already in Paris. When we arrived at Rochester therefore, we
were surprised to receive, by a man just come from Slough, a letter from this exemplary sufferer. His
account was, that, journeying from his home, and passing through Datchet, he was surprised to see
smoke issue from the chimney of the inn, and supposing that he should find comrades for his journey
assembled there, he knocked and was admitted. There was no one in the house but Lucy, and her
mother; the latter had been deprived of the use of her limbs by an attack of rheumatism, and so, one
by one, all the remaining inhabitants of the country set forward, leaving them alone. Lucy intreated
the man to stay with her; in a week or two her mother would be better, and they would then set out;
but they must perish, if they were left thus helpless and forlorn. The man said, that his wife and
children were already among the emigrants, and it was therefore, according to his notion, impossible
for him to remain. Lucy, as a last resource, gave him a letter for Idris, to be delivered to her wherever
he should meet us. This commission at least he fulfilled, and Idris received with emotion the
following letter:-
"HONOURED LADY,
"I am sure that you will remember and pity me, and I dare hope that you will assist me; what other
hope have I? Pardon my manner of writing, I am so bewildered. A month ago my dear mother was
deprived of the use of her limbs. She is already better, and in another month would I am sure be able
to travel, in the way you were so kind as to say you would arrange for us. But now everybody is
gone-everybody-as they went away, each said, that perhaps my mother would be better, before
we were quite deserted. But three days ago I went to Samuel Woods, who, on account of his new-
born child, remained to the last; and there being a large family of them, I thought I could persuade
them to wait a little longer for us; but I found the house deserted. I have not seen a soul since, till
this good man came. -What will become of us? My mother does not know our state; she is so ill,
that I have hidden it from her. "Will you not send some one to us? I am sure we must perish miserably as we are. If I were to try to
move my mother now, she would die on the road; and if, when she gets better, I were able, I cannot
guess how, to find out the roads, and get on so many many miles to the sea, you would all be in
France, and the great ocean would be between us, which is so terrible even to sailors. What would it
be to me, a woman, who never saw it? We should be imprisoned by it in this country, all, all alone,
with no help; better die where we are. I can hardly write-I cannot stop my tears-it is not for
myself; I could put my trust in God; and let the worst come, I think I could bear it, if I were alone. But
my mother, my sick, my dear, dear mother, who never, since I was born, spoke a harsh word to me,
who has been patient in many sufferings; pity her, dear Lady, she must die a miserable death if you
do not pity her. People speak carelessly of her, because she is old and infirm, as if we must not all, if
we are spared, become so; and then, when the young are old themselves, they will think that they
ought to be taken care of. It is very silly of me to write in this way to you; but, when I hear her trying
not to groan, and see her look smiling on me to comfort me, when I know she is in pain; and when I
think that she does not know the worst, but she soon must; and then she will not complain; but I
shall sit guessing at all that she is dwelling upon, of famine and misery-I feel as if my heart must
break, and I do not know what I say or do; my mother-mother for whom I have borne much, God
preserve you from this fate! Preserve her, Lady, and He will bless you; and I, poor miserable creature
as I am, will thank you and pray for you while I live. "Your unhappy and dutiful servant,
"Dec. 30th, 2097. LUCY MARTIN." This letter deeply affected Idris, and she instantly proposed, that we should return to Datchet, to
assist Lucy and her mother. I said that I would without delay set out for that place, but entreated her
to join her brother, and there await my return with the children. But Idris was in high spirits, and full
of hope. She declared that she could not consent even to a temporary separation from me, but that
there was no need of this, the motion of the carriage did her good, and the distance was too trifling
to be considered. We could dispatch messengers to Adrian, to inform him of our deviation from the
original plan. She spoke with vivacity, and drew a picture after her own dear heart, of the pleasure
we should bestow upon Lucy, and declared, if I went, she must accompany me, and that she should
very much dislike to entrust the charge of rescuing them to others, who might fulfil it with coldness
or inhumanity. Lucy's life had been one act of devotion and virtue; let her now reap the small reward
of finding her excellence appreciated, and her necessity assisted, by those whom she respected and
honoured. These, and many other arguments, were urged with gentle pertinacity, and the ardour of a wish to
do all the good in her power, by her whose simple expression of a desire and slightest request had
ever been a law with me. I, of course, consented, the moment that I saw that she had set her heart
upon this step. We sent half our attendant troop on to Adrian; and with the other half our carriage
took a retrograde course back to Windsor. I wonder now how I could be so blind and senseless, as thus to risk the safety of Idris; for, if I had
eyes, surely I could see the sure, though deceitful, advance of death in her burning cheek and
encreasing weakness. But she said she was better; and I believed her. Extinction could not be near a
being, whose vivacity and intelligence hourly encreased, and whose frame was endowed with an
intense, and I fondly thought, a strong and permanent spirit of life. Who, after a great disaster, has
not looked back with wonder at his inconceivable obtuseness of understanding, that could not
perceive the many minute threads with which fate weaves the inextricable net of our destinies, until
he is inmeshed completely in it? The cross roads which we now entered upon, were even in a worse state than the long neglected
high-ways; and the inconvenience seemed to menace the perishing frame of Idris with destruction. Passing through Dartford, we arrived at Hampton on the second day. Even in this short interval my
beloved companion grew sensibly worse in health, though her spirits were still light, and she cheered
my growing anxiety with gay sallies; sometimes the thought pierced my brain-Is she dying?-as I
saw her fair fleshless hand rest on mine, or observed the feebleness with which she performed the
accustomed acts of life. I drove away the idea, as if it had been suggested by insanity; but it occurred
again and again, only to be dispelled by the continued liveliness of her manner. About mid-day, after quitting Hampton, our carriage broke down: the shock caused Idris to faint, but
on her reviving no other ill consequence ensued; our party of attendants had as usual gone on before
us, and our coachman went in search of another vehicle, our former one being rendered by this
accident unfit for service. The only place near us was a poor village, in which he found a kind of
caravan, able to hold four people, but it was clumsy and ill hung; besides this he found a very
excellent cabriolet: our plan was soon arranged; I would drive Idris in the latter; while the children
were conveyed by the servant in the former. But these arrangements cost time; we had agreed to
proceed that night to Windsor, and thither our purveyors had gone: we should find considerable
difficulty in getting accommodation, before we reached this place; after all, the distance was only ten
miles; my horse was a good one; I would go forward at a good pace with Idris, leaving the children to
follow at a rate more consonant to the uses of their cumberous machine. Evening closed in quickly, far more quickly than I was prepared to expect. At the going down of the
sun it began to snow heavily. I attempted in vain to defend my beloved companion from the storm;
the wind drove the snow in our faces; and it lay so high on the ground, that we made but small way;
while the night was so dark, that but for the white covering on the ground we should not have been
able to see a yard before us. We had left our accompanying caravan far behind us; and now I
perceived that the storm had made me unconsciously deviate from my intended route. I had gone
some miles out of my way. My knowledge of the country enabled me to regain the right road; but,
instead of going, as at first agreed upon, by a cross road through Stanwell to Datchet, I was obliged to
take the way of Egham and Bishopgate. It was certain therefore that I should not be rejoined by the
other vehicle, that I should not meet a single fellow-creature till we arrived at Windsor. The back of our carriage was drawn up, and I hung a pelisse before it, thus to curtain the beloved
sufferer from the pelting sleet. She leaned on my shoulder, growing every moment more languid and
feeble; at first she replied to my words of cheer with affectionate thanks; but by degrees she sunk
into silence; her head lay heavily upon me; I only knew that she lived by her irregular breathing and
frequent sighs. For a moment I resolved to stop, and, opposing the back of the cabriolet to the force
of the tempest, to expect morning as well as I might. But the wind was bleak and piercing, while the
occasional shudderings of my poor Idris, and the intense cold I felt myself, demonstrated that this
would be a dangerous experiment. At length methought she slept-fatal sleep, induced by frost: at
this moment I saw the heavy outline of a cottage traced on the dark horizon close to us: "Dearest
love," I said, "support yourself but one moment, and we shall have shelter; let us stop here, that I
may open the door of this blessed dwelling." As I spoke, my heart was transported, and my senses swam with excessive delight and thankfulness; I
placed the head of Idris against the carriage, and, leaping out, scrambled through the snow to the
cottage, whose door was open. I had apparatus about me for procuring light, and that shewed me a
comfortable room, with a pile of wood in one corner, and no appearance of disorder, except that,
the door having been left partly open, the snow, drifting in, had blocked up the threshold. I returned
to the carriage, and the sudden change from light to darkness at first blinded me. When I recovered
my sight-eternal God of this lawless world! O supreme Death! I will not disturb thy silent reign, or
mar my tale with fruitless exclamations of horror-I saw Idris, who had fallen from the seat to the
bottom of the carriage; her head, its long hair pendent, with one arm, hung over the side.-Struck by
a spasm of horror, I lifted her up; her heart was pulseless, her faded lips unfanned by the slightest
breath. I carried her into the cottage; I placed her on the bed. Lighting a fire, I chafed her stiffening limbs; for
two long hours I sought to restore departed life; and, when hope was as dead as my beloved, I closed
with trembling hands her glazed eyes. I did not doubt what I should now do. In the confusion
attendant on my illness, the task of interring our darling Alfred had devolved on his grandmother, the
Ex-Queen, and she, true to her ruling passion, had caused him to be carried to Windsor, and buried in
the family vault, in St. George's Chapel. I must proceed to Windsor, to calm the anxiety of Clara, who
would wait anxiously for us-yet I would fain spare her the heart-breaking spectacle of Idris, brought
in by me lifeless from the journey. So first I would place my beloved beside her child in the vault, and
then seek the poor children who would be expecting me. I lighted the lamps of my carriage; I wrapt her in furs, and placed her along the seat; then taking the
reins, made the horses go forward. We proceeded through the snow, which lay in masses impeding
the way, while the descending flakes, driving against me with redoubled fury, blinded me. The pain
occasioned by the angry elements, and the cold iron of the shafts of frost which buffetted me, and
entered my aching flesh, were a relief to me; blunting my mental suffering. The horses staggered on,
and the reins hung loosely in my hands. I often thought I would lay my head close to the sweet, cold
face of my lost angel, and thus resign myself to conquering torpor. Yet I must not leave her a prey to
the fowls of the air; but, in pursuance of my determination place her in the tomb of her forefathers,
where a merciful God might permit me to rest also. The road we passed through Egham was familiar to me; but the wind and snow caused the horses to
drag their load slowly and heavily. Suddenly the wind veered from south-west to west, and then
again to north-west. As Sampson with tug and strain stirred from their bases the columns that
supported the Philistine temple, so did the gale shake the dense vapours propped on the horizon,
while the massy dome of clouds fell to the south, disclosing through the scattered web the clear
empyrean, and the little stars, which were set at an immeasurable distance in the crystalline fields,
showered their small rays on the glittering snow. Even the horses were cheered, and moved on with
renovated strength. We entered the forest at Bishopgate, and at the end of the Long Walk I saw the
Castle, "the proud Keep of Windsor, rising in the majesty of proportion, girt with the double belt of
its kindred and coeval towers." I looked with reverence on a structure, ancient almost as the rock on
which it stood, abode of kings, theme of admiration for the wise. With greater reverence and, tearful
affection I beheld it as the asylum of the long lease of love I had enjoyed there with the perishable,
unmatchable treasure of dust, which now lay cold beside me. Now indeed, I could have yielded to all
the softness of my nature, and wept; and, womanlike, have uttered bitter plaints; while the familiar
trees, the herds of living deer, the sward oft prest by her fairy-feet, one by one with sad association
presented themselves. The white gate at the end of the Long Walk was wide open, and I rode up the
empty town through the first gate of the feudal tower; and now St. George's Chapel, with its
blackened fretted sides, was right before me. I halted at its door, which was open; I entered, and
placed my lighted lamp on the altar; then I returned, and with tender caution I bore Idris up the aisle
into the chancel, and laid her softly down on the carpet which covered the step leading to the
communion table. The banners of the knights of the garter, and their half drawn swords, were hung
in vain emblazonry above the stalls. The banner of her family hung there, still surmounted by its regal
crown. Farewell to the glory and heraldry of England!-I turned from such vanity with a slight feeling
of wonder, at how mankind could have ever been interested in such things. I bent over the lifeless
corpse of my beloved; and, while looking on her uncovered face, the features already contracted by
the rigidity of death, I felt as if all the visible universe had grown as soulless, inane, and comfortless
as the clay-cold image beneath me. I felt for a moment the intolerable sense of struggle with, and
detestation for, the laws which govern the world; till the calm still visible on the face of my dead love
recalled me to a more soothing tone of mind, and I proceeded to fulfil the last office that could now
be paid her. For her I could not lament, so much I envied her enjoyment of "the sad immunities of
the grave." The vault had been lately opened to place our Alfred therein. The ceremony customary in these
latter days had been cursorily performed, and the pavement of the chapel, which was its entrance,
having been removed, had not been replaced. I descended the steps, and walked through the long
passage to the large vault which contained the kindred dust of my Idris. I distinguished the small
coffin of my babe. With hasty, trembling hands I constructed a bier beside it, spreading it with the
furs and Indian shawls, which had wrapt Idris in her journey thither. I lighted the glimmering lamp,
which flickered in this damp abode of the dead; then I bore my lost one to her last bed, decently
composing her limbs, and covering them with a mantle, veiling all except her face, which remained
lovely and placid. She appeared to rest like one over-wearied, her beauteous eyes steeped in sweet
slumber. Yet, so it was not-she was dead! How intensely I then longed to lie down beside her, to
gaze till death should gather me to the same repose. But death does not come at the bidding of the miserable. I had lately recovered from mortal illness,
and my blood had never flowed with such an even current, nor had my limbs ever been so instinct
with quick life, as now. I felt that my death must be voluntary. Yet what more natural than famine, as
I watched in this chamber of mortality, placed in a world of the dead, beside the lost hope of my life? Meanwhile as I looked on her, the features, which bore a sisterly resemblance to Adrian, brought my
thoughts back again to the living, to this dear friend, to Clara, and to Evelyn, who were probably now
in Windsor, waiting anxiously for our arrival. Methought I heard a noise, a step in the far chapel, which was re-echoed by its vaulted roof, and
borne to me through the hollow passages. Had Clara seen my carriage pass up the town, and did she
seek me here? I must save her at least from the horrible scene the vault presented. I sprung up the
steps, and then saw a female figure, bent with age, and clad in long mourning robes, advance
through the dusky chapel, supported by a slender cane, yet tottering even with this support. She
heard me, and looked up; the lamp I held illuminated my figure, and the moon-beams, struggling
through the painted glass, fell upon her face, wrinkled and gaunt, yet with a piercing eye and
commanding brow-I recognized the Countess of Windsor. With a hollow voice she asked, "Where is
the princess?" I pointed to the torn up pavement: she walked to the spot, and looked down into the palpable
darkness; for the vault was too distant for the rays of the small lamp I had left there to be discernible. "Your light," she said. I gave it her; and she regarded the now visible, but precipitous steps, as if
calculating her capacity to descend. Instinctively I made a silent offer of my assistance. She motioned
me away with a look of scorn, saying in an harsh voice, as she pointed downwards, "There at least I
may have her undisturbed." She walked deliberately down, while I, overcome, miserable beyond words, or tears, or groans, threw
myself on the pavement near-the stiffening form of Idris was before me, the death-struck
countenance hushed in eternal repose beneath. That was to me the end of all! The day before, I had
figured to my self various adventures, and communion with my friends in after time-now I had leapt
the interval, and reached the utmost edge and bourne of life. Thus wrapt in gloom, enclosed, walled
up, vaulted over by the omnipotent present, I was startled by the sound of feet on the steps of the
tomb, and I remembered her whom I had utterly forgotten, my angry visitant; her tall form slowly
rose upwards from the vault, a living statue, instinct with hate, and human, passionate strife: she
seemed to me as having reached the pavement of the aisle; she stood motionless, seeking with her
eyes alone, some desired object-till, perceiving me close to her, she placed her wrinkled hand on
my arm, exclaiming with tremulous accents, "Lionel Verney, my son!" This name, applied at such a
moment by my angel's mother, instilled into me more respect than I had ever before felt for this
disdainful lady. I bowed my head, and kissed her shrivelled hand, and, remarking that she trembled
violently, supported her to the end of the chancel, where she sat on the steps that led to the regal
stall. She suffered herself to be led, and still holding my hand, she leaned her head back against the
stall, while the moon beams, tinged with various colours by the painted glass, fell on her glistening
eyes; aware of her weakness, again calling to mind her long cherished dignity, she dashed the tears
away; yet they fell fast, as she said, for excuse, "She is so beautiful and placid, even in death. No
harsh feeling ever clouded her serene brow; how did I treat her? wounding her gentle heart with
savage coldness; I had no compassion on her in past years, does she forgive me now? Little, little
does it boot to talk of repentance and forgiveness to the dead, had I during her life once consulted
her gentle wishes, and curbed my rugged nature to do her pleasure, I should not feel thus." Idris and her mother were unlike in person. The dark hair, deep-set black eyes, and prominent
features of the Ex-Queen were in entire contrast to the golden tresses, the full blue orbs, and the soft
lines and contour of her daughter's countenance. Yet, in latter days, illness had taken from my poor
girl the full outline of her face, and reduced it to the inflexible shape of the bone beneath. In the
form of her brow, in her oval chin, there was to be found a resemblance to her mother; nay in some
moods, their gestures were not unlike; nor, having lived so long together, was this wonderful. There is a magic power in resemblance. When one we love dies, we hope to see them in another
state, and half expect that the agency of mind will inform its new garb in imitation of its decayed
earthly vesture. But these are ideas of the mind only. We know that the instrument is shivered, the
sensible image lies in miserable fragments, dissolved to dusty nothingness; a look, a gesture, or a
fashioning of the limbs similar to the dead in a living person, touches a thrilling chord, whose sacred
harmony is felt in the heart's dearest recess. Strangely moved, prostrate before this spectral image,
and enslaved by the force of blood manifested in likeness of look and movement, I remained
trembling in the presence of the harsh, proud, and till now unloved mother of Idris. Poor, mistaken woman! in her tenderest mood before, she had cherished the idea, that a word, a
look of reconciliation from her, would be received with joy, and repay long years of severity. Now
that the time was gone for the exercise of such power, she fell at once upon the thorny truth of
things, and felt that neither smile nor caress could penetrate to the unconscious state, or influence
the happiness of her who lay in the vault beneath. This conviction, together with the remembrance
of soft replies to bitter speeches, of gentle looks repaying angry glances; the perception of the
falsehood, paltryness and futility of her cherished dreams of birth and power; the overpowering
knowledge, that love and life were the true emperors of our mortal state; all, as a tide, rose, and
filled her soul with stormy and bewildering confusion. It fell to my lot, to come as the influential
power, to allay the fierce tossing of these tumultuous waves. I spoke to her; I led her to reflect how
happy Idris had really been, and how her virtues and numerous excellencies had found scope and
estimation in her past career. I praised her, the idol of my heart's dear worship, the admired type of
feminine perfection. With ardent and overflowing eloquence, I relieved my heart from its burthen,
and awoke to the sense of a new pleasure in life, as I poured forth the funeral eulogy. Then I referred
to Adrian, her loved brother, and to her surviving child. I declared, which I had before almost
forgotten, what my duties were with regard to these valued portions of herself, and bade the
melancholy repentant mother reflect, how she could best expiate unkindness towards the dead, by
redoubled love of the survivors. Consoling her, my own sorrows were assuaged; my sincerity won her
entire conviction. She turned to me. The hard, inflexible, persecuting woman, turned with a mild expression of face,
and said, "If our beloved angel sees us now, it will delight her to find that I do you even tardy justice. You were worthy of her; and from my heart I am glad that you won her away from me. Pardon, my
son, the many wrongs I have done you; forget my bitter words and unkind treatment-take me, and
govern me as you will." I seized this docile moment to propose our departure from the church. "First," she said, "let us replace the pavement above the vault." We drew near to it; "Shall we look on her again?" I asked. "I cannot," she replied, "and, I pray you, neither do you. We need not torture ourselves by gazing on
the soulless body, while her living spirit is buried quick in our hearts, and her surpassing loveliness is
so deeply carved there, that sleeping or waking she must ever be present to us." For a few moments, we bent in solemn silence over the open vault. I consecrated my future life, to
the embalming of her dear memory; I vowed to serve her brother and her child till death. The
convulsive sob of my companion made me break off my internal orisons. I next dragged the stones
over the entrance of the tomb, and closed the gulph that contained the life of my life. Then,
supporting my decrepid fellow-mourner, we slowly left the chapel. I felt, as I stepped into the open
air, as if I had quitted an happy nest of repose, for a dreary wilderness, a tortuous path, a bitter,
joyless, hopeless pilgrimage. OUR escort had been directed to prepare our abode for the night at the inn, opposite the ascent to
the Castle. We could not again visit the halls and familiar chambers of our home, on a mere visit. We
had already left for ever the glades of Windsor, and all of coppice, flowery hedgerow, and murmuring
stream, which gave shape and intensity to the love of our country, and the almost superstitious
attachment with which we regarded native England. It had been our intention to have called at Lucy's
dwelling in Datchet, and to have re-assured her with promises of aid and protection before we
repaired to our quarters for the night. Now, as the Countess of Windsor and I turned down the steep
hill that led from the Castle, we saw the children, who had just stopped in their caravan, at the inn-
door. They had passed through Datchet without halting. I dreaded to meet them, and to be the
bearer of my tragic story, so while they were still occupied in the hurry of arrival, I suddenly left
them, and through the snow and clear moon-light air, hastened along the well known road to
Datchet. Well known indeed it was. Each cottage stood on its accustomed site, each tree wore its familiar
appearance. Habit had graven uneraseably on my memory, every turn and change of object on the
road. At a short distance beyond the Little Park, was an elm half blown down by a storm, some ten
years ago; and still, with leafless snow-laden branches, it stretched across the pathway, which wound
through a meadow, beside a shallow brook, whose brawling was silenced by frost-that stile, that
white gate, that hollow oak tree, which doubtless once belonged to the forest, and which now
shewed in the moonlight its gaping rent; to whose fanciful appearance, tricked out by the dusk into a
resemblance of the human form, the children had given the name of Falstaff;-all these objects were
as well known to me as the cold hearth of my deserted home, and every moss-grown wall and plot of
orchard ground, alike as twin lambs are to each other in a stranger's eye, yet to my accustomed gaze
bore differences, distinction, and a name. England remained, though England was dead-it was the
ghost of merry England that I beheld, under those greenwood shade passing generations had sported
in security and ease. To this painful recognition of familiar places, was added a feeling experienced
by all, understood by none-a feeling as if in some state, less visionary than a dream, in some past
real existence, I had seen all I saw, with precisely the same feelings as I now beheld them-as if all
my sensations were a duplex mirror of a former revelation. To get rid of this oppressive sense I strove
to imagine change in this tranquil spot-this augmented my mood, by causing me to bestow more
attention on the objects which occasioned me pain. I reached Datchet and Lucy's humble abode-once noisy with Saturday night revellers, or trim and
neat on Sunday morning it had borne testimony to the labours and orderly habits of the housewife. The snow lay high about the door, as if it had remained unclosed for many days. "What scene of death hath Roscius now to act?" I muttered to myself as I looked at the dark
casements. At first I thought I saw a light in one of them, but it proved to be merely the refraction of
the moon-beams, while the only sound was the crackling branches as the breeze whirred the snow
flakes from them-the moon sailed high and unclouded in the interminable ether, while the shadow
of the cottage lay black on the garden behind. I entered this by the open wicket, and anxiously
examined each window. At length I detected a ray of light struggling through a closed shutter in one
of the upper rooms-it was a novel feeling, alas! to look at any house and say there dwells its usual
inmate-the door of the house was merely on the latch: so I entered and ascended the moon-lit
staircase. The door of the inhabited room was ajar: looking in, I saw Lucy sitting as at work at the
table on which the light stood; the implements of needlework were about her, but her hand had
fallen on her lap, and her eyes, fixed on the ground, shewed by their vacancy that her thoughts
wandered. Traces of care and watching had diminished her former attractions-but her simple dress
and cap, her desponding attitude, and the single candle that cast its light upon her, gave for a
moment a picturesque grouping to the whole. A fearful reality recalled me from the thought-a
figure lay stretched on the bed covered by a sheet-her mother was dead, and Lucy, apart from all
the world, deserted and alone, watched beside the corpse during the weary night. I entered the
room, and my unexpected appearance at first drew a scream from the lone survivor of a dead nation;
but she recognised me, and recovered herself, with the quick exercise of self-control habitual to her. "Did you not expect me?" I asked, in that low voice which the presence of the dead makes us as it
were instinctively assume. "You are very good," replied she, "to have come yourself; I can never thank you sufficiently; but it is
too late." "Too late," cried I, "what do you mean? It is not too late to take you from this deserted place, and
conduct you to--"
My own loss, which I had forgotten as I spoke, now made me turn away, while choking grief impeded
my speech. I threw open the window, and looked on the cold, waning, ghastly, misshaped circle on
high, and the chill white earth beneath-did the spirit of sweet Idris sail along the moon-frozen
crystal air?-No, no, a more genial atmosphere, a lovelier habitation was surely hers! I indulged in this meditation for a moment, and then again addressed the mourner, who stood
leaning against the bed with that expression of resigned despair, of complete misery, and a patient
sufferance of it, which is far more touching than any of the insane ravings or wild gesticulation of
untamed sorrow. I desired to draw her from this spot; but she opposed my wish. That class of
persons whose imagination and sensibility have never been taken out of the narrow circle
immediately in view, if they possess these qualities to any extent, are apt to pour their influence into
the very realities which appear to destroy them, and to cling to these with double tenacity from not
being able to comprehend any thing beyond. Thus Lucy, in desert England, in a dead world, wished to
fulfil the usual ceremonies of the dead, such as were customary to the English country people, when
death was a rare visitant, and gave us time to receive his dreaded usurpation with pomp and
circumstance-going forth in procession to deliver the keys of the tomb into his conquering hand. She had already, alone as she was, accomplished some of these, and the work on which I found her
employed, was her mother's shroud. My heart sickened at such detail of woe, which a female can
endure, but which is more painful to the masculine spirit than deadliest struggle, or throes of
unutterable but transient agony. This must not be, I told her; and then, as further inducement, I communicated to her my recent loss,
and gave her the idea that she must come with me to take charge of the orphan children, whom the
death of Idris had deprived of a mother's care. Lucy never resisted the call of a duty, so she yielded,
and closing the casements and doors with care, she accompanied me back to Windsor. As we went
she communicated to me the occasion of her mother's death. Either by some mischance she had got
sight of Lucy's letter to Idris, or she had overheard her conversation with the countryman who bore
it; however it might be, she obtained a knowledge of the appalling situation of herself and her
daughter, her aged frame could not sustain the anxiety and horror this discovery instilled-she
concealed her knowledge from Lucy, but brooded over it through sleepless nights, till fever and
delirium, swift forerunners of death, disclosed the secret. Her life, which had long been hovering on
its extinction, now yielded at once to the united effects of misery and sickness, and that same
morning she had died. After the tumultuous emotions of the day, I was glad to find on my arrival at the inn that my
companions had retired to rest. I gave Lucy in charge to the Countess's attendant, and then sought
repose from my various struggles and impatient regrets. For a few moments the events of the day
floated in disastrous pageant through my brain, till sleep bathed it in forgetfulness; when morning
dawned and I awoke, it seemed as if my slumber had endured for years. My companions had not shared my oblivion. Clara's swollen eyes shewed that she has passed the
night in weeping. The Countess looked haggard and wan. Her firm spirit had not found relief in tears,
and she suffered the more from all the painful retrospect and agonizing regret that now occupied
her. We departed from Windsor, as soon as the burial rites had been performed for Lucy's mother,
and, urged on by an impatient desire to change the scene, went forward towards Dover with speed,
our escort having gone before to provide horses; finding them either in the warm stables they
instinctively sought during the cold weather, or standing shivering in the bleak fields ready to
surrender their liberty in exchange for offered corn. During our ride the Countess recounted to me the extraordinary circumstances which had brought
her so strangely to my side in the chancel of St. George's chapel. When last she had taken leave of
Idris, as she looked anxiously on her faded person and pallid countenance, she had suddenly been
visited by a conviction that she saw her for the last time. It was hard to part with her while under the
dominion of this sentiment, and for the last time she endeavoured to persuade her daughter to
commit herself to her nursing, permitting me to join Adrian. Idris mildly refused, and thus they
separated. The idea that they should never again meet grew on the Countess's mind, and haunted
her perpetually; a thousand times she had resolved to turn back and join us, and was again and again
restrained by the pride and anger of which she was the slave. Proud of heart as she was, she bathed
her pillow with nightly tears, and through the day was subdued by nervous agitation and expectation
of the dreaded event, which she was wholly incapable of curbing. She confessed that at this period
her hatred of me knew no bounds, since she considered me as the sole obstacle to the fulfilment of
her dearest wish, that of attending upon her daughter in her last moments. She desired to express
her fears to her son, and to seek consolation from his sympathy with, or courage from his rejection
of, her auguries. On the first day of her arrival at Dover she walked with him on the sea beach, and with the timidity
characteristic of passionate and exaggerated feeling was by degrees bringing the conversation to the
desired point, when she could communicate her fears to him, when the messenger who bore my
letter announcing our temporary return to Windsor, came riding down to them. He gave some oral
account of how he had left us, and added, that notwithstanding the cheerfulness and good courage
of Lady Idris, he was afraid that she would hardly reach Windsor alive. "True," said the Countess,
"your fears are just, she is about to expire!" As she spoke, her eyes were fixed on a tomblike hollow of the cliff, and she saw, she averred the
same to me with solemnity, Idris pacing slowly towards this cave. She was turned from her, her head
was bent down, her white dress was such as she was accustomed to wear, except that a thin crape-
like veil covered her golden tresses, and concealed her as a dim transparent mist. She looked
dejected, as docilely yielding to a commanding power; she submissively entered, and was lost in the
dark recess. "Were I subject to visionary moods," said the venerable lady, as she continued her narrative, "I might
doubt my eyes, and condemn my credulity; but reality is the world I live in, and what I saw I doubt
not had existence beyond myself. From that moment I could not rest; it was worth my existence to
see her once again before she died; I knew that I should not accomplish this, yet I must endeavour. I
immediately departed for Windsor; and, though I was assured that we travelled speedily, it seemed
to me that our progress was snail-like, and that delays were created solely for my annoyance. Still I
accused you, and heaped on your head the fiery ashes of my burning impatience. It was no
disappointment, though an agonizing pang, when you pointed to her last abode; and words would ill
express the abhorrence I that moment felt towards you, the triumphant impediment to my dearest
wishes. I saw her, and anger, and hate, and injustice died at her bier, giving place at their departure
to a remorse (Great God, that I should feel it!) which must last while memory and feeling endure." To medicine such remorse, to prevent awakening love and new-born mildness from producing the
same bitter fruit that hate and harshness had done, I devoted all my endeavours to soothe the
venerable penitent. Our party was a melancholy one; each was possessed by regret for what was
remediless; for the absence of his mother shadowed even the infant gaiety of Evelyn. Added to this
was the prospect of the uncertain future. Before the final accomplishment of any great voluntary
change the mind vacillates, now soothing itself by fervent expectation, now recoiling from obstacles
which seem never to have presented themselves before with so frightful an aspect. An involuntary
tremor ran through me when I thought that in another day we might have crossed the watery
barrier, and have set forward on that hopeless, interminable, sad wandering, which but a short time
before I regarded as the only relief to sorrow that our situation afforded. Our approach to Dover was announced by the loud roarings of the wintry sea. They were borne miles
inland by the sound-laden blast, and by their unaccustomed uproar, imparted a feeling of insecurity
and peril to our stable abode. At first we hardly permitted ourselves to think that any unusual
eruption of nature caused this tremendous war of air and water, but rather fancied that we merely
listened to what we had heard a thousand times before, when we had watched the flocks of fleece-
crowned waves, driven by the winds, come to lament and die on the barren sands and pointed rocks. But we found upon advancing farther, that Dover was overflowed- many of the houses were
overthrown by the surges which filled the streets, and with hideous brawlings sometimes retreated
leaving the pavement of the town bare, till again hurried forward by the influx of ocean, they
returned with thunder-sound to their usurped station. Hardly less disturbed than the tempestuous world of waters was the assembly of human beings, that
from the cliff fearfully watched its ravings. On the morning of the arrival of the emigrants under the
conduct of Adrian, the sea had been serene and glassy, the slight ripples refracted the sunbeams,
which shed their radiance through the clear blue frosty air. This placid appearance of nature was
hailed as a good augury for the voyage, and the chief immediately repaired to the harbour to
examine two steamboats which were moored there. On the following midnight, when all were at
rest, a frightful storm of wind and clattering rain and hail first disturbed them, and the voice of one
shrieking in the streets, that the sleepers must awake or they would be drowned; and when they
rushed out, half clothed, to discover the meaning of this alarm, they found that the tide, rising above
every mark, was rushing into the town. They ascended the cliff, but the darkness permitted only the
white crest of waves to be seen, while the roaring wind mingled its howlings in dire accord with the
wild surges. The awful hour of night, the utter inexperience of many who had never seen the sea
before, the wailing of women and cries of children added to the horror of the tumult. All the
following day the same scene continued. When the tide ebbed, the town was left dry; but on its flow,
it rose even higher than on the preceding night. The vast ships that lay rotting in the roads were
whirled from their anchorage, and driven and jammed against the cliff, the vessels in the harbour
were flung on land like sea-weed, and there battered to pieces by the breakers. The waves dashed
against the cliff, which if in any place it had been before loosened, now gave way, and the affrighted
crowd saw vast fragments of the near earth fall with crash and roar into the deep. This sight
operated differently on different persons. The greater part thought it a judgment of God, to prevent
or punish our emigration from our native land. Many were doubly eager to quit a nook of ground
now become their prison, which appeared unable to resist the inroads of ocean's giant waves. When we arrived at Dover, after a fatiguing day's journey, we all required rest and sleep; but the
scene acting around us soon drove away such ideas. We were drawn, along with the greater part of
our companions, to the edge of the cliff, there to listen to and make a thousand conjectures. A fog
narrowed our horizon to about a quarter of a mile, and the misty veil, cold and dense, enveloped sky
and sea in equal obscurity. What added to our inquietude was the circumstance that two-thirds of
our original number were now waiting for us in Paris, and clinging, as we now did most painfully, to
any addition to our melancholy remnant, this division, with the tameless impassable ocean between,
struck us with affright. At length, after loitering for several hours on the cliff, we retired to Dover
Castle, whose roof sheltered all who breathed the English air, and sought the sleep necessary to
restore strength and courage to our worn frames and languid spirits. Early in the morning Adrian brought me the welcome intelligence that the wind had changed: it had
been south-west; it was now north-east. The sky was stripped bare of clouds by the increasing gale,
while the tide at its ebb seceded entirely from the town. The change of wind rather increased the
fury of the sea, but it altered its late dusky hue to a bright green; and in spite of its unmitigated
clamour, its more cheerful appearance instilled hope and pleasure.