Margaret again looked across the
table; Sir Charles never heeded her. When Mrs. Kennedy came to tell the future fate of the two girls, she had no interest
in flattering them, and she was guided only by the different appearances of clubs, hearts,
diamonds, and spades, as they chanced to follow each other, or be mingled together; and


she told their fortunes, as she had been taught to prognosticate, from the different
succession of the cards alone, without deviation from those hieroglyphics. She told the astonished, convinced, though trembling and horror-struck Margaret,
that she loved a very fair man, short of stature; but that she was deceived in him, for if she
believed him to be a gentleman, she would find herself very much mistaken, for he was
the very lowest of the low-born: that a very rich and great man, much older than herself,
would fall in love with her; but she must take care of him, for he had evil designs against
her. Margaret eagerly asked, if she had yet seen him? Mrs. Kennedy said, her cards did
not tell; but if she had, he was not yet in love with her. To Mary, she told, that she was a little given to jealousy, but that she had no cause,
for a young gentleman loved her beyond all the girls he had ever seen; and that at last they
would certainly be united; but they would meet with a great many troubles and obstacles
at first: that she would find, or had already found this gentleman rather too free in his
moral principles; but that he was only led astray by fashion, and rather an extravagant
turn of mind; he would soon love her, and her good conduct and prudence would restore
him to himself, and entirely eradicate all his former errors. As Mary accidentally raised
her eyes, she beheld those of Frederic Harrington tenderly fixed upon her: it was a
moment of electrical bliss that then darted across her bosom! all that could be expressed
from every pure and affectionate sentiment of the soul, beamed upon her blushing
countenance from the fine, intelligent eyes of the handsome Frederic! love approaching to
adoration, respect, admiration, and softness lighted up his visage, and in that one glance,
and the accompanying and visible emotion of Mary, their hearts were irrevocably pledged
to each other! The repeated attentions of Frederic afterwards to Lady Isabella savoured more of
respect and homage to her beauty alone, than any thing approximate to a softer passion:
when trouble was foretold to Mary, though only in childish play, with a pack of cards,
Frederic looked anxiously towards her. In vain the Reverend and Honourable Theodore
Leslie essayed to "look unutterable things;" in vain he contrived to address her, by name,
that she might look towards him, when this, her real lover was foretold, by the eloquent
Mrs. Kennedy; Mary saw not, nor thought of any one but Frederic Harrington. How oft had Margaret, during the unfolding of her strange and complicated fortune,
turned her supplicating eyes towards Sir Charles Sefton! he had no looks but for Lady
Isabella: and when Margaret's imaginary lovers were mentioned amongst the kings and
knaves by Mrs. Kennedy, the poor romantic girl remarked nothing but laughter and
whisperings between the noble lovers; but not one look could she gain, not one of her
own meaning ones could she get returned, by either her quality friend, or her once
fascinated adorer! Trifling as was this last amusement, Mrs. Kennedy knew how to render it extremely
entertaining by her witty talents, and her versatility of expression-Edward Marsham,
though not particularly pleased with so many falsehoods, yet wondered at her uncommon
abilities, which could stamp such an agreeable interest on "trifles light as air." Sir Edward Harrington and Charles Marsham regarded the younger part of the merry
auditors with pleased benevolence: and there were indeed scarcely any of the party that
could be called really old: while Ralph, all matter of fact, looked excessively serious; and
thought within himself, that if she told true, she must absolutely deal in the black art, and


if not, she must be naturally very much addicted to lying, to sit and invent so many off
hand. At length the clock chimed a quarter to four: Lady Wringham's servants were called,
and she declared she had never passed so niest an evening in all her life; and that Mrs.
Kennedy was the funniest and the most cleverest woman she ever knew. The farm-house family then took their leave; the back of Sir Charles was towards his
Margaritta, but he never turned when she went away, nor offered now to accompany her
home-sad reverse since the ball night! Mary, elated, yet she hardly knew why, (for the
scene between Harrington and Lady Caroline, as she again passed through the little antichamber,
darted its momentary agony across her memory,) took the arm of her uncle
Charles with a smile, and endeavoured to drive it from intruding on her mind. Margaret, sadly disappointed and depressed, took hold of his other arm, and, with
Ralph and Edward in their same serious and unaltered state of mind, walked home, by the
light of the moon, contending with the beams of the morning. No huswife led a better life;
She to false steps was e'en hard-hearted,
* * * * * * *
And thought the nation ne'er could thrive,
Till all frail girls were burnt alive! PRIOR. LADY WRINGHAM has been introduced to the reader, as a ci-devant laundress; and
such was really her origin, though she was so very much noticed by the rector and his
family. *
Sir John Wringham, the diminutive husband of this lady, was a wealthy baronet,
and the last of his noble house: he was sent to study the law at the Temple, and which dry
business seemed to accord very well with abilities in which were united much shrewdness
with intense plodding. He wished for an heir, to inherit his title and dignity, but he had an
almost unconquerable preference to the life of a bachelor; and he continued to study away
at his chambers in the Temple, until he had actually attained his forty-fifth year. However, Sir John was rich and great, as far as related to his purse and the
ancestry of his family; though mean in aspect and low in stature: twice, without much
exertion on his part, was he, in succeeding elections, chosen member for the county
of ----, and sparing of his breath in St. Stephen's chapel, except in giving his aye,
when he plainly saw most votes would carry the day; and as sparing of his good dinners
and of unlocking his coffers; his respiration never suffered from overexertion. And while
a steak and a pint of wine contented him at the Temple Coffee-house, the strong box,
being unincumbered with any other visitors than this sparing baronet, it was so well
filled, that Sir John scarcely knew, himself, the extent of his riches. One laundress had washed for him and cleaned his chambers for ten years; she
was pretty, but rather masculine, and turned of thirty: for three whole years, had Sir John
been assailing her chastity in vain! "By gosh, she knew how to manage such a little
whiffling being as he!" and having that kind of violent virtue, which scratches and fights
to defend itself, many a time has she laid the amorous knight sprawling on the floor, from
a well aimed blow, and confined him to his chambers, under pretence of a cold, from the
black eyes inflicted by her Amazonian fist. *Her Ladyship's origin-Historique. Once in a quarter, Sir John Wringham used to meet a party of brother students at a
club, held at the house of an inn-keeper, who had assisted Sir John in gaining his
elections: there, as the bottle passed briskly about, was it much lamented that the
baronetage of Wringham should be in danger of extinction from the want of heirs male. This repeated remark dwelt on the mind of the knight; and he wished to bequeath his
honours to posterity: he loved Sukey Wiggins, his laundress; he felt he could not be
happy without her, and he had many striking proofs of her virtue; which finding
impossible to conquer, he actually made his honourable proposals, in due form: and the
astonished and delighted Sukey, biting her little finger till it bled, to see if she was
actually awake; sending for the apothecary, to know if she was in her right senses; and
going to a famous fortune-teller, who, after she had thrown out, herself, every possible
hint, told her she would certainly be very soon married to a very rich man, and be a
lady,-she soon knew that Sir John Wringham had really, in right arnest, made
honourable love to her. She did not want for an abundant share of low cunning; and she played the tyrant
over her infatuated lover, as well as any high bred lady of birth and fashion could possibly
have done; and seeing herself sure of her man, she did not let him rest, till she had
obtained from him a written promise to let her have the entire disposal of much more than
the half of his immense fortune. And now behold her, Lady Wringham! proud, haughty, insolent, and
overbearing-her ignorance, which was unnoticed in her humble state, now rendered
glaring and conspicuous; pluming herself on her virtue, and more for her imaginary
beauty and perfections. If a poor, young, inexperienced girl, had the misfortune, through the perfidy of a
treacherous lover,
"Before a wife, to be a nurse,"
Oh! what virulent abuse was heaped upon the nasty creature, by Lady Wringham! Hanging, she declared, was too good for her! such bold, infamous hussies ought to be
flayed alive! At the same time, she detested the wife who had not the happiness of being a
mother: she, herself, thank God, was the joyful mother of eight: but really, indeed, she
must say, she did not expect to have little ones so fast! but it was God Almighty's
pleasure! Then if ever any lady shewed any kind of fondness for a faithful dog, a bird, or
a kitten, or indeed expressed only common compassion for them; if this lady chanced, at
the same time, to be childless, Lady Wringham would be sure to say, "Aye, aye, if you
had any little ones, you'd never think about them there brutes." Such is always the common-place jargon proceeding from a narrow and
contracted heart! children, the dearest tie under heaven, creatures, when not even bound
to us, by nature's strongest bands, the most helpless, the most interesting objects of
creation! But cold must be the heart that, though it gives to you its tenderest affections,
and feelings of a widely differing nature, can yet unnoticed, and too often spurned, see the
fawnings of the fond spaniel; and the faithful guardian of our person and property is the
dog of every description. Oft-times, by such pretended fond parents, is the imprisoned
bird pining for want of food; and, unrewarded, the half-famished cat for her useful
abilities, nor given a share of that food which her vigilance, in keeping the house clear
from vermin, has deserved. The principles of honour should make us kind to the brute


creation; we are their lords; he who destroys his fellow creature "shall surely die:" the
lives of animals are ours; they are given into our hands, and it behoves us to treat them,
by no means with ridiculous fondness, but with kindness and humanity; while we reflect,
"That HE who doth the ravens feed,
As providently caters for the sparrows." The three first children with whom Lady Wringham presented her husband, were,
much to his disappointment, all girls: at length, a puisne boy made his appearance. The
country air being recommended for the future baronet, a magnificent house and grounds
were purchased at Eglantine, and my Lady affected to be quite enamoured of the rual
scenes about this charming village. Here the young gentleman grew strong and hearty: the prolific lady added four
more children, two boys and two girls to the family; and with those that were old enough,
she strutted to church, like an old fat hen, with her chickens trotting after her. The eighth child, Mr. Leslie had the honour of christening, when first this amiable
lady was introduced to the reader; and four times had he the more agreeable honour of
touching twenty bright guineas, which the lady picked out for him, each time she had a
child made a christian; for she liked to "do things like themselves!" She spared no expence in the articles of dress; nor in any kind of ostentatious
vanity; but never gave away a sixpence to relieve a distressed and worthy object-"there
was the parish," she would say, "for those poor wretches! and God knows, Sir John paid
enough to the poor's rates"-and as for common beggars, "they were such a set of
wagabones, that they ought to be whipped at the cart's tail." When first she married, she had a little diffidence of herself, and held her tongue;
but her equipage, her husband's rank and wealth, procured her numerous acquaintance;
she met with many ignorant people among her betters; they said all that came uppermost:
she was therefore resolved in her turn to dash forward, and be as easy and as unreserved
as the best of them! and if any chose to laugh at her, she would think within herself, "let
those laugh as wins, I can buy them all." Her profusion, which was mistaken for carelessness about money, and knowing
she had the entire management of Sir John's heavy purse, induced the rector, who was
getting rather out at elbows, to pay implicit court to her ladyship; as he hoped, some day,
to be able to coax her out of a good round sum of money, to be paid in any way that was
most agreeable to her, or which would be much better, as most convenient to himself. Lady Wringham at this time was grown very fat, old looking and coarse; and
never would be any thing else, than very vulgar; yet, the fashionable Mr. Leslie, to carry
his point, did not scruple to flirt with her in that kind of way, as made her fancy he had a
tender inclination for her person; which made her really not wonder at her elevation to
dignity; but she began to think even that she might have done better for herself, with the
irresistible charms she was mistress of. She was uncommonly proud and arrogant to all her country neighbours, except
those she dignified by the appellation of quite your tip-top quality folks: she would
sometimes honour Mrs. Susanna Bradbury by a call; and two or three times in the winter,
invite her and her niece to a family dinner! but begged, above all things, Mrs. Susan
would never think of introducing her to her friend Mrs. Edmonds, as it might very much
injure her virtue and repitation: Mrs. Susan took no notice of her silly remarks; she


reflected from whence they came, and that it was literally casting "pearl before swine," to
attempt, by dint of reasoning, to convince obstinate and ignorant self-approbation. Lady Wringham honoured the family at the farm house for some time, only by a
swaggering curtesy, an high elevation and violent toss of the head; but since the last visit
of the rector to his living, when he brought down his family, and she saw them all take so
much notice of the young ladies, she was much more familiar; but she never visited them
before, except once or twice in a year: she said, she believed they were quite commonish
kind of people, for she had never heard of one title among them. Sir John was something of an original character, before his marriage; he was now
a mere non-entity, particularly in the presence of his dear Sukey; who governed with
absolute sway-when he did even dare to reflect, he wondered at himself that she could
ever charm him so much, to give up the reins to her management as he had done-but
then, how many dear children she had brought! doubly dear, for they were very
expensive, and Sir John was getting fast onwards to that period of life, which, when the
affections attaching themselves beyond judicious boundaries, is very aptly called dotage. In these spoilt children "of his age," did Sir John centre all his delight; he was continually
seen dandling the smaller ones on his knee; playing with them at see-saw, and singing to
them all the babies' songs, and reciting the old nurse's tales, which he had heard himself,
in his days of infancy; then he would sometimes lead the others about the grounds and the
environs of the village; while perfect strangers to him or his title, who might chance to
visit that part of the country, and the unruly children have escaped him, and been,
perhaps, in the apparent danger of being run over by a horse or a carriage, have much
mortified him, by saying, "Do, my pretty dear, go back to grandpapa, when he calls you." Now, though there was not such a violent disparity of age between Lady
Wringham and her husband, yet, she has given a foolish titter on such occasions, and
would frequently talk to her confidential friends of her youth having been sackerficed;
and tell the false-tongued rector and the quizzing Sir Charles Sefton, who would often
flatter her for her youth and the charms of her person, "Ah! dear me; what sinifies title or
riches? to be sure, Sir John is a very good husband, and a loving father to the little ones,
but I have a sad prospect before me of being nothing more nor a nurse to him, in the very
prime of my life!" Fancy, whose delusions vain
Sport themselves with human brain;
Rival thou of Nature's power,
Cans't, from thy exhaustless store,
Bid a tide of sorrow flow,
And whelm the soul in the deepest woe;
Or, in the twinkling of an eye,
Raise it to mirth and jollity! COOPER'S Poetical Blossoms. MARGARET, now in some degree, convinced of the caprice of quality, moped
away her hours at home, during a long rainy week: all her bright visions of conquest
seemed fled, while the prophecies of Mrs. Kennedy occupied all her thoughts. Confident in her own mind, that all she had foretold her would be verified, she
detested the very sight of poor Phelim O'Gurphy, and was sure that he must be "the
lowest of the low-born." She flew to her old resource of incredible romance; and read till she almost made
herself sick and blind. Mary felt the power of love; and she was sure also that her love
was hopeless; could she ever raise her thoughts to the nephew of Sir Edward Harrington? doomed by birth, wealth, and fashion, to figure only in the great world! Impossible. The
rose fled from her cheek, and though her duty made her cheerfully and implicitly follow
all her former occupations, yet her spirits sunk, and her father and uncles saw, with much
anxiety, this, the loveliest blossom which adorned the house and garden of Eglantine
Farm, drooping and fading daily before their eyes: Mary, whose cheerful vivacity, whose
continual gaiety inspired them all with gladness, now smiled but faintly, and that smile
was evidently forced. Edward, the most affectionate of fathers, trembled for both his girls; he fancied
that their mother had been consumptive, and that they both inherited it; for though Mary
looked not so fresh as formerly, yet, in the presence of Margaret, who was now as pale as
a ghost, she looked better. In the mean time the girls were both indulged in every thing they could wish for;
compelled only to drink asses' milk; to take every thing good and strengthening, in order
to repel the silent, slow, but sure and death-dealing malady. Their malady was seated only
in the heart and the imagination; it was the heart of Mary that was assailed; and though
the flight of the arrow was quick and sudden, it was buried deep! while the frenzied
imagination of Margaret, fed to satiety, and destroying itself by "the food it fed on," was
the only cause of her heavy eye and chalky-coloured cheek. Towards the latter end of the following week, a beautiful summer's day seemed to
exhilarate every inhabitant of the farm-house; a brightness shone in the heretofore languid
eyes of Mary, and she sang, as usual, while she worked; and though her songs were of the


plaintive kind, yet her listening father and uncles, who were busy arranging papers in an
adjoining room, were delighted to hear that she did sing; but Margaret still neglected
herself, and sat in a corner reading, with her fingers stuck in her uncurled and uncombed
hair, her knees and chin together; while a romance of the fourteenth century laid on her
lap: from which she lifted her head every now and then, to say, "La! I wish my sister
would not make such a noise!" The third time she made this remark, Mary gave a sigh, and thought, within
herself, ah! why should I sing? She then applied herself to her needle, and was silent. Just as the clock struck two, who should enter the apartment, but Frederic
Harrington and Lady Isabella Emerson! the glowing rose again quickly bloomed on
Mary's cheek: Harrington had never visited the farm before! an equal emotion kindled in
his bosom; and Mary could not be blind to his accompanying blush and love-fraught eye. Margaret too was highly gratified, for Lady Isabella almost flew to her, and
embracing her, said, "My lovely friend, I am sure you are not well." "Oh! yes, now I am,"
said Margaret, speaking from the native impulse of her heart, "I was really ill, but the
presence and condescension of your ladyship has quite cured me." "Sweet girl!" replied
Lady Isabella, and taking up the book, she added, "Come with me into the garden; it is so
delightful after the rain; and I want to have a little talk with you." She then, with a
charming familiarity, took up the book, and drawing Margaret's arm through her own,
walked with her into the garden: while Mary moved, to acquaint her father and uncles of
the presence of these noble visitors. Frederic, however, prevented her; "Oh! stay, Miss Marsham," said he, as he
respectfully, and tremblingly took her hand, "the servant is gone to Mr. Marsham; but
they are now very busy in arranging some paper, which they cannot leave; and which it
will not be five minutes before they have done with; we wish not to be treated here as
strangers, but as familiar friends; and, oh! suffer me, dear Miss Marsham, to enjoy those
short moments, winged, indeed, too swiftly with bliss, in your charming company." "Oh! sir," said Mary, "why address me in this high-flown strain of flattery? Have you then, so
very poor an opinion of my understanding, as to imagine I can be pleased with it?" "It is
concurring, and in some degree, afflicting circumstances, which alone render me eager to
seize the present fleeting minutes; suffer me then to make use of this blessed opportunity,
the last perhaps, I shall find of unburthening my thoughts to the too amiable Miss
Marsham." "The last!" involuntarily and emphatically uttered Mary, "Oh! I hope not." The manner of her uttering this simple expression, and the deep blush that suffused her
cheek, imparted hope, in her brightest array, to the breast of Frederic. "The sweet
illusion," said he, "of thinking that Miss Marsham regrets my absence, will soothe the
pangs of separation, and act as a tutelary divinity, to steel my breast with courage and my
arms with success, in the day of battle." "Battle!" repeated Mary, while the hue of the lily
succeeded to the rose on her cheek, and a drop, like the dew of the morning, stood
trembling on her long eyelash. "O God!" said the empassioned Frederic, "time presses; I go, perhaps never to
return; never to see you more! Pardon, I beseech you, pardon my temerity;" and he
clasped the timid, though then unresisting Mary to his bosom, while he kissed off the
liquid assurance of more than common concern for his safety. She would fain have chid her lover, but she found it impossible; and there was a
respect attending the action, which would have rendered resistance on her part (all
circumstances considered) both prudish and fastidious. The servant entered, saying, "My
master, sir, is quite distressed that my interruption just now, obliged him to go over a
great part of the paper he was engaged with, again: and the Captain being obliged to
depart next week, they are settling some family affairs of importance; but the gentlemen
will really have done in less than ten minutes." Frederic intreated him to desire his master to take his time, as Lady Isabella and
himself had no particular engagement to call them home; and he inwardly blessed the
delay, and prayed that Lady Isabella, towards whom he now felt perfectly indifferent,
would remain some time longer with her friend: and he might make himself easy in that
respect, for they had strayed to the meadows, conversing on many interesting matters. Harrington now made the best of his time, and endowed as he was with every
insinuating art of persuasion, he was not long ere he wrought on the mind of the young
and innocent Mary, so far, as to draw from her a faint and timid promise, of giving him
that hope of her affections, which would enable him to support the pain of absence. Frederic Harrington had formerly been an officer in the Guards; but not well
pleased with a service, active only in deeds of continued dissipation, he had quitted it, at
the request of his uncle, coinciding also with his own wishes after the death of his mother. He became acquainted with the honourable and reverend Theodore Leslie at the
University of Oxford, when that gentleman had gone there to keep a long term, previous
to his being made Master of Arts. Frederic was fascinated with the easy and fashionable
manners of the young divine, and entered into a firm friendship with him; but his frequent
loans to this reverend gentleman had so impoverished him, together with much money
purposely and gallantly lost to Lady Caroline Leslie, that his uncle, entirely to wean him
from so destructive and dangerous a society, though he severely felt the separation, yet
judged it better that he should again enter the army, and accompany the grand expedition
to the Scheldt, when he might also be of service to his country, and distinguish himself by
his personal courage and merit. Sir Edward Harrington likewise regretted that so many fine young men, who
might be usefully and bravely employed, and become an honour to Great Britain and
themselves, should be lounging away their hours on the pavements of Bond-street and
Pall-mall. Severe might be the lot, deep the sorrow of their surviving relatives, should
they perish; but they would have this consolation, that the youthful heroes died on the bed
of honour, and did their part in ensuring the safety of their island from the grasp of the
usurper: and such as these enable the honest artificer, the industrious farmer, and the
useful citizen to carry on their employments in peace and security, and spread the table of
the wealthy tradesman with "luxury and ease." It was but in brief, that Frederic acquainted his Mary with one cause of his
departure; which was the impoverished state of his finances: his persuasions to Lady
Caroline Leslie had conquered her; for he had prevailed upon her to take back the sum
she had lost to him, on the evening of that day he first beheld the charming Mary: this, in
as delicate a manner as possible, towards her ladyship, did he explain to Mary, on the
accusation he received from her, of his being a general lover. He owned that he had never


seen any woman so beautiful and fascinating, in person, as Lady Isabella Emerson; but it
was person alone; and its "skin-deep" and fugitive impressions had departed for ever! The irradiating mind of Mary, while it embellished her countenance, made the
charms of that countenance, though quick in their effects, increasing and durable in their
impression. Mary was easily disposed to believe all that her Harrington told her-perhaps the
reader may think too easily: but Mary was very young, Frederic irresistibly insinuating
and handsome, and they were also on the point of separating, perhaps never to meet
again: she had found the object of her choice virtuous and innocent, when compared to
what she had once thought him; and when she reflected on the distance between them,
when she knew how many high-born and wealthy ladies to whom he had a right to aspire,
she felt that conscious and gratified pride which cannot but glory in being the preferred
choice of such a man. Mary was not a model of perfection; far from it; she was a mere human being,
subject to error: she had no vice, she shuddered at the thought of committing a crime! she
was prudent as any girl of eighteen, but was not without the natural weaknesses of frail
mortality. Too soon, much too soon for Frederic Harrington, and why should we endeavour
to conceal it from our readers, for their own hearts will tell them, if we did not, that too
soon also for Mary did the three brothers enter the parlour, and put a stop to the most
interesting conversation which she had ever held with any one. In the mean time Lady Isabella and Margaret were not idle. "My dearest girl," said
the lady, as she turned over the leaves of the volume which Margaret had been perusing,
"What stuff are you reading here? Why you might as well read Mother Bunch's Fairy
Tales, or a Defence of Witchcraft." "La! my lady," said Margaret, "I really presumed to
think that you and I were something alike in our ideas; and that your ladyship was as
romantic almost as myself.