I could, however, discern that a general ceremonious
insincerity was performed by the members towards me, especially on the
part of those who were in league and conjunct with the town-clerk, who
comported himself, by reason of his knowledge of the law, as if he was in
verity the true and effectual chief magistrate of the burgh; and the
effect of this discovery, was a consideration and digesting within me how
I should demean myself, so as to regain the vantage I had lost; taking
little heed as to how the loss had come, whether from an ill-judged pride
and pretending in myself, or from the natural spirit of envy, that
darkens the good-will of all mankind towards those who get sudden
promotion, as it was commonly thought I had obtained, in being so soon
exalted to the provostry. Before the Michaelmas I was, in consequence of this deliberation and
counselling with my own mind, fully prepared to achieve a great stroke of
policy for the future government of the town. I saw that it would not do
for me for a time to stand overly eminent forward, and that it was a
better thing, in the world, to have power and influence, than to show the
possession of either. Accordingly, after casting about from one thing to
another, I bethought with myself, that it would be a great advantage if
the council could be worked with, so as to nominate and appoint My Lord
the next provost after me. In the proposing of this, I could see there
would be no difficulty; but the hazard was, that his lordship might only
be made a tool of instrumentality to our shrewd and sly town-clerk, Mr
Keelivine, while it was of great importance that I should keep the
management of my lord in my own hands. In this strait, however, a thing
came to pass, which strongly confirms me in the opinion, that good-luck
has really a great deal to say with the prosperity of men. The earl, who
had not for years been in the country, came down in the summer from
London, and I, together with the other magistrates and council, received
an invitation to dine with him at the castle. We all of course went,
"with our best breeding," as the old proverb says, "helped by our brawest
cleeding;" but I soon saw that it was only a _pro forma_ dinner, and that
there was nothing of cordiality in all the civility with which we were
treated, both by my lord and my lady. Nor, indeed, could I, on an
afterthought, blame our noble entertainers for being so on their guard;
for in truth some of the deacons, (I'll no say any of the bailies,) were
so transported out of themselves with the glory of my lord's banquet, and
the thought of dining at the castle, and at the first table too, that
when the wine began to fiz in their noddles, they forgot themselves
entirely, and made no more of the earl than if he had been one of
themselves. Seeing to what issue the matter was tending, I set a guard
upon myself; and while my lord, out of a parly-voo politess, was egging
them on, one after another, to drink deeper and deeper of his old wines,
to the manifest detriment of their own senses, I kept myself in a degree
as sober as a judge, warily noting all things that came to pass. The earl had really a commendable share of common sense for a lord, and
the discretion of my conduct was not unnoticed by him; in so much, that
after the major part of the council had become, as it may be said, out o'
the body, cracking their jokes with one another, just as if all present
had been carousing at the Cross-Keys, his lordship wised to me to come
and sit beside him, where we had a very private and satisfactory
conversation together; in the which conversation, I said, that it was a
pity he would not allow himself to be nominated our provost. Nobody had
ever minted to him a thought of the thing before; so it was no wonder
that his lordship replied, with a look of surprise, saying, "That so far
from refusing, he had never heard of any such proposal." "That is very extraordinary, my lord," said I; "for surely it is for your
interests, and would to a certainty be a great advantage to the town,
were your lordship to take upon you the nominal office of provost; I say
nominal, my lord, because being now used to the duties, and somewhat
experienced therein, I could take all the necessary part of the trouble
off your lordship's hands, and so render the provostry in your lordship's
name a perfect nonentity." Whereupon, he was pleased to say, if I would
do so, and he commended my talents and prudence, he would have no
objection to be made the provost at the ensuing election. Something more
explicit might have ensued at that time; but Bailie M'Lucre and Mr
Sharpset, who was the dean of guild, had been for about the space of half
an hour carrying on a vehement argument anent some concern of the
guildry, in which, coming to high words, and both being beguiled and
ripened into folly by the earl's wine, they came into such a manifest
quarrel, that Mr Sharpset pulled off the bailie's best wig, and flung it
with a damn into the fire: the which stramash caused my lord to end the
sederunt; but none of the magistrates, save myself, was in a condition to
go with his lordship to My Lady in the drawing-room. Soon after the foregoing transaction, a thing happened that, in a manner,
I would fain conceal and suppress from the knowledge of future times,
although it was but a sort of sprose to make the world laugh. Fortunately
for my character, however, it did not fall out exactly in my hands,
although it happened in the course of my provostry. The matter spoken
of, was the affair of a Frenchman who was taken up as a spy; for the
American war was then raging, and the French had taken the part of the
Yankee rebels. One day, in the month of August it was, I had gone on some private
concernment of my own to Kilmarnock, and Mr Booble, who was then oldest
Bailie, naturally officiated as chief magistrate in my stead. There have been, as the world knows, a disposition on the part of the
grand monarque of that time, to invade and conquer this country, the
which made it a duty incumbent on all magistrates to keep a vigilant eye
on the in-comings and out-goings of aliens and other suspectable persons. On the said day, and during my absence, a Frenchman, that could speak no
manner of English, somehow was discovered in the Cross-Key inns. What he
was, or where he came from, nobody at the time could tell, as I was
informed; but there he was, having come into the house at the door, with
a bundle in his hand, and a portmanty on his shoulder, like a traveller
out of some vehicle of conveyance. Mrs Drammer, the landlady, did not
like his looks; for he had toozy black whiskers, was lank and wan, and
moreover deformed beyond human nature, as she said, with a parrot nose,
and had no cravat, but only a bit black riband drawn through two button-
holes, fastening his ill-coloured sark neck, which gave him altogether
something of an unwholesome, outlandish appearance. Finding he was a foreigner, and understanding that strict injunctions
were laid on the magistrates by the king and government anent the
egressing of such persons, she thought, for the credit of her house, and
the safety of the community at large, that it behoved her to send word to
me, then provost, of this man's visibility among us; but as I was not at
home, Mrs Pawkie, my wife, directed the messenger to Bailie Booble's. The
bailie was, at all times, overly ready to claught at an alarm; and when
he heard the news, he went straight to the council-room, and sending for
the rest of the council, ordered the alien enemy, as he called the
forlorn Frenchman, to be brought before him. By this time, the suspicion
of a spy in the town had spread far and wide; and Mrs Pawkie told me,
that there was a palid consternation in every countenance when the black
and yellow man--for he had not the looks of the honest folks of this
country--was brought up the street between two of the town-officers, to
stand an examine before Bailie Booble. Neither the bailie, nor those that were then sitting with him, could
speak any French language, and "the alien enemy" was as little master of
our tongue. I have often wondered how the bailie did not jealouse that
he could be no spy, seeing how, in that respect, he wanted the main
faculty. But he was under the enchantment of a panic, partly thinking
also, perhaps, that he was to do a great exploit for the government in my
absence. However, the man was brought before him, and there was he, and them all,
speaking loud out to one another as if they had been hard of hearing,
when I, on my coming home from Kilmarnock, went to see what was going on
in the council. Considering that the procedure had been in handsome time
before my arrival, I thought it judicious to leave the whole business
with those present, and to sit still as a spectator; and really it was
very comical to observe how the bailie was driven to his wit's-end by the
poor lean and yellow Frenchman, and in what a pucker of passion the
pannel put himself at every new interlocutor, none of which he could
understand. At last, the bailie, getting no satisfaction--how could
he?--he directed the man's portmanty and bundle to be opened; and in the
bottom of the forementioned package, there, to be sure, was found many a
mystical and suspicious paper, which no one could read; among others,
there was a strange map, as it then seemed to all present. "I' gude faith," cried the bailie, with a keckle of exultation, "here's
proof enough now. This is a plain map o' the Frith o' Clyde, all the way
to the tail of the bank o' Greenock. This muckle place is Arran; that
round ane is the craig of Ailsa; the wee ane between is Plada. Gentlemen,
gentlemen, this is a sore discovery; there will be hanging and quartering
on this." So he ordered the man to be forthwith committed as a king's
prisoner to the tolbooth; and turning to me, said:--"My lord provost, as
ye have not been present throughout the whole of this troublesome affair,
I'll e'en gie an account mysel to the lord advocate of what we have
done." I thought, at the time, there was something fey and overly
forward in this, but I assented; for I know not what it was, that seemed
to me as if there was something neither right nor regular; indeed, to say
the truth, I was no ill pleased that the bailie took on him what he did;
so I allowed him to write himself to the lord advocate; and, as the
sequel showed, it was a blessed prudence on my part that I did so. For
no sooner did his lordship receive the bailie's terrifying letter, than a
special king's messenger was sent to take the spy into Edinburgh Castle;
and nothing could surpass the great importance that Bailie Booble made of
himself, on the occasion, on getting the man into a coach, and two
dragoons to guard him into Glasgow. But oh! what a dejected man was the miserable Bailie Booble, and what a
laugh rose from shop and chamber, when the tidings came out from
Edinburgh that, "the alien enemy" was but a French cook coming over from
Dublin, with the intent to take up the trade of a confectioner in
Glasgow, and that the map of the Clyde was nothing but a plan for the
outset of a fashionable table--the bailie's island of Arran being the
roast beef, and the craig of Ailsa the plum-pudding, and Plada a butter-
boat. Nobody enjoyed the jocularity of the business more than myself;
but I trembled when I thought of the escape that my honour and character
had with the lord advocate. I trow, Bailie Booble never set himself so
forward from that day to this. After the close of the American war, I had, for various reasons of a
private nature, a wish to sequestrate myself for a time, from any very
ostensible part in public affairs. Still, however, desiring to retain a
mean of resuming my station, and of maintaining my influence in the
council, I bespoke Mr Keg to act in my place as deputy for My Lord, who
was regularly every year at this time chosen into the provostry. This Mr Keg was a man who had made a competency by the Isle-of-Man trade,
and had come in from the laighlands, where he had been apparently in the
farming line, to live among us; but for many a day, on account of
something that happened when he was concerned in the smuggling, he kept
himself cannily aloof from all sort of town matters; deporting himself
with a most creditable sobriety; in so much, that there was at one time a
sough that Mr Pittle, the minister, our friend, had put him on the leet
for an elder. That post, however, if it was offered to him, he certainly
never accepted; but I jealouse that he took the rumour o't for a sign
that his character had ripened into an estimation among us, for he
thenceforth began to kithe more in public, and was just a patron to every
manifestation of loyalty, putting more lights in his windows in the
rejoicing nights of victory than any other body, Mr M'Creesh, the
candlemaker, and Collector Cocket, not excepted. Thus, in the fulness of
time, he was taken into the council, and no man in the whole corporation
could be said to be more zealous than he was. In respect, therefore, to
him, I had nothing to fear, so far as the interests, and, over and above
all, the loyalty of the corporation, were concerned; but something like a
quailing came over my heart, when, after the breaking up of the council
on the day of election, he seemed to shy away from me, who had been
instrumental to his advancement. However, I trow he had soon reason to
repent of that ingratitude, as I may well call it; for when the troubles
of the meal mob came upon him, I showed him that I could keep my distance
as well as my neighbours. It was on the Friday, our market-day, that the hobleshow began, and in
the afternoon, when the farmers who had brought in their victual for sale
were loading their carts to take it home again, the price not having come
up to their expectation.