my father, the bitter tears with which I shall bedew my innocent child, will wash away my fault in disregarding thy dying precepts. Ah! thou wouldst not judge my errors too severely, for thou also wert deceived!” She wept in an agony of grief, and thought that she could, with pleasure have resigned Lord Courtney to any other woman, rather than to her, whom she knew to be beautiful, and believed to be amiable, or Henry would not love her. She had regarded him as the destined husband of Lady Harriett Parkhurst, until she had taught

herself to consider him as such with calmness; she had likewise been supported by thinking, that in his heart the image of Lady Harriett, would never efface that of Mary Macdonald; which might be remembered with fond regret, long after all intercourse between them had ceased; but now, even this hope, the only consolation that she had asked, was torn from her bosom, and left her lacerated heart to smart under the keenest pangs of undeserved neglect. In her delicate state, mental agonies came not unattended; they were soon accompanied by bodily ones, so acute, that the poor sufferer was soon made sensible of the rapid approach of that trying hour, when even the most affectionate care, the most soothing attentions, and the most refined comforts, are insufficient to dispel the dread of evil, or lull the sense of pain. Mary was to suffer unaided by these, and unsupported even by her own reflections, but Mr. Barlowe wept over her, and prayed for consolation to be imparted to her, whilst Lord Courtney implored her forgiveness, with tears of anguish, and exclaimed, “Never till now, did I feel the extent of my crimes, never till now was I sensible of my folly, or punished for my baseness.” His affliction increased her sufferings, but she bore them with fortitude, and said in the self-accusing language of the humble La Valliere, “I am not worthy to complain.” After some hours, wherein exhausted nature had often counterfeited the tranquillity of death, as a respite from her suffering, Mary gave birth to an infant, whose feeble cries, pierced the soul of its young and unhappy mother, and filled her with sensation of the most exquisite delight, chastened with melancholy awe. “So did my mother,” she exclaimed, pressing the babe to her throbbing breast, and bathing it in tears, “so did my mother fondly clasp me in her arms. Oh, my God! grant me but this sweet treasure, and never more can I know unhappiness. I am undeserving of thy mercy, but thou wilt accept my penitence, thou wilt not “break the bruised reed,” thou wilt not deprive me of a boon so kindly given. My little darling, my all,” she continued as she fondly kissed its closed eyes, soft cheeks, and folded hands, “I tremble whilst I look on thee, and consider what trifles may injure thy delicate frame, and on how fine a thread thy precious existence hangs! ah! already have my parental anxieties commenced.” There appeared indeed too reasonable grounds for apprehension, even to those less tremblingly alive to danger than a mother; for the agitation which she had undergone, and a premature birth, had visibly affected the innocent child, whose continuance in a world, to which it had been introduced under auspices so unfavorable, appeared very uncertain. Lord Courtney’s transports on finding himself a father, were checked by the alloy of self-reproach; he felt that he had injured his child, and behaved cruelly to its mother, but his heart was too full of rapture to dwell long on any gloomy ideas, and he hastily went to Mary’s apartment, to indulge it to the utmost. He was some minutes before he could gain resolution to look at the babe, but when he took it in his arms, and gazed on its little features, he felt all the sacred and indiscribable emotions of a parent, and in the delight of expressing them, almost forgot that they might have been more perfect. “My poor babe,” he exclaimed, “thy father has deprived thee of thy just inheritance, but he will watch over, and befriend thee, whilst he has the power to do it.” To Mary he made the most affecting acknowledgments, and she, absorbed in maternal delight, assured him repeatedly of her forgiveness, whilst the long absent smile of rapture and contentment, played on her innocent and now tranquil features, as she listened to the soft breathings of her sleeping son. How willingly would Lord Courtney have devoted himself to retirement during Mary’s recovery, how willingly would he have abandoned a scheme, of which in his hours of serious thought, he saw all the imperfections. In those hours his cruelty to Mary, his ingratitude to the Marchese, and his injustice to Lord Drelincourt, in taking so important a step, as forming a matrimonial alliance, without consulting him on the subject, all rose to his mental view, but too soon the suggestions of reason and affection, were put to flight by the phantom, false-honor, the illusions of self-love, and the triumph of vanity. Vice is a monster of such hideous mein, As to be hated needs but to be seen,
But seen too oft familiar grows her face, We first endure, then pity, then embrace. POPE. PERHAPS vice is never more certain of success, than when she approaches the object of her allurement by gradations almost imperceptible; it is incumbent, on us therefore to watch our thoughts, before they lead to actions, for that enemy is the most dangerous, whose machinations are the least suspected. Had Lord Courtney been told that he would seduce the orphan, left to his charge with the expiring breath of a brave but unfortunate officer, how would he have spurned the idea, with all the generous indignation of conscious virtue! but had he also been told, that he would afterwards desert her, and abandon the first fruits of his illicit love, the innocent and unfortunate pledge of his guilty passion, then the enormity of the crime would have appeared almost to preclude the possibility of its commission, and resentment would have been lost in incredulity. Let then Lord Courtney’s unhappy dereliction from the paths of virtue, in which he had been trained, and with the beauty and pleasantness of which he was fully acquainted, teach us the first rule of prudence, which is to distrust ourselves. “If a man thinks that he stands, let him take heed lest he fall;” and may we learn by the errors of others, to be yet more watchful over our own. When Lord Courtney’s promised billet arrived, Everilda’s cheeks were dyed in blushes of shame, for the deception of which it was the vehicle; and her agitation was observed by both her parents, who unfortunately attributing it to her partiality for the writer, and her sorrow for his departure, willingly consented to her desire of visiting her friend, hoping the change of scene would divert her mind from the attachment which she had rashly formed. When she took leave of her father and mother, her excessive grief, would have inevitably inspired suspicion in them, had they not been fatally blinded by the previous conjectures that they had formed; and when she in an agony of tears exclaimed, “Oh my dear parents, assure me of your forgiveness and love,” they still imagined that she alluded to the opposition which she had recently shewn, and kindly assured her of their undiminished affection. When Everilda arrived near the place where she had appointed to meet Lord Courtney, she informed the astonished Claudina of her designs, and requested the favor of her company to England. In vain her friend, more rational than herself, endeavoured to dissuade her from the scheme, by dispassionately pointing out its numerous objections; Everilda had unhappily never been accustomed to listen to arguments opposing her inclinations, and calmly repeating, that none would be able to shake her resolutions, she again entreated Claudina to accompany her. This was a request more easily made than granted; the fear of being thought accessary to a step, which she entirely disapproved, and

the dread of appearing ungrateful to her kind friends, the Marchese and Marchesa, made her very unwilling to go forward. But on the other hand, her attachment to Everilda, the reluctance which she felt, to reduce her to the indelicacy of travelling without a female companion, in such peculiar circumstances, and the security which she should be certain of finding in England, from her brother’s cruelty, and implacable revenge, with perhaps a hope almost unconsciously indulged, of again seeing Clayton, made her equally unwilling to return. Everilda saw her advantage, and pursued it with the warmest entreaties, soon prevailed. When they arrived at the Villa Polastri, she dismissed her carriage, and all her attendants, but Bianca, her waiting woman, and Giuseppe, her own valet, who were in the secret. After chatting some time with the friend, of whom she had made use as a tool in her designs; Everilda informed her, that she and Claudina were going to stay a few days at a villa, four leagues further, and on their return, would spend the same time with her, but could not then prolong their visit, as the carriage was ordered to fetch them. The young lady knew the villa that Everilda named, though not the family to whom it belonged, and therefore when a handsome equipage was driven up to the door, she wished her friends an agreeable visit, saying, that she should impatiently anticipate the pleasure of seeing them again; and they proceeded entirely unsuspected. Lord Courtney soon joined them, and they proceeded to Bologna, resolving to lay their route through Germany. The indissoluble knot was soon tied, and the parties then wrote to their respective friends, to solicit their forgiveness of the past. Claudina also wrote a candid account of her ignorance of Everilda’s intentions, when she left the villa, and of the motives by which she had been induced reluctantly to accompany her, on being made acquainted with them. It is difficult to say, whether sorrow, mortification, or surprise, predominated in the breast of the Marchese and his lady. The blow fell the more heavily, from being wholly unthought of, for even if they could for one moment have suspected their daughter of artifice, a suspicion which from her natural candour and ingenuousness, would have appeared highly unjust, yet the return of the carriage and domestics, with their account of leaving the young ladies safe at the Villa Polastri, added to the circumstance of Bianca and Giuseppe being detained, as was usual, would certainly have disarmed the most cautious of their fears. The pride of the Marchese was deeply wounded, at his daughter’s entering into any family clandestinely; and the anxiety of the Marchesa, was again roused, lest her child should have wrecked her happiness, by risking it with a man, whose character she had too great reason to dread, was that of a libertine. Mary Macdonald had borne parting with her faithless seducer, better than she had dared to hope; but her child was now all the world to her, and in clasping it to her bosom, she forgot its father’s falsehood. Alas! she was not to possess this consolation long; the infant drooped, notwithstanding the cares which affection lavished on it; prophetic anguish embittered its mother’s fond caresses, and she had scarcely recovered from her confinement, when she was deprived of this pledge of unfortunate love. To attempt to describe her affliction, would be fruitless as painful. She contemplated the dying moments of her child, with the wild, though stedfast gaze of despair; hardly durst she breathe, lest she should hasten its dissolution; and when its quivering eyes were finally closed in death, she averted her’s in the fallacious hope, that her fears deceived her, and that when she looked on it again, she should find that they had been groundless. Alas! it was too true, the little form waxed cold, nor could its mother’s

scalding tears, recal the genial warmth. Still she pressed it to her bosom, still she felt a melancholy pleasure in possessing it, and until she was compelled to resign it to the grave, she felt not the extent of her misery. Nature sometimes kindly shields us from a sense of evil, even by means of the feelings which render it too acute to be borne. This was Mary’s case; the remembrance of her sorrows, was lost in insensibility; a burning fever raged through her veins, the langour of disease suspended the acuteness of grief, and it was long doubtful whether she would recover to a consciousness of suffering. The worthy Mr. Barlowe, transferred to her the cares which he had found useless for his pupil. He watched over her with holy patience; soothed her hours of affliction, cheered those of convalescence, and invited the poor penitent back to life, bidding her depend on him for every worldly comfort, and in teaching her true repentance of her errors, he was enabled also to console her with the well grounded hope of merciful forgiveness. Leaving him to watch the bed of sickness, sufficiently rewarded for his exertions by the gradual, though lingering recovery of their object; we will again return to Lord Drelincourt and his family. “Tho’ flowers embroider Barca’s faithless coast, Yet there deceitful rocks and quicksands lie, Tho’ richest gems Golconda’s mountains boast, There blasting pestilence pervades the sky. ’Tis thus does Heav’n its various gifts impart, Mingling alternate, ills and blessing flow; And sometimes rapture fills the lighten’d heart,
Which disappointment soon absorbs in woe.”
THE revolving seasons had again brought round the period, when the tranquil pleasures of retirement are made to yield to the hurry of business, or whirl of dissipation; and the Earl had now left the shades of Castle Drelincourt to resume his residence in Berkeley Square. Edmund continued to observe with the impartial eye of truth, aided by the steady light of unclouded reason, the real character, not only of the English, but of the individuals of numerous nations, who are constantly to be met with in the capital. Every day’s experience exalted the former yet higher in his estimation; and taught him more readily to acknowledge their virtues, and excuse their foibles. He had heard their roughness condemned, but he thought of them, as Goldsmith admirably expressed himself of the great Johnson, that they had nothing of the bear but the coat. He had heard the superior politeness of the French much boasted of; yet he would not yield the palm even where the English themselves acknowledge it to be due. He maintained with Lord Chesterfield, that they evinced their superiority by disclaiming it; and, in an argument which he held with Mr. Fletcher on the subject, he thus gave the result of his observations, and the opinion that he had formed from them: “I believe it is generally allowed, that true politeness may be more easily felt than taught, and that it must necessarily be felt, in order to be practised in perfection. It does not consist in a certain set of phrases, or a regular number of bows; if it did, even the French must yield to the Chinese, who value each other according to their facility in making obeisances; denote their respect for a person by the number which they make to him; and think that guest the best bred, who returns from the greatest distance after his departure, to make another bow to his host; who, perhaps, expected that he had long before arrived at home. “True politeness springs from the heart, of which it expresses the wishes in a variety of agreeable ways, as poetry decorates and improves the ideas of the mind; both may receive additional value by being pleasingly communicated; but both must possess intrinsic worth, to be really estimable.” “In the former, I will grant that politeness resembles poetry,” said Mr. Fletcher, “inasmuch as both can make a trifle appear of consequence, and dress it in charms, pleasing, though perhaps imaginary; whilst, without such aid, it would fall into insignificance, and be desired by no one. In this art, partial as I am to my country, I must think we are inferior to our neighbours.” “In the art of making that appear, which is not, I will resign the competition,” replied Edmund, “for that is not

the politeness of the heart, which is what I contend for: it is a bastard production of the head, compounded of interest and vanity. A Frenchman seeks to magnify the importance of a service, by inventing a thousand inconveniences which he pretends to have sustained in the performance of it. An Englishman, on the contrary, seeks to convince those whom he has obliged, however ungracefully, that he has had so little trouble in the affair, that thanks are as unnecessary as undesired. I think whether or not, any may hesitate, which may be the most polite, all will feel which is the most generous mode of proceeding. A Frenchman forms chains of your obligations to him, complimenting you, and drawing them tighter at the same time. An Englishman spurns the idea of chains in any shape, and if you take them on yourself, insists on freeing you, even though he may throw them in your face. I will illustrate my arguments by example. An English sailor, loaded with the rewards of his bravery, meets an old messmate, his equal in courage, though his inferior in good fortune: after the first salutations, the poverty-stricken congratulates the monied man on his new rigging; adding, in a melancholy accent, as he changes his quid, and eyes his companion’s new hat, ‘Sink my carcase if my skull be n’t so weather-beaten,’ pulling off the tattered crown of what had once resembled the object of his envy, ‘that it might be hove aboard an enemy to save a cannon-ball, and I should hardly grudge the loss of it, if it had the luck, d’ye see, to plump into great mounseer’s bread-basket.’ In the mean time, his comrade’s eyes are rivetted on a wound in this ill-defended skull; and, taking his new purchase from his own head, he decorates that of his companion with it, saying, ‘Take that, and welcome, Jack; it shall never be said that Will Flasket saw a messmate hang out signals of distress, and flinched from helping him.’ ‘No,’ says Jack, pride struggling with necessity in his breast, ‘I flung out no signals; thank God it’s no stormy weather with me, only shallow water; and I’m no pirate, to take what’s not my own, and rob an honest man of what he’s worked fore and aft for.’ Saying this, he seeks to replace the hat on Will’s head, who vociferates, ‘Avast there, off with your nippers; what are you turned land- lubber, with your palaver? Strike my timbers, take the skull-cap, and sail no longer on your talking tack; I tell you, it’s too little for me, it keeps my head in limbo; I’d as lieve have it jamm’d in a turnkit, and if you won’t take it, I’ll heave it overboard.’ This argument succeeds; one departs pleased to have cheated his old acquaintance into the acceptance of a benefit, and the other at receiving so useful a gift without injuring the giver. Some perhaps will say, ‘like John Bull’s compliments, he always defeats a favor by his manner of conferring it; for where is the generosity of giving away, what he avers he does not wish to keep?’ I differ from these remarkers, I think the intention of that manner adds to the obligation. A Frenchman has a house to dispose of, for a season, and will be greatly inconvenienced by its remaining on his hands. He hears of a stranger who wants one, and waits on him to offer his, with assurances that his visit is solely occasioned by being informed of the very great trouble which the stranger has had in procuring accommodations; and that, entirely on this account, he is induced to remove his family, to be enabled to offer his house to him for the most moderate recompense. Confounded by politeness so excessive and unlooked for, the gentleman hesitates, cannot think of giving so much trouble: the Frenchman presses, assures him, that, though the inconvenience be considerable, yet were it much more, or incalculable, it would be overbalanced by the pleasure of serving so worthy, agreeable, or eminent a personage. The gentleman, quite overpowered with civilities, enters on the house, acknowledging to himself, that a

Frenchman is surely the politest being on earth. He finds the house a ruin, the furniture dropping to pieces, the situation execrable, the rent exorbitant, and he begins to think the politeness of a Frenchman not so charming as he had at first imagined. Perhaps it may be said, that these are not instances of what we mean by the term politeness, but they are instances of the difference of disposition, which occasions different modes of behaviour; and a nation will, throughout its several ranks, maintain the same characteristics, though the form of expressing them may be varied according to the circumstances of the parties.” Edmund here ended his dissertation on politeness, and the company laughing, told him, that he gave great proof of his own, by the ease with which he had adopted English prejudices. He replied, that those very prejudices were also in a great degree praise- worthy, as springing from a proper sense of superiority, and a laudable anxiety to preserve it. “Other nations,” he continued, “complain of the insufferable insolence of the English when they go abroad, and they would undoubtedly do better in bearing their honors more meekly, for no one likes to be convinced of his inferiority; but, perhaps the consciousness which they always retain of their advantage over most others, and the pleasure that they take in shewing it, may greatly conduce to their firmness in preserving the character, of which they are justly proud. I may appear partial, but I think I am only acknowledging their real worth, when I declare, that, for truth, honesty, charity, generosity, friendship and benevolence, social comfort, and family concord, the English are unrivalled.” “I am of your opinion, Edmund,” replied Lord Drelincourt, “and think with you, that many of the faults which disgust other nations with my countrymen, may be excused by a candid mind, as rising entirely from that love of their native country, which makes every other fail in comparison with it, and which never forsakes them. Every man says that he loves his country, but every man does not prove his assertion. A Frenchman, German, Dutchman, all love their country, but they will contentedly pass their days in any other, without ever disturbing their peace by wishing to return to their own; wherever money can be procured, that place is desirable to them, and there they would willingly live; but to an Englishman, it is not sufficient to accumulate property, he must hope to spend it in his native country, without which soothing prospect, avarice would fail to stimulate his industry; impelled by the love of gain, the young adventurer crosses the vast Atlantic, explores the frozen or the torrid zone, and exhausts the ardour of his youth in heaping up wealth, which when ease brings time for reflection, appears of no value in his eyes, till he can return to the early scene of his social comforts; for this, he retraces his hazardous route, and thinks every care repaid when he beholds,
“That pale, that white-fac’d shore,
Whose foot spurns back old ocean’s roaring waves.”
Whilst time thus flew in Lord Drelincourt’s family, marked only by instruction and delight, the tranquillity was interrupted by the arrival of Lord Courtney’s letter from Bologna, and it is needless to say, with what severe mortification the Earl perused its contents. His feelings were keenly wounded by the reserve that Lord Courtney had shewn, and which ill requited the generous and unlimited indulgence, with which he had always been treated. Lord Drelincourt’s views were disappointed, his intentions frustrated, his expectations destroyed; and however philosophers and moralists may argue on the futility

of rank, the insufficiency of riches, and the uncertainty of adventitious circumstances, yet the marriage of the heir of an illustrious family, must in the present state of society, be a matter of anxious importance to those, who are nearly connected with him. An exalted situation is taxed with pains, more than proportioned to its pleasures; for whilst the glare of magnificence, or the flutter of dissipation, will inevitably weary, and grow insipid on repetition, the grasping hand of avarice and the aspiring eye of ambition, are still actively employed; and the mind which has long ceased to be amused by pleasures, whose only attractions were novelty, or gratified by honors, which when possessed, no longer pleased, will yet continue to be tenderly alive to the sensations of mortification and disappointment. Lord Drelincourt felt not only as a man of the world, but as a tender parent; happy in his own marriage, he anxiously desired to see his son equally fortunate; placing all his own comfort in his family, and in the endearing ties of natural affection, and social love, he ardently wished to see that of his son, derived from the same laudable source, for perfect as the lot of humanity will admit of, must be the superstructure raised on the solid foundation of domestic peace. It may be very naturally asked, if Lord Drelincourt imagined Lady Harriett Parkhurst to be a female, to whom the precious deposit of his son’s felicity might be entrusted, without fear of disgusting him by folly, or wearying him by insipidity? Lady Harriett was, certainly, one of
“Matter too soft a lasting mark to bear,
And best distinguished by black, brown, or fair.”
But she was thoroughly good-natured; if she had not talents, she had not the scornful contempt for the less informed, which a consciousness of possessing them sometimes inspires. If she was not accomplished, she was free from the affectation of appearing so. She exhibited no drawings finished by the skilful hand of her master; her dressing-room displayed no toilet-boxes, fillagree, or embroidery, the work of some ingenious and needy female; who, under the name of governess, displays her own taste for her pupils’ credit: and, when we recollect that her appearance was pleasing, her connections numerous as powerful, herself the daughter of an old and esteemed friend, and by failure of issue in a branch of the family, heiress to immense estates, it cannot be a matter of surprise if the Earl, considering her follies in the most favorable view, was willing to attribute them to youth, to a neglected education, or to any cause, rather than to deficiency of ability; and he had additional reason for his lenity of opinion, since Lord Courtney had never seemed anxious to consider her character more critically; but, on the contrary, had always appeared satisfied with the arrangement which he knew his father had made for him. Lord Drelincourt perfectly remembered the blooming charms, the fascinating graces, and opening talents of the youthful Everilda; but he remembered also, her impatience of controul, her quickness of resentment, and her love of admiration. Perhaps, however, candour must own that her good qualities would have over-balanced her defects, even in the opinion of the severest judge; but in this instance, the Earl could not be quite impartial; he felt mortified to the utmost, that his son should have formed a foreign connection, as by that means no alliances were made, that could strengthen his

interests in his own country. Nor was the Earl unmindful of the advantages of fortune for his son; which for himself, he had overlooked; for know, gentle readers, there were moments when Lord Drelincourt, like many other lords, felt himself poor. Yes, though the pale children of want may deem the fact an impossibility; though they who are reduced by misfortune from happy competence, to the bitter morsel of poverty, may sigh to think of the comforts to which the retrenchments of one ball, one birthday’s expences might restore them; yet, nothing was more certain, than that while his splendid retinue, and magnificent household excited the admiration of the vulgar, and the envy of the superficial observer, they did not shield Lord Drelincourt from feeling poor. Riches and poverty are only comparative terms: the Lydian king thirsted for gold amidst countless wealth; and the Cynic philopher threw away his wooden bowl, blushing to find himself possessed of a superfluity. Lord Drelincourt’s title was supported by estates, which in simpler periods had been deemed fully adequate to maintain its dignity. Unfortunately they had not encreased in the exact proportion of modern profusion, or the unceasing liberality of their possessor, and he had often the mortification of finding the dictates of generosity, necessarily restrained by the suggestions of prudence. He then endeavoured to discover how many, without half his fortune, contrived to live in the most boundless extravagance; to enter into all the most luxurious whims of wanton opulence, and yet never appear embarrassed by the want of that article, of which he too often felt an inconvenient scarcity. His conjectures however did not lead to any great discovery; for as all are blind to their own peculiarities, so, in this instance, he forgot the absurd habit that he had acquired, as well from his father’s example, as his own whimsical ideas of rectitude, of regularly paying his tradesmen’s bills; a weakness from which they, whose ingenuity so puzzled him to account for, were happily exempt. He likewise in enumerating the members of his establishment, overlooked a numerous train of dependants on his bounty, whom he maintained for no other reason, than that they were aged, helpless, sick or destitute; that some had worn out their lives in the service of the family, and others had known better days; with various causes, equally ridiculous, which never entered into the expences of those, who appeared so much more profuse than himself. Lord Drelincourt was likewise fond of a numerous retinue; and with the early imbibed prejudices of his youth, felt his heart expand amidst a train of respectable and cheerful dependants. His superior domestics were taken from a class in life, exalted by education, though depressed by misfortune; as such, they were treated with humane attention and liberal kindness; nor was the luxurious profusion of his own table supplied by abridging the comforts of theirs; for the encreasing expences of the times, never furnished him with an excuse to curtail the necessaries of his household, in order to sacrifice more extravagantly at the shrine of fashionable folly. It cannot then be wondered at, if the Earl, under the influence of these ideas, did sometimes feel the influence of the comparative term poorly, more sensibly than was agreeable; and when he further considered that at his death, his lady’s jointure, and daughters’ portions, though none of the largest, must encumber yet more an income, already insufficient for the continuance of the magnificence, with which the title of Drelincourt had always been supported, he very naturally thought that his son would have

found the large estates, to which Lady Harriett Parkhurst was heiress apparent, no unwelcome appendage to his own. This pleasing prospect was, however now changed for one infinitely less agreeable, of providing an establishment for Lord Courtney, who could no longer be expected to reside with his father’s family; in the bosom of which he had hitherto been so happy, that the unsociable and destructive plan of a separate residence was never thought of, by him. The Earl sighed again, as he contemplated the necessity of this additional expence: with other singular ideas, he had one remarkably so, in the eyes of many of his acquaintance; it was, that regarding a family estate as a sacred deposit or precious loan; he deemed it alike dishonorable, and dishonest to load it with mortgages or debts; nor did he feel authorized to fell, unmercifully, the venerable growth of ages, to discharge the honorable demands of one evening’s amusement in dishonorable society. Scrupulously fulfilling the grand command, of doing unto others as he would be done by, he considered a wrong done to posterity, as the most ungenerous and selfish of crimes, and one of which society ought to shew the most marked contempt. There is, however, a power which never heard the voice of reason, or owned the claims of subordination, which tyranny could never subdue, or artifice deceive; and to this stern inexorable demon, by mortals ycleped necessity, Lord Drelincourt’s knotted oaks were doomed to bend. All the consolation he could receive was, that their venerable shades,
“Where the rude axe, with heaved stroke, Was never heard the nymphs to daunt,
Or fright them from their hallow’d haunts;”
had hitherto been spared for the future interest of his son; and that the same motive now prompted him to pronounce, however reluctantly, their doom. Mortification was not confined to Lord and Lady Drelincourt’s bosoms; it was extended to Edmund’s in no trifling degree. The letters from his parents inspired him with the liveliest sympathy in their wounded feelings; and he was shocked that this sister should degrade the dignity, and delicacy so estimable in the female character, by eloping with a man of whom she could know but little, and subjecting herself to be treated with coldness by a family, into which her clandestine entrance could not inspire any very favorable ideas. His vexation was encreased, by observing the cloud that hung over the Earl’s brow, and of which Edmund well knew, disappointed projects, and gloomy forebodings to be the cause. He was too just to feel, for a moment, offended by the disapprobation thus expressed; as he was fully conscious, that, exclusive of the disadvantage of any foreign connection, the fortune which the Marchese could bestow on Everilda, though something considerable in Italy, would yet appear very trifling in a rich commercial country, where opulence and luxury struggle for pre-eminence. He thought likewise of Mary, and when he recollected the ardour of Lord Courtney’s passion for her in its commencement, and the shortness of its continuance, he dreaded lest his sister should in her turn, experience neglect and fickleness, which would rouse her sensibility too acutely, and pique her pride too deeply, to be submitted to in uncomplaining silence. In various talk th’ instructive hours they past, Who gave the ball, or paid the visit last;
One speaks the glory of the British queen, And one describes a charming Indian screen; A third interprets motions, looks, and eyes, At every word a reputation dies. Snuff, or the fan, supply each pause of chat, With singing, laughing, ogling, and all that. POPE. AFTER a few days had elapsed, Lord Drelincourt gained resolution to impart to the family the secret of Lord Courtney’s marriage, informing them also, that in a few weeks they would probably be gratified with an introduction to his bride; for whom to ensure their affection and esteem, it was only necessary to inform them that they were related, through her, to Signior Rodalvi, by the ties of fraternal love, as well as of friendship. Edmund bowed his acknowledgments for this delicate attention from his lordship, who never forgot the regard due to the feelings of another, even when his own were most deeply wounded. Now it happened that this secret, like many others, was a secret only to the person most nearly interested in it, who was Lady Harriett; and therefore, by all but her, it was heard with very philosophic composure. She, wholly unable to conceal her surprise and mortification, exclaimed, “Dear me, married!