He then put the two hooks into his
buff belt, and committing himself to the water, was dragged in silence
and perfect safety up the pool between the outposts. The first turn above that was the point where Sandy lay watching. He had
only seized one prey that night, and that was of no great value,--for
they had given over sending up victuals to enrich an old Scots rascal,
as they termed honest Sanders. He was glad when he saw the wake of a
heavy burden coming slowly towards him. "This is a sack o' sweet-meats,"
said he to himself: "It must be currans an' raisins, an' sic fine things
as are na injured by the fresh water. I shall get a swinging price from
the abbey-men for them, to help wi' their Christmas pies." No sooner did this huge load touch the land, than Sandy seized it with
all expedition; but, to his inexpressible horror, the sack of sweetmeats
seized him in its turn, and that with such potence that he was
instantaneously overpowered. He uttered one piercing cry, and no more,
before the trooper gagged and pinioned him. The Scottish lines were
alarmed, and all in motion, and the troops on both sides were crowding
to the bank of the stream. A party was approaching the spot where the
twain were engaged in the unequal struggle. To return down the stream
with his prisoner, as he intended, was impracticable; so the trooper had
no alternative left but that of throwing himself into Sandy's boat, with
its owner in his arms, shoving her from the side into the deep, and
trusting himself to the strength of the wire-lines. As the windlasses
were made always to exert the same force and no more, by resisting that
they could be stopped; so by pushing the boat from the side in the
direction of the castle, the line being slackened, that again set them
agoing with great velocity; and though they soon slackened in swiftness,
the trooper escaped with his prisoner undiscovered, and, by degrees, was
dragged up to the mouth of the covered way that led through or under the
hill on which the castle stood; and there was poor Sanders Yellowlees
delivered into the hands of his incensed and half-famished enemies. It
was he that was hanged over the wall of the castle on the day that the
five English yeomen were executed. [1]

[1] As there can be no doubt of the authenticity of this part of the
Curate's tale, these secret passages must have been carried under ground
all the way from the castle to the junction of the two rivers; and it is
said that a tradition still exists on the spot, that these vaulted paths
have often been discovered by former inhabitants. The English now conceived that their secret was undiscovered, and that
their sufferings would forthwith be mitigated by the supply drawn by
their lines. They commenced briskly and successfully; but, alas! their
success was of short duration. Sanders' secret became known to the Scots
army. The night-watchers had often seen the old man's boat leaning on
the shore at that point at all hours of the night; for he was always
free to go about plodding for fish when he pleased. His cry was heard at
that spot, and the boat was now missing: the place was watched, and in
two days the Englishmen's secret, on which they so much relied, was
discovered, and quite cut off; and that powerful garrison was now left
with absolute famine staring them in the face. As in all cases of utter privation, the men grew ungovernable. Their
passions were chafed, and foamed like the ocean before the commencement
of a tempest, foreboding nothing but anarchy and commotion. Parties were
formed of the most desperate opposition to one another, and every one
grew suspicious of his neighbour. Amid all this tempest of passion a
mutiny broke out:--a strong party set themselves to deliver up the
fortress to the Scots. But through such a medley of jarring opinions
what project could succeed? The plot was soon discovered, the
ring-leaders secured, and Sir Stephen Vernon, Musgrave's most tried and
intimate friend, found to be at the head of it. No pen can do justice to
the astonishment manifested by Musgrave when the treachery of his dear
friend was fully proven. His whole frame and mind received a shock as by
electricity, and he gazed around him in moody madness, as not knowing
whom to trust, and as if he deemed those around him were going to be his
assassins. "Wretch that I am!" cried he, "What is there more to afflict and rend
this heart? Do I breathe the same air? Do I live among the same men? Do
I partake of the same nature and feelings as I was wont? My own friend
and brother Vernon, has he indeed lifted up his hand against me, and
become one with my enemies? Whom now shall I trust? Must my dearest
hopes--my honour, and the honour of my country, be sacrificed to
disaffection and treachery? Oh Vernon--my brother Vernon, how art thou
fallen!" "I confess my crime," said Vernon; and I submit to my fate, since a
crime it must be deemed. But it was out of love and affection to you,
that your honour might not stoop to our haughty enemies. To hold out the
fortress is impossible, and to persevere in the attempt utter depravity. Suppose you feed on one another, before the termination of the Christmas
holidays, the remnant that will be left will not be able to guard the
sallying ports, even though the ramparts are left unmanned. In a few
days I shall see my brave young friend and companion in arms, your
brother, disgracefully put down, and ere long the triumphant Scots
enter, treading over the feeble remains of this yet gallant army. I may
bide a traitor's blame, and be branded with a traitor's name, but it was
to save my friends that I strove; for I tell you, and some of you will
live to see it, to hold out the castle is impossible." "It is false!" cried Musgrave. "It is false! It is false!" cried every
voice present in the judgment-hall, with frantic rage; and all the
people, great and small, flew on the culprit to tear him to pieces; for
their inveteracy against the Scots still grew with their distress. "It is false! It is false!" shouted they. "Down with the traitor! sooner
shall we eat the flesh from our own bones than deliver up the fortress
to the Scots! Down with the false knave! down with the traitor!" --and,
in the midst of a tumult that was quite irresistible, Vernon was borne
up on their shoulders, and hurried to execution, smiling with derision
at their madness, and repeating their frantic cries in mockery. It was
in vain that the commander strove to save his friend,--as well might he
have attempted to have stemmed the river in its irresistible course
single-handed. Vernon and his associates were hanged like dogs, amid
shouts of execration, and their bodies flung into a pit. When this was
accomplished, the soldiers waved their caps, and cried out, "So fare it
with all who take part with our hateful enemies!" Musgrave shed tears at the fate of his brave companion, and
thenceforward was seized with gloomy despondency; for he saw that
subordination hung by a thread so brittle that the least concussion
would snap it asunder, and involve all in inextricable confusion. His
countenance and manner underwent a visible change, and he often started
on the approach of any one toward him, and laid his hand on his sword. The day appointed by the Douglas for the execution of Sir Richard,
provided the castle was not delivered up before that period, was fast
approaching,--an event that Musgrave could not look forward to without
distraction; and it was too evident to his associates that his brave
mind was so torn by conflicting passions, that it stood in great danger
of being rooted up for ever. It is probable that at this time he would willingly have complied with
the dictates of nature, and saved the life of his brother; but to have
talked of yielding up the fortress to the Scots at that period would
only have been the prelude to his being torn in pieces. It was no more
their captain's affair of love and chivalry that influenced them, but
desperate animosity against their besiegers; and every one called aloud
for succours. Communication with their friends was impracticable, but
they hoped that their condition was known, and that succours would soon
appear.--Alas, their friends in Northumberland had enough ado to defend
themselves, nor could they do it so effectually but that their lands
were sometimes harried to their very doors. The warden, with his hardy
mountaineers, was indefatigable; and the English garrison were now so
closely beleaguered, that all chance of driving a prey from the country
faded from their hopes. Never was the portcullis drawn up, nor the
draw-bridge at either end let down, that intelligence was not
communicated by blast of bugle to the whole Scottish army, who were
instantly on the alert. The latter fared sumptuously, while those within
the walls were famishing; and at length the day appointed for the
execution of Sir Richard drew so near that three days only were to run. It had been customary for the English, whenever the Scots sent out a
herald, bearing the flag of truce, to make any proposal whatsoever, to
salute him with a flight of arrows; all communication or listening to
proposals being strictly forbidden by the captain, on pain of death. However, that day, when the Douglas' herald appeared on the rising
ground, called the Hill of Barns, Musgrave caused answer him by a
corresponding flag, hoping it might be some proposal of a ransom for the
life of his beloved brother, on which the heralds had an interchange of
words at the draw-bridge. The Scottish herald made demand of the castle
in his captain's name, and added, that the Douglas requested it might be
done instantly, to save the life of a brave and noble youth, whom he
would gladly spare, but could not break his word and his oath that he
should suffer. He farther assured the English captain, that it was in
vain for him to sacrifice his brother, for that he had the means in his
power to bring him under subjection the day following, if he chose. A council of the gentlemen in the castle was called. Every one spoke in
anger, and treated the demand with derision. Musgrave spoke not a word;
but, with a look of unstable attention on every one that spoke,
collected their verdicts, and in a few minutes this answer was returned
to the requisition of the Scots. "If Sir Philip Musgrave himself, and every English knight and gentleman
in the castle were now in the hands of the Douglas, and doomed to the
same fate of their brave young friend, still the Douglas should not
gain his point,--the castle would not be delivered up. The garrison
scorn his proposals, they despise his threats, and they hold his power
at defiance. Such tender mercies as he bestows, such shall he
experience. He shall only take the castle by treading over the breasts
of the last six men that remain alive in it." This was the general answer for the garrison--in the meantime Musgrave
requested, as a personal favour of the Douglas, that he might see and
condole with his brother one hour before his fatal exit. The request was
readily complied with, and every assurance of safe conduct and
protection added. The Douglas' pavilion stood on the rising ground,
between the castle and the then splendid city of Roxburgh, a position
from which he had a view of both rivers, and all that passed around the
castle, and in the town; but, since the commencement of winter he had
lodged over night in a tower that stood in the middle of the High-town,
called the King's House, that had prisons underneath, and was strongly
guarded; but during the day he continued at the pavilion, in order to
keep an eye over the siege. To this pavilion, therefore, Musgrave was suffered to pass, with only
one knight attendant; and all the way from the draw-bridge to the tent
they passed between two files of armed soldiers, whose features, forms,
and armour exhibited a strange contrast. The one rank was made up of Mar
Highlanders, men short of stature, with red locks, high cheek bones, and
looks that indicated a ferocity of nature; the other was composed of
Lowlanders from the dales of the south and the west; men clothed in
grey, with sedate looks, strong athletic frames, and faces of blunt and
honest bravery. Musgrave weened himself passing between the ranks of two
different nations, instead of the vassals of one Scottish nobleman. At
the pavilion, the state, splendour, and number of attendant knights and
squires amazed him; but by them all he was received with the most
courteous respect. Sir Richard was brought up from the vaults of the King's House to the
tent, as the most convenient place for the meeting with his brother, and
for the guards to be stationed around them; and there, being placed in
one of the apartments of the pavilion, his brother was ushered in to
him. No one was present at the meeting; but, from an inner apartment,
all that passed between them was overheard. Musgrave clasped his younger
brother in his arms; the other could not return the embrace, for his
chains were not taken off; but their meeting was passionately affecting,
as the last meeting between two brothers must always be. When the elder
retired a step, that they might gaze on each other, what a difference in
appearance!--what a contrast they exhibited to each other! The man in
chains, doomed to instant death, had looks of blooming health, and manly
fortitude: The free man, the renowned Lord Musgrave, governor of the
impregnable but perilous castle of Roxburgh, and the affianced lord and
husband to the richest and most beautiful lady in England, was the
picture of haggard despair and misfortune. He appeared but the remnant,
the skeleton of the hero he had lately been; and a sullen instability
of mind flashed loweringly in his dark eye. His brother was almost
terrified at his looks, for he regarded him sometimes as with dark
suspicion, and as if he dreaded him to be an incendiary. "My dear brother," said Sir Richard, "what is it that hangs upon your
mind, and discomposes you so much? You are indeed an altered man since I
had the misfortune to be taken from you. Tell me, how fares all within
the castle?" "Oh, very well; quite well, brother. All perfectly secure--quite well
within the castle." But as he said this he strode rapidly backward and
forward across the small apartment, and eyed the canvass on each side
with a grin of rage, as if he suspected that it concealed listeners; nor
was he wrong in his conjecture, though it was only caused by the frenzy
of habitual distrust. "But, how can I be otherwise than discomposed,
brother," continued he, "when I am in so short a time to see you
sacrificed in the prime of youth and vigour, to my own obstinacy and
pride, perhaps." "I beg that you will not think of it, or take it at all to heart," said
the youth; "I have made up my mind, and can look death in the face
without unbecoming dismay. I should have preferred dying on the field of
honour, with my sword in my hand, rather than being hanged up between
the hosts, like a spy, or common malefactor. But let the tears that are
shed for Richard be other than salt brine from the eyes of the
Englishmen. Let them be the drops of purple blood from the hearts of our
enemies. I charge you, by the spirits of our fathers, whom I am so
shortly to join, and by the blessed Trinity, that you act in this trying
dilemma as the son of the house you represent. Shed not a tear for me,
but revenge my death on the haughty house of Douglas." "There is my hand! Here is my sword! But the vital motion, or the light
of reason, who shall ensure to me till these things are fulfilled. Nay,
who shall ensure them to this wasted frame for one moment? I am not the
man I have been, brother: But here I will swear to you, by all the host
of heaven, to revenge your death, or die in the fulfilment of my vow. Yes, fully will I revenge it! I will waste! waste! waste! and the fire
that is begun within shall be quenched, and no tongue shall utter it! Ha! ha, ha! shall it not be so, brother?" "This is mere raving, brother; I have nothing from this." "No, it is not; for there is a fire that you wot not of. But I will
quench it, though with my own blood. Brother, there is one thing I wish
to know, and for that purpose did I come hither. Do you think it behoves
me to suffer you to perish in this affair?" "That depends entirely upon your internal means of defence," answered
Richard. "If there is a certainty, or even a probability, that the
castle can hold until relieved by our friends, which will not likely be
previous to the time you have appointed for them to attempt it; why,
then, I would put no account on the life of one man. Were I in your
place, I would retain my integrity in opposition to the views of
Douglas; but if it is apparent to you, who know all your own resources,
that the castle must yield, it is needless to throw away the life of
your brother, sacrificing it to the pride of opposition for a day or a
week." Musgrave seemed to be paying no regard to this heroic and disinterested
reasoning,--for he was still pacing to and fro, gnawing his lip; and if
he was reasoning, or thinking at all, was following out the train of his
own unstable mind.--"Because, if I were sure," said he, "that you felt
that I was acting unkindly or unnaturally by you, by the Rood, I would
carve the man into fragments that would oppose my submission to save my
brother. I would teach them that Musgrave was not to be thwarted in his
command of the castle that was taken by his own might and device, and to
the government of which his sovereign appointed him. If a dog should
dare to bay at me in opposition to my will, whatever it were, I would
muzzle the hound, and make him repent his audacity." "My noble brother," said Richard, "what is the meaning of this frenzy?