O captain, tell me if it is in your power to
save her!" Douglas flung himself on a form in the corner of the tent, and hid his
face with his hand, and at the same time groaned as if every throb
would have burst his heart's casement. He had seen his royal, his
affectionate, and adored mistress swung from the enemy's battlements,
without one effort to save her, and without a tear wetting his cheek;
and his agony of mind became so extreme that he paid no more regard to
the lady, who was still standing over him, adding the bitterest censure
to lamentation. Yet he told her not of her mistress's melancholy
fate,--he could not tell her; but the ejaculatory words that he uttered
from time to time too plainly informed Mary Kirkmichael that the life of
her royal mistress was either in jeopardy or irretrievably lost. The Douglas saw the lady no more, nor regarded her. He rushed from
the tent, and gave such orders as quite confounded his warriors,
one part being quite incompatible with another; and, in the confusion,
Mary glided quietly away from the scene without farther notice. All
the motions of Douglas, for two days subsequent to this piece of
information, were like those of a drunken man; he was enraged without
cause, and acted without consistency; but the only point towards which
all these jarring and discordant passions constantly turned was revenge
on the English--deadly and insatiable revenge. When he looked towards
the ramparts of the castle, his dark eye would change its colour, and
sink deeper under his brow, while his brown cheeks would appear as if
furrowed across, and his teeth ground and jarred against one another. His counsels, however, were not, at this time, of a nature suited to
accomplish any thing material against his rivals. He meditated the most
deadly retaliation, but was prevented before he could put it in
practice. On the following evening, when the disturbance of his mind had somewhat
subsided, and appeared to be settling into a sullen depression of
spirit, or rather a softened melancholy, he was accosted by a monk, who
had craved and obtained admittance--for a deference to all that these
people said or did was a leading feature of that age. Douglas scarcely
regarded him on his first entrance, and to his address only deigned to
answer by a slight motion of his head; for the monk's whole appearance
augured little beyond contempt. He was of a diminutive stature, had a
slight, starved make, and a weak treble voice. His conversation,
nevertheless, proved of that sort that soon drew the attention of the
chief. "May the blessed Virgin, the mother of God, bless and shield you,
captain!" "Humph!" returned the Douglas, noding his head. "May Saint Withold be your helmet and buckler in the day of battle--"

"Amen!" said the Douglas, interrupting him, and taking a searching look
of the tiny being that spoke, as if there were something in the tones of
his voice that struck him with emotion. --"And withhold your weapon from the blood of the good," added the monk,
"from the breast of the professor of our holy religion, and dispose your
heart to peace and amity, that the land may have rest, and the humble
servants of the Cross protection. Why don't you say 'Amen' to this,
knight? Is your profession of Christianity a mere form? and are the
blessed tenets which it enjoins, strangers to thy turbulent bosom?" "Humph!" said Douglas: "With reverence be it spoken, monk, but you holy
brethren have got a way of chattering about things that you do not
understand. Adhere to your books and your beads. I am a soldier, and
must stick by my profession, bearing arms for my king and country." "I am a soldier too," rejoined the monk, "and bear arms and suffer in a
better cause. But enough of this. I have a strange message for you,
captain. You must know that, a few weeks ago, a beautiful youth came to
our monastery seeking supply of writing materials, which he could not
otherwise procure. He was a kind and ingenious youth. I supplied him,
for I loved him; and I have since seen him sundry times in my cell. But
last night, as I was sitting alone, a little before midnight--I am
afraid you will not believe me, captain, for the matter of my message
is so strange--I had gone over my breviary, and was sitting with the
cross pressed to my lips, when behold the youth entered. I arose to
receive him; but he beckoned me to keep away from his person, and glided
backward. I then recollected that he must be a spirit, else he could not
have got in; and, though I do not recollect all that he said, the
purport of his message was to the following effect:

"'Benjamin,' said he, 'arise and go to the captain of the Scottish army,
whom you will find in great perplexity of mind, and meditating schemes
of cruelty and retaliation, which would be disgraceful to himself and to
his country. But let him beware; for there be some at his hand that he
does not see; and if he dare in the slightest instance disobey the
injunctions which you shall from time to time lay on him, his sight
shall be withered by a visitant from another world, whose face he shall
too well recognize ever again to find rest under a consciousness of her
presence. Monk Benjamin, I was not what I seemed. A few days ago I was a
lady in the prime of youth and hope. I loved that captain, and was
betrothed to him. For his sake I ventured my life, and lost it without a
single effort on his part to save me. But his fate is in my hand, and I
will use the power. It is given to me to control or further his efforts
as I see meet,--to turn his sword in the day of battle,--or to redouble
the strength of his and his warriors' arms. My behests shall be made
known to him; and if he would avoid distraction of mind, as well as
utter ruin, let him tremble to disobey. In the first place, then, you
will find him pondering on a scheme for the recovery of my lifeless
body,--a scheme of madness which cannot and may not succeed; therefore,
charge him from me to desist. You will find him farther preparing an
embassy to my father and mother to inform them of the circumstances of
my death, and that not in the words of truth. But let him take care to
keep that a secret, as he would take care of his life and honour, for on
that depends his ultimate success. Tell him farther, from me, to revenge
my death, but not on the helpless beings that are already in his power;
to pursue with steady aim his primary object,--and his reward shall be
greater than he can conceive.' "Strange as this story may appear, captain, it is strictly according to
truth. You yourself may judge whether it was a true or lying spirit that
spoke to me." "Are you not some demon or spirit yourself," said the Douglas, "who know
such things as these? Tell me, are you a thing of flesh and blood, that
you can thus tell me the thoughts and purposes of my heart?" "I am a being such as yourself," said the monk,--"a poor brother of the
Cistertian order, and of the cloister adjoining to this; and I only
speak what I was enjoined to speak, without knowing whether it is true
or false. I was threatened with trouble and dismay if I declined the
commission; and I advise you, captain, for your own peace of mind, to
attend to this warning." Douglas promised that he would, at least for a time; and the monk,
taking his leave, left the earl in the utmost consternation. The monk's
tale was so simple and unmasked, there was no doubting the truth of
it,--for without such a communication it was impossible he could have
known the things he uttered; and the assurance that a disembodied being
should have such a power over him, though it somewhat staggered the
Douglas' faith, created an unwonted sensation within his breast--a
sensation of wonder and awe; for none of that age were exempt from the
sway of an overpowering superstition. What a brave group we have! That fellow there,
    He with the cushion, would outprate the cricket;
    The babble of the brook is not more constant,
    Or syllabled with such monotony,
    Than the eternal tingle of his tongue. _Cor._ I'll bid him silence, master;
    Or do him so, which likes you. _The Prioress._

We must now leave the two commanders in plights more dismal than ever
commanders were before, and return to our warden, the bold baron of
Mountcomyn, whose feats form a more pleasant and diverting subject. His
warfare all this while was of a predatory nature,--for that his warriors
were peculiarly fitted, and at this time they did not fail to avail
themselves well of the troubles on the border, and the prevailing power
of the Scots alongst its line. The warden pretended still to be acting
in concert with Douglas, but his operations were all according to the
purposes of his own heart. He cared nothing for the success or the
aggrandisement of Douglas; but he had a particular eye to the
advancement of his own house, and the honour of his kinsmen. It was
therefore a matter of daily consultation with him and his friends, how
they should act in conformity with this ruling principle. The
probability was against Douglas, that he would ultimately fail in his
undertaking, and be stripped of all his dominions. Viewing the matter in
that light, it was high time for the Redhough to be providing for
himself. On the other hand, should Douglas succeed in his enterprize,
and become the king's son-in-law, there was no other way by which the
warden could hold his own, save by a certain species of subordination, a
submission in effect, though not by acknowledgment. Such matters were
perfectly understood by the chiefs in these times, and all who proved
refractory were taught in silence to feel the grounds on which they
stood, This was, therefore, a most critical period for Sir Ringan. The
future advancement of his house depended on every turn of his hand. During all the former part of the siege he had conducted himself with an
eye to Douglas' failure, to which he was partly incited by the
prophecies of Thomas the Rhymer, and those of his kinsman, Master
Michael Scott of Oakwood, whom he believed the most powerful wizard, and
the greatest prophet, that ever had arisen since the Rhymer's days. But, on the return of Charlie of Yardbire and Dan Chisholm from the
beleaguering army, the warden got the extraordinary intelligence, that
the Lady Jane Howard had fallen into the hands of the Douglas, as well
as Musgrave's only brother. These things changed Sir Ringan's prospects
of the future in a very material degree, and he pondered on changing his
mode of operations. Before doing so, however, he called a council of his
kinsmen, and brought the matter again before them. Most of them
counselled the continuance of the predatory warfare in which they had
been engaged; it had served to enrich them, and had proved, as they
reasoned, of more service to the Douglas than if they had joined his
host. That it proved of more service to himself and his kinsmen than if
they had joined the host, the warden was well aware; but he was not
satisfied that the Douglas viewed their mountain warfare as of great
consequence to him; and he farther knew, that services were always
repaid, not according to the toil and exertion undergone, but according
as they were estimated, while that estimation was ever and anon modelled
by the apparent motives of the performer. After much slow and inanimate reasoning on the matter, Sir Ringan
chanced, after a minute's deep thought, to say, "What would I not give
to know the events that are to happen at Roxburgh between this time and
the end of the Christmas holidays?" "Auld Michael Scott will ken brawly," said Charlie of Yardbire. "Then, what for shoudna we ken too?" said the knight. "Aye, what for shoudna we ken too?" said Dickie o' Dryhope. "They might get a kittle cast that meddled wi' him, an' nae the wiser
after a'," said Robert of Howpasley. "When he was at pains to come a' the way to the castle of Mountcomyn,"
said Simon Longspeare, "a matter o' five Scots miles ower the moor, to
warn our captain, the warden, how to row his bowls, he surely winna
refuse to tell him what's to be the final issue o' this daft contest." "Ane wad think he wadna spare a cantrip or twa," said Sir Ringan; "him
that has spirits at his ca', an' canna get them hadden i' wark. It wad
be an easy matter for him; an' blood's aye thicker than water." "Ay, that's a true tale," said Dickie o' Dryhope; "It wad be an easy
matter for him, we a' ken that; an' blood's aye thicker than water!" "If I were to gang wi' a gallant retinue," said Sir Ringan, "he surely
wadna refuse to gie me some answer." "He wad refuse the king o' France," said Robert of Howpasley, "if he
warna i' the key for human conversation, an' maybe gar his familiar
spirits carry you away, and thraw ye into the sea, or set you down i'
some faraway land, for a piece o' employment to them, and amusement to
himsel'. He has served mony ane that gate afore now." "Od I'll defy him," said muckle Charlie of Yardbire. "If my master, the
warden, likes to tak me wi' him for his elbowman, I'll answer for him
against a' the monkey spirits that auld Michael has." "Spoke like yourself, honest Charlie!" said the baron; "and if it is
judged meet by my friends that I should go, you shall be one that shall
attend me. Certes, it would be of incalculable benefit to me, for all
your sakes, to know even by a small hint what is to be the upshot of
this business--But should I be taken away or detained--"

"Ay, should he be taken away or detained, gentlemen: think of that,
gentlemen," said Dickie o' Dryhope. "I approve highly of the mission," said Simon Longspeare; "for I believe
there is nothing too hard for that old wizard to do, and no event so
closely sealed up in futurity, but that he can calculate with a good
deal of certainty on the issue. I see that our all depends on our
knowledge of the event; but I disapprove of our chief attending on the
wizard in person--for in his absence who is to be our commander? And,
should any sudden rising of our foes take place, of which we are every
hour uncertain, we may lose more by the want of him one hour than we
could ever regain." "Ay, think of that, gentlemen," said Dickie: "My cousin Longspeare
speaks good sense. What could we do wanting Sir Ringan. We're all
children to him, and little better without him." "And old children are the worst of all children," said the warden; "I
would rather be deaved with the teething yammer than the toothless
chatter. Prithee, peace, and let us hear out our cousin Simon's
proposal." The circle of the gallant kinsmen did not like ill to hear this snub on
old Dickie. They could not account for the chief's partiality to him;
and they were even afraid that, being the oldest man, he should be
nominated to the command in the knight's absence. It was however noted
by all, that Dickie was not half so great a man in field or foray as he
was at board in the castle of Mountcomyn. Only a very few men of
experience discerned the bottom of this. The truth was, that Sir Ringan
did not care a doit either for Dickie's counsels or his arm, but he saw
that his lady abhorred him, and therefore he would not yield to cast him
off. His lady was of a high spirit and proud unyielding temper, and the
knight could not stand his own with her at all times and seasons; but
before his kinsmen warriors he was particularly jealous of his dignity,
and would not yield to the encroachment on it of a single item. It was
by this kind of elemental opposition, if it may be so termed, that
Dickie maintained his consequence at the warden's castle. In the field
he was nothing more than a foolish vain old kinsman. "I propose," said Longspeare," that we send a deputation of our _notable
men_ to the warlock, of whom we have some of the first that perhaps ever
the world produced. As a bard, or minstrel, we can send Colley Carol, a
man that is fit to charm the spirits out of the heart of the earth, or
the bowels of the cloud, without the aid of old Michael. As a man of
crabbed wit and endless absurdity, we can send the Deil's Tam: As a true
natural and moral philosopher, the Laird o' the Peatstacknowe: As one
versed in all the mysteries of religion, and many mysteries beside, or
some tell lies, we can send the gospel friar. All these are men of
spirit, and can handle the sword and the bow either less or more: And as
a man of unequalled strength and courage, and a guard and captain over
all the rest, we can send Charlie o' Yardbire--and I will defy all the
kingdoms of Europe to send out sic another quorum either to emperor,
Turk, wizard, or the devil himself." Every one applauded Simon Longspeare's motion, and declared the
deputation worthy of being sent out, if it were for nothing but its own
unrivalled excellence. Never, they said, since the mind of man was
framed, was there such a combination of rare talent in so small a
circle. There was none of those nominated for the mission present
excepting muckle Charlie Scott. Charlie scratched his head, and
said:--"Gude faith, callans, I hae a queer bike to gang wi! he-he-he! I
fear we'll get mae to laugh at us than gie us ought: The Deil's
Tam an' the metre poet! the fat gospel friar, and the laird o' the
Peatstacknowe! I never gaed out on sic a foray as this afore, an' little
do I wot how we'll come on. He-he-he! A wheen queer chaps, faith!" The jocund kinsmen then shouted to Gibby Jordan of the Peatstacknowe to
come into the circle, that they might hear what he had to say about
going on this celebrated embassy. This gentleman's name had erst been
Gordon: By some mistake, either in spelling, or falling into some foul
tub by night, for some grounded it both ways, it had been changed on him
to Jordan, and, as he had no resource, he was obliged to admit it as
legitimate. He was a man of education, and could read, write, and cast
up accounts. But his figure, features, and the nasal twine with which he
pronounced every word that he spoke, rendered his discourse irresistibly
ludicrous. Every one was so ready to give Jordan the information, that
he was chosen as one to go on a deputation to Master Michael Scott the
warlock, that the laird for a long time could not get a word said; but
stood and looked about him, turning always round his long nose to the
speaker that was loudest, or him that was poking him most forcibly to
obtain attention. "Gentlemen," said Gibby Jordan, "you mind me of a story that I have
heard about a paddock that was lying on the plowed land, an' by comes
the harrows, an' they gangs out ower the tap o' the poor paddock, an'
every tooth gae her a tite an' a turn ower. 'What's the matter wi' you
the day, Mrs Paddock?'