At such a time sorrow has no voice; affliction, tamed by it is very vehemence, is
mute. The poor animal recognised me, licked my hand, crept close to its lord, and died. He had been
evidently thrown from his horse by some falling ruin, which had crushed his head, and defaced his
whole person. I bent over the body, and took in my hand the edge of his cloak, less altered in
appearance than the human frame it clothed. I pressed it to my lips, while the rough soldiers
gathered around, mourning over this worthiest prey of death, as if regret and endless lamentation
could re-illumine the extinguished spark, or call to its shattered prison-house of flesh the liberated
spirit. Yesterday those limbs were worth an universe; they then enshrined a transcendant power,
whose intents, words, and actions were worthy to be recorded in letters of gold; now the
superstition of affection alone could give value to the shattered mechanism, which, incapable and
clod-like, no more resembled Raymond, than the fallen rain is like the former mansion of cloud in
which it climbed the highest skies, and gilded by the sun, attracted all eyes, and satiated the sense by
its excess of beauty. Such as he had now become, such as was his terrene vesture, defaced and spoiled, we wrapt it in our
cloaks, and lifting the burthen in our arms, bore it from this city of the dead. The question arose as to
where we should deposit him. In our road to the palace, we passed through the Greek cemetery;
here on a tablet of black marble I caused him to be laid; the cypresses waved high above, their death-
like gloom accorded with his state of nothingness. We cut branches of the funereal trees and placed
them over him, and on these again his sword. I left a guard to protect this treasure of dust; and
ordered perpetual torches to be burned around. When I returned to Perdita, I found that she had already been informed of the success of my
undertaking. He, her beloved, the sole and eternal object of her passionate tenderness, was restored
her. Such was the maniac language of her enthusiasm. What though those limbs moved not, and
those lips could no more frame modulated accents of wisdom and love! What though like a weed
flung from the fruitless sea, he lay the prey of corruption- still that was the form she had caressed,
those the lips that meeting hers, had drank the spirit of love from the commingling breath; that was
the earthly mechanism of dissoluble clay she had called her own. True, she looked forward to
another life; true, the burning spirit of love seemed to her unextinguishable throughout eternity. Yet
at this time, with human fondness, she clung to all that her human senses permitted her to see and
feel to be a part of Raymond. Pale as marble, clear and beaming as that, she heard my tale, and enquired concerning the spot
where he had been deposited. Her features had lost the distortion of grief; her eyes were
brightened, her very person seemed dilated; while the excessive whiteness and even transparency of
her skin, and something hollow in her voice, bore witness that not tranquillity, but excess of
excitement, occasioned the treacherous calm that settled on her countenance. I asked her where he
should be buried. She replied, "At Athens; even at the Athens which he loved. Without the town, on
the acclivity of Hymettus, there is a rocky recess which he pointed out to me as the spot where he
would wish to repose." My own desire certainly was that he should not be removed from the spot where he now lay. But her
wish was of course to be complied with; and I entreated her to prepare without delay for our
departure. Behold now the melancholy train cross the flats of Thrace, and wind through the defiles, and over the
mountains of Macedonia, coast the clear waves of the Peneus, cross the Larissean plain, pass the
straits of Thermopylae, and ascending in succession Oeta and Parnassus, descend to the fertile plain
of Athens. Women bear with resignation these long drawn ills, but to a man's impatient spirit, the
slow motion of our cavalcade, the melancholy repose we took at noon, the perpetual presence of the
pall, gorgeous though it was, that wrapt the rifled casket which had contained Raymond, the
monotonous recurrence of day and night, unvaried by hope or change, all the circumstances of our
march were intolerable. Perdita, shut up in herself, spoke little. Her carriage was closed; and, when
we rested, she sat leaning her pale cheek on her white cold hand, with eyes fixed on the ground,
indulging thoughts which refused communication or sympathy. We descended from Parnassus, emerging from its many folds, and passed through Livadia on our
road to Attica. Perdita would not enter Athens; but reposing at Marathon on the night of our arrival,
conducted me on the following day, to the spot selected by her as the treasure house of Raymond's
dear remains. It was in a recess near the head of the ravine to the south of Hymettus. The chasm,
deep, black, and hoary, swept from the summit to the base; in the fissures of the rock myrtle
underwood grew and wild thyme, the food of many nations of bees; enormous crags protruded into
the cleft, some beetling over, others rising perpendicularly from it. At the foot of this sublime chasm,
a fertile laughing valley reached from sea to sea, and beyond was spread the blue Aegean, sprinkled
with islands, the light waves glancing beneath the sun. Close to the spot on which we stood, was a
solitary rock, high and conical, which, divided on every side from the mountain, seemed a nature-
hewn pyramid; with little labour this block was reduced to a perfect shape; the narrow cell was
scooped out beneath in which Raymond was placed, and a short inscription, carved in the living
stone, recorded the name of its tenant, the cause and aera of his death. Every thing was accomplished with speed under my directions. I agreed to leave the finishing and
guardianship of the tomb to the head of the religious establishment at Athens, and by the end of
October prepared for my return to England. I mentioned this to Perdita. It was painful to appear to
drag her from the last scene that spoke of her lost one; but to linger here was vain, and my very soul
was sick with its yearning to rejoin my Idris and her babes. In reply, my sister requested me to
accompany her the following evening to the tomb of Raymond. Some days had passed since I had
visited the spot. The path to it had been enlarged, and steps hewn in the rock led us less circuitously
than before, to the spot itself; the platform on which the pyramid stood was enlarged, and looking
towards the south, in a recess overshadowed by the straggling branches of a wild fig-tree, I saw
foundations dug, and props and rafters fixed, evidently the commencement of a cottage; standing on
its unfinished threshold, the tomb was at our right-hand, the whole ravine, and plain, and azure sea
immediately before us; the dark rocks received a glow from the descending sun, which glanced along
the cultivated valley, and dyed in purple and orange the placid waves; we sat on a rocky elevation,
and I gazed with rapture on the beauteous panorama of living and changeful colours, which varied
and enhanced the graces of earth and ocean. "Did I not do right," said Perdita, "in having my loved one conveyed hither? Hereafter this will be the
cynosure of Greece. In such a spot death loses half its terrors, and even the inanimate dust appears
to partake of the spirit of beauty which hallows this region. Lionel, he sleeps there; that is the grave
of Raymond, he whom in my youth I first loved; whom my heart accompanied in days of separation
and anger; to whom I am now joined for ever. Never-mark me-never will I leave this spot. Methinks his spirit remains here as well as that dust, which, uncommunicable though it be, is more
precious in its nothingness than aught else widowed earth clasps to her sorrowing bosom. The myrtle
bushes, the thyme, the little cyclamen, which peep from the fissures of the rock, all the produce of
the place, bear affinity to him; the light that invests the hills participates in his essence, and sky and
mountains, sea and valley, are imbued by the presence of his spirit. I will live and die here! "Go you to England, Lionel; return to sweet Idris and dearest Adrian; return, and let my orphan girl
be as a child of your own in your house. Look on me as dead; and truly if death be a mere change of
state, I am dead. This is another world, from that which late I inhabited, from that which is now your
home. Here I hold communion only with the has been, and to come. Go you to England, and leave
me where alone I can consent to drag out the miserable days which I must still live." A shower of tears terminated her sad harangue. I had expected some extravagant proposition, and
remained silent awhile, collecting my thoughts that I might the better combat her fanciful scheme. "You cherish dreary thoughts, my dear Perdita," I said, "nor do I wonder that for a time your better
reason should be influenced by passionate grief and a disturbed imagination. Even I am in love with
this last home of Raymond's; nevertheless we must quit it." "I expected this," cried Perdita; "I supposed that you would treat me as a mad, foolish girl. But do not
deceive yourself; this cottage is built by my order; and here I shall remain, until the hour arrives
when I may share his happier dwelling." "My dearest girl!" "And what is there so strange in my design? I might have deceived you; I might have talked of
remaining here only a few months; in your anxiety to reach Windsor you would have left me, and
without reproach or contention, I might have pursued my plan. But I disdained the artifice; or rather
in my wretchedness it was my only consolation to pour out my heart to you, my brother, my only
friend. You will not dispute with me? You know how wilful your poor, misery-stricken sister is. Take
my girl with you; wean her from sights and thoughts of sorrow; let infantine hilarity revisit her heart,
and animate her eyes; so could it never be, were she near me; it is far better for all of you that you
should never see me again. For myself, I will not voluntarily seek death, that is, I will not, while I can
command myself; and I can here. But drag me from this country; and my power of self control
vanishes, nor can I answer for the violence my agony of grief may lead me to commit." "You clothe your meaning, Perdita," I replied, "in powerful words, yet that meaning is selfish and
unworthy of you. You have often agreed with me that there is but one solution to the intricate riddle
of life; to improve ourselves, and contribute to the happiness of others: and now, in the very prime
of life, you desert your principles, and shut yourself up in useless solitude. Will you think of Raymond
less at Windsor, the scene of your early happiness? Will you commune less with his departed spirit,
while you watch over and cultivate the rare excellence of his child? You have been sadly visited; nor
do I wonder that a feeling akin to insanity should drive you to bitter and unreasonable imaginings. But a home of love awaits you in your native England. My tenderness and affection must soothe you;
the society of Raymond's friends will be of more solace than these dreary speculations. We will all
make it our first care, our dearest task, to contribute to your happiness." Perdita shook her head; "If it could be so," she replied, "I were much in the wrong to disdain your
offers. But it is not a matter of choice; I can live here only. I am a part of this scene; each and all its
properties are a part of me. This is no sudden fancy; I live by it. The knowledge that I am here, rises
with me in the morning, and enables me to endure the light; it is mingled with my food, which else
were poison; it walks, it sleeps with me, for ever it accompanies me. Here I may even cease to repine,
and may add my tardy consent to the decree which has taken him from me. He would rather have
died such a death, which will be recorded in history to endless time, than have lived to old age
unknown, unhonoured. Nor can I desire better, than, having been the chosen and beloved of his
heart, here, in youth's prime, before added years can tarnish the best feelings of my nature, to watch
his tomb, and speedily rejoin him in his blessed repose. "So much, my dearest Lionel, I have said, wishing to persuade you that I do right. If you are
unconvinced, I can add nothing further by way of argument, and I can only declare my fixed resolve. I
stay here; force only can remove me. Be it so; drag me away-I return; confine me, imprison me, still
I escape, and come here. Or would my brother rather devote the heart-broken Perdita to the straw
and chains of a maniac, than suffer her to rest in peace beneath the shadow of His society, in this my
own selected and beloved recess? "-
All this appeared to me, I own, methodized madness. I imagined, that it was my imperative duty to
take her from scenes that thus forcibly reminded her of her loss. Nor did I doubt, that in the
tranquillity of our family circle at Windsor, she would recover some degree of composure, and in the
end, of happiness. My affection for Clara also led me to oppose these fond dreams of cherished grief;
her sensibility had already been too much excited; her infant heedlessness too soon exchanged for
deep and anxious thought. The strange and romantic scheme of her mother, might confirm and
perpetuate the painful view of life, which had intruded itself thus early on her contemplation. On returning home, the captain of the steam packet with whom I had agreed to sail, came to tell me,
that accidental circumstances hastened his departure, and that, if I went with him, I must come on
board at five on the following morning. I hastily gave my consent to this arrangement, and as hastily
formed a plan through which Perdita should be forced to become my companion. I believe that most
people in my situation would have acted in the same manner. Yet this consideration does not, or
rather did not in after time, diminish the reproaches of my conscience. At the moment, I felt
convinced that I was acting for the best, and that all I did was right and even necessary. I sat with Perdita and soothed her, by my seeming assent to her wild scheme. She received my
concurrence with pleasure, and a thousand times over thanked her deceiving, deceitful brother. As
night came on, her spirits, enlivened by my unexpected concession, regained an almost forgotten
vivacity. I pretended to be alarmed by the feverish glow in her cheek; I entreated her to take a
composing draught; I poured out the medicine, which she took docilely from me. I watched her as
she drank it. Falsehood and artifice are in themselves so hateful, that, though I still thought I did
right, a feeling of shame and guilt came painfully upon me. I left her, and soon heard that she slept
soundly under the influence of the opiate I had administered. She was carried thus unconscious on
board; the anchor weighed, and the wind being favourable, we stood far out to sea; with all the
canvas spread, and the power of the engine to assist, we scudded swiftly and steadily through the
chafed element. It was late in the day before Perdita awoke, and a longer time elapsed before recovering from the
torpor occasioned by the laudanum, she perceived her change of situation. She started wildly from
her couch, and flew to the cabin window. The blue and troubled sea sped past the vessel, and was
spread shoreless around: the sky was covered by a rack, which in its swift motion shewed how
speedily she was borne away. The creaking of the masts, the clang of the wheels, the tramp above,
all persuaded her that she was already far from the shores of Greece.-"Where are we?" she cried,
"where are we going? "-
The attendant whom I had stationed to watch her, replied, "to England. "-
"And my brother? "-
"Is on deck, Madam." "Unkind! unkind!" exclaimed the poor victim, as with a deep sigh she looked on the waste of waters. Then without further remark, she threw herself on her couch, and closing her eyes remained
motionless; so that but for the deep sighs that burst from her, it would have seemed that she slept. As soon as I heard that she had spoken, I sent Clara to her, that the sight of the lovely innocent might
inspire gentle and affectionate thoughts. But neither the presence of her child, nor a subsequent visit
from me, could rouse my sister. She looked on Clara with a countenance of woful meaning, but she
did not speak. When I appeared, she turned away, and in reply to my enquiries, only said, "You know
not what you have done! "-I trusted that this sullenness betokened merely the struggle between
disappointment and natural affection, and that in a few days she would be reconciled to her fate. When night came on, she begged that Clara might sleep in a separate cabin. Her servant, however,
remained with her. About midnight she spoke to the latter, saying that she had had a bad dream, and
bade her go to her daughter, and bring word whether she rested quietly. The woman obeyed. The breeze, that had flagged since sunset, now rose again. I was on deck, enjoying our swift progress. The quiet was disturbed only by the rush of waters as they divided before the steady keel, the
murmur of the moveless and full sails, the wind whistling in the shrouds, and the regular motion of
the engine. The sea was gently agitated, now shewing a white crest, and now resuming an uniform
hue; the clouds had disappeared; and dark ether clipt the broad ocean, in which the constellations
vainly sought their accustomed mirror. Our rate could not have been less than eight knots. Suddenly I heard a splash in the sea. The sailors on watch rushed to the side of the vessel, with the
cry-some one gone overboard. "It is not from deck," said the man at the helm, "something has been
thrown from the aft cabin." A call for the boat to be lowered was echoed from the deck. I rushed into
my sister's cabin; it was empty. With sails abaft, the engine stopt, the vessel remained unwillingly stationary, until, after an hour's
search, my poor Perdita was brought on board. But no care could re-animate her, no medicine cause
her dear eyes to open, and the blood to flow again from her pulseless heart. One clenched hand
contained a slip of paper, on which was written, "To Athens." To ensure her removal thither, and
prevent the irrecoverable loss of her body in the wide sea, she had had the precaution to fasten a
long shawl round her waist, and again to the staunchions of the cabin window. She had drifted
somewhat under the keel of the vessel, and her being out of sight occasioned the delay in finding
her. And thus the ill-starred girl died a victim to my senseless rashness. Thus, in early day, she left us
for the company of the dead, and preferred to share the rocky grave of Raymond, before the
animated scene this cheerful earth afforded, and the society of loving friends. Thus in her twenty-
ninth year she died; having enjoyed some few years of the happiness of paradise, and sustaining a
reverse to which her impatient spirit and affectionate disposition were unable to submit. As I marked
the placid expression that had settled on her countenance in death, I felt, in spite of the pangs of
remorse, in spite of heart-rending regret, that it was better to die so, than to drag on long, miserable
years of repining and inconsolable grief. Stress of weather drove us up the Adriatic Gulph; and, our
vessel being hardly fitted to weather a storm, we took refuge in the port of Ancona. Here I met
Georgio Palli, the vice-admiral of the Greek fleet, a former friend and warm partizan of Raymond. I
committed the remains of my lost Perdita to his care, for the purpose of having them transported to
Hymettus, and placed in the cell her Raymond already occupied beneath the pyramid. This was all
accomplished even as I wished. She reposed beside her beloved, and the tomb above was inscribed
with the united names of Raymond and Perdita. I then came to a resolution of pursuing our journey to England overland. My own heart was racked
by regrets and remorse. The apprehension, that Raymond had departed for ever, that his name,
blended eternally with the past, must be erased from every anticipation of the future, had come
slowly upon me. I had always admired his talents; his noble aspirations; his grand conceptions of the
glory and majesty of his ambition: his utter want of mean passions; his fortitude and daring. In
Greece I had learnt to love him; his very waywardness, and self-abandonment to the impulses of
superstition, attached me to him doubly; it might be weakness, but it was the antipodes of all that
was grovelling and selfish. To these pangs were added the loss of Perdita, lost through my own
accursed self-will and conceit. This dear one, my sole relation; whose progress I had marked from
tender childhood through the varied path of life, and seen her throughout conspicuous for integrity,
devotion, and true affection; for all that constitutes the peculiar graces of the female character, and
beheld her at last the victim of too much loving, too constant an attachment to the perishable and
lost, she, in her pride of beauty and life, had thrown aside the pleasant perception of the apparent
world for the unreality of the grave, and had left poor Clara quite an orphan. I concealed from this
beloved child that her mother's death was voluntary, and tried every means to awaken cheerfulness
in her sorrow-stricken spirit. One of my first acts for the recovery even of my own composure, was to bid farewell to the sea. Its
hateful splash renewed again and again to my sense the death of my sister; its roar was a dirge; in
every dark hull that was tossed on its inconstant bosom, I imaged a bier, that would convey to death
all who trusted to its treacherous smiles. Farewell to the sea! Come, my Clara, sit beside me in this
aerial bark; quickly and gently it cleaves the azure serene, and with soft undulation glides upon the
current of the air; or, if storm shake its fragile mechanism, the green earth is below; we can descend,
and take shelter on the stable continent. Here aloft, the companions of the swift-winged birds, we
skim through the unresisting element, fleetly and fearlessly. The light boat heaves not, nor is
opposed by death-bearing waves; the ether opens before the prow, and the shadow of the globe
that upholds it, shelters us from the noon-day sun. Beneath are the plains of Italy, or the vast
undulations of the wave-like Apennines: fertility reposes in their many folds, and woods crown the
summits. The free and happy peasant, unshackled by the Austrian, bears the double harvest to the
garner; and the refined citizens rear without dread the long blighted tree of knowledge in this garden
of the world. We were lifted above the Alpine peaks, and from their deep and brawling ravines
entered the plain of fair France, and after an airy journey of six days, we landed at Dieppe, furled the
feathered wings, and closed the silken globe of our little pinnace. A heavy rain made this mode of
travelling now incommodious; so we embarked in a steam-packet, and after a short passage landed
at Portsmouth. A strange story was rife here. A few days before, a tempest-struck vessel had appeared off the town:
the hull was parched-looking and cracked, the sails rent, and bent in a careless, unseamanlike
manner, the shrouds tangled and broken. She drifted towards the harbour, and was stranded on the
sands at the entrance. In the morning the custom-house officers, together with a crowd of idlers,
visited her. One only of the crew appeared to have arrived with her. He had got to shore, and had
walked a few paces towards the town, and then, vanquished by malady and approaching death, had
fallen on the inhospitable beach. He was found stiff, his hands clenched, and pressed against his
breast. His skin, nearly black, his matted hair and bristly beard, were signs of a long protracted
misery. It was whispered that he had died of the plague. No one ventured on board the vessel, and
strange sights were averred to be seen at night, walking the deck, and hanging on the masts and
shrouds. She soon went to pieces; I was shewn where she had been, and saw her disjoined timbers
tossed on the waves. The body of the man who had landed, had been buried deep in the sands; and
none could tell more, than that the vessel was American built, and that several months before the
Fortunatas had sailed from Philadelphia, of which no tidings were afterwards received. I RETURNED to my family estate in the autumn of the year 2092. My heart had long been with them;
and I felt sick with the hope and delight of seeing them again. The district which contained them
appeared the abode of every kindly spirit. Happiness, love and peace, walked the forest paths, and
tempered the atmosphere. After all the agitation and sorrow I had endured in Greece, I sought
Windsor, as the storm-driven bird does the nest in which it may fold its wings in tranquillity. How unwise had the wanderers been, who had deserted its shelter, entangled themselves in the web
of society, and entered on what men of the world call "life,"-that labyrinth of evil, that scheme of
mutual torture. To live, according to this sense of the word, we must not only observe and learn, we
must also feel; we must not be mere spectators of action, we must act; we must not describe, but be
subjects of description. Deep sorrow must have been the inmate of our bosoms; fraud must have lain
in wait for us; the artful must have deceived us; sickening doubt and false hope must have chequered
our days; hilarity and joy, that lap the soul in ecstasy, must at times have possessed us. Who that
knows what "life" is, would pine for this feverish species of existence? I have lived. I have spent days
and nights of festivity; I have joined in ambitious hopes, and exulted in victory: now,-shut the door
on the world, and build high the wall that is to separate me from the troubled scene enacted within
its precincts. Let us live for each other and for happiness; let us seek peace in our dear home, near
the inland murmur of streams, and the gracious waving of trees, the beauteous vesture of earth, and
sublime pageantry of the skies. Let us leave "life," that we may live. Idris was well content with this resolve of mine. Her native sprightliness needed no undue
excitement, and her placid heart reposed contented on my love, the well-being of her children, and
the beauty of surrounding nature. Her pride and blameless ambition was to create smiles in all
around her, and to shed repose on the fragile existence of her brother. In spite of her tender nursing,
the health of Adrian perceptibly declined. Walking, riding, the common occupations of life, overcame
him: he felt no pain, but seemed to tremble for ever on the verge of annihilation. Yet, as he had lived
on for months nearly in the same state, he did not inspire us with any immediate fear; and, though
he talked of death as an event most familiar to his thoughts, he did not cease to exert himself to
render others happy, or to cultivate his own astonishing powers of mind. Winter passed away; and
spring, led by the months, awakened life in all nature. The forest was dressed in green; the young
calves frisked on the new-sprung grass; the wind-winged shadows of light clouds sped over the green
cornfields; the hermit cuckoo repeated his monotonous all-hail to the season; the nightingale, bird of
love and minion of the evening star, filled the woods with song; while Venus lingered in the warm
sunset, and the young green of the trees lay in gentle relief along the clear horizon. Delight awoke in every heart, delight and exultation; for there was peace through all the world; the
temple of Universal Janus was shut, and man died not that year by the hand of man. "Let this last but twelve months," said Adrian; "and earth will become a Paradise. The energies of
man were before directed to the destruction of his species: they now aim at its liberation and
preservation. Man cannot repose, and his restless aspirations will now bring forth good instead of
evil. The favoured countries of the south will throw off the iron yoke of servitude; poverty will quit
us, and with that, sickness. What may not the forces, never before united, of liberty and peace
achieve in this dwelling of man?" "Dreaming, for ever dreaming, Windsor!" said Ryland, the old adversary of Raymond, and candidate
for the Protectorate at the ensuing election. "Be assured that earth is not, nor ever can be heaven,
while the seeds of hell are natives of her soil. When the seasons have become equal, when the air
breeds no disorders, when its surface is no longer liable to blights and droughts, then sickness will
cease; when men's passions are dead, poverty will depart. When love is no longer akin to hate, then
brotherhood will exist: we are very far from that state at present." "Not so far as you may suppose," observed a little old astronomer, by name Merrival, "the poles
precede slowly, but securely; in an hundred thousand years-"
"We shall all be underground," said Ryland. "The pole of the earth will coincide with the pole of the ecliptic," continued the astronomer, "an
universal spring will be produced, and earth become a paradise." "And we shall of course enjoy the benefit of the change," said Ryland, contemptuously. "We have strange news here," I observed. I had the newspaper in my hand, and, as usual, had turned
to the intelligence from Greece. "It seems that the total destruction of Constantinople, and the
supposition that winter had purified the air of the fallen city, gave the Greeks courage to visit its site,
and begin to rebuild it. But they tell us that the curse of God is on the place, for every one who has
ventured within the walls has been tainted by the plague; that this disease has spread in Thrace and
Macedonia; and now, fearing the virulence of infection during the coming heats, a cordon has been
drawn on the frontiers of Thessaly, and a strict quarantine exacted." This intelligence brought us back
from the prospect of paradise, held out after the lapse of an hundred thousand years, to the pain and
misery at present existent upon earth. We talked of the ravages made last year by pestilence in every
quarter of the world; and of the dreadful consequences of a second visitation. We discussed the best
means of preventing infection, and of preserving health and activity in a large city thus afflicted-
London, for instance. Merrival did not join in this conversation; drawing near Idris, he proceeded to
assure her that the joyful prospect of an earthly paradise after an hundred thousand years, was
clouded to him by the knowledge that in a certain period of time after, an earthly hell or purgatory,
would occur, when the ecliptic and equator would be at right angles. Our party at length broke up;
"We are all dreaming this morning," said Ryland, "it is as wise to discuss the probability of a visitation
of the plague in our well-governed metropolis, as to calculate the centuries which must escape
before we can grow pine-apples here in the open air." But, though it seemed absurd to calculate upon the arrival of the plague in London, I could not reflect
without extreme pain on the desolation this evil would cause in Greece. The English for the most part
talked of Thrace and Macedonia, as they would of a lunar territory, which, unknown to them,
presented no distinct idea or interest to the minds. I had trod the soil. The faces of many of the
inhabitants were familiar to me; in the towns, plains, hills, and defiles of these countries, I had
enjoyed unspeakable delight, as I journied through them the year before. Some romantic village,
some cottage, or elegant abode there situated, inhabited by the lovely and the good, rose before my
mental sight, and the question haunted me, is the plague there also?-That same invincible monster,
which hovered over and devoured Constantinople-that fiend more cruel than tempest, less tame
than fire, is, alas, unchained in that beautiful country-these reflections would not allow me to rest. The political state of England became agitated as the time drew near when the new Protector was to
be elected. This event excited the more interest, since it was the current report, that if the popular
candidate (Ryland) should be chosen, the question of the abolition of hereditary rank, and other
feudal relics, would come under the consideration of parliament. Not a word had been spoken during
the present session on any of these topics. Every thing would depend upon the choice of a Protector,
and the elections of the ensuing year. Yet this very silence was awful, shewing the deep weight
attributed to the question; the fear of either party to hazard an ill-timed attack, and the expectation
of a furious contention when it should begin. But although St. Stephen's did not echo with the voice which filled each heart, the newspapers
teemed with nothing else; and in private companies the conversation however remotely begun, soon
verged towards this central point, while voices were lowered and chairs drawn closer. The nobles did
not hesitate to express their fear; the other party endeavoured to treat the matter lightly. "Shame on
the country," said Ryland, "to lay so much stress upon words and frippery; it is a question of nothing;
of the new painting of carriage-pannels and the embroidery of footmen's coats." Yet could England indeed doff her lordly trappings, and be content with the democratic style of
America? Were the pride of ancestry, the patrician spirit, the gentle courtesies and refined pursuits,
splendid attributes of rank, to be erased among us? We were told that this would not be the case;
that we were by nature a poetical people, a nation easily duped by words, ready to array clouds in
splendour, and bestow honour on the dust. This spirit we could never lose; and it was to diffuse this
concentrated spirit of birth, that the new law was to be brought forward. We were assured that,
when the name and title of Englishman was the sole patent of nobility, we should all be noble; that
when no man born under English sway, felt another his superior in rank, courtesy and refinement
would become the birth-right of all our countrymen. Let not England be so far disgraced, as to have it
imagined that it can be without nobles, nature's true nobility, who bear their patent in their mien,
who are from their cradle elevated above the rest of their species, because they are better than the
rest. Among a race of independent, and generous, and well educated men, in a country where the
imagination is empress of men's minds, there needs be no fear that we should want a perpetual
succession of the high-born and lordly. That party, however, could hardly yet be considered a
minority in the kingdom, who extolled the ornament of the column, "the Corinthian capital of
polished society;" they appealed to prejudices without number, to old attachments and young
hopes; to the expectation of thousands who might one day become peers; they set up as a
scarecrow, the spectre of all that was sordid, mechanic and base in the commercial republics. The plague had come to Athens. Hundreds of English residents returned to their own country. Raymond's beloved Athenians, the free, the noble people of the divinest town in Greece, fell like ripe
corn before the merciless sickle of the adversary. Its pleasant places were deserted; its temples and
palaces were converted into tombs; its energies, bent before towards the highest objects of human
ambition, were now forced to converge to one point, the guarding against the innumerous arrows of
the plague. At any other time this disaster would have excited extreme compassion among us; but it was now
passed over, while each mind was engaged by the coming controversy. It was not so with me; and
the question of rank and right dwindled to insignificance in my eyes, when I pictured the scene of
suffering Athens. I heard of the death of only sons; of wives and husbands most devoted; of the
rending of ties twisted with the heart's fibres, of friend losing friend, and young mothers mourning
for their first born; and these moving incidents were grouped and painted in my mind by the
knowledge of the persons, by my esteem and affection for the sufferers. It was the admirers, friends,
fellow soldiers of Raymond, families that had welcomed Perdita to Greece, and lamented with her
the loss of her lord, that were swept away, and went to dwell with them in the undistinguishing
tomb. The plague at Athens had been preceded and caused by the contagion from the East; and the scene
of havoc and death continued to be acted there, on a scale of fearful magnitude. A hope that the
visitation of the present year would prove the last, kept up the spirits of the merchants connected
with these countries; but the inhabitants were driven to despair, or to a resignation which, arising
from fanaticism, assumed the same dark hue. America had also received the taint; and, were it
yellow fever or plague, the epidemic was gifted with a virulence before unfelt. The devastation was
not confined to the towns, but spread throughout the country; the hunter died in the woods, the
peasant in the corn-fields, and the fisher on his native waters. A strange story was brought to us from the East, to which little credit would have been given, had
not the fact been attested by a multitude of witnesses, in various parts of the world. On the twenty-
first of June, it was said that an hour before noon, a black sun arose: an orb, the size of that luminary,
but dark, defined, whose beams were shadows, ascended from the west; in about an hour it had
reached the meridian, and eclipsed the bright parent of day. Night fell upon every country, night,
sudden, rayless, entire. The stars came out, shedding their ineffectual glimmerings on the light-
widowed earth. But soon the dim orb passed from over the sun, and lingered down the eastern
heaven. As it descended, its dusky rays crossed the brilliant ones of the sun, and deadened or
distorted them. The shadows of things assumed strange and ghastly shapes. The wild animals in the
woods took fright at the unknown shapes figured on the ground. They fled they knew not whither;
and the citizens were filled with greater dread, at the convulsion which "shook lions into civil
streets;"-birds, strong-winged eagles, suddenly blinded, fell in the market-places, while owls and
bats shewed themselves welcoming the early night. Gradually the object of fear sank beneath the
horizon, and to the last shot up shadowy beams into the otherwise radiant air. Such was the tale sent
us from Asia, from the eastern extremity of Europe, and from Africa as far west as the Golden Coast. Whether this story were true or not, the effects were certain. Through Asia, from the banks of the
Nile to the shores of the Caspian, from the Hellespont even to the sea of Oman, a sudden panic was
driven. The men filled the mosques; the women, veiled, hastened to the tombs, and carried offerings
to the dead, thus to preserve the living. The plague was forgotten, in this new fear which the black
sun had spread; and, though the dead multiplied, and the streets of Ispahan, of Pekin, and of Delhi
were strewed with pestilence-struck corpses, men passed on, gazing on the ominous sky, regardless
of the death beneath their feet. The christians sought their churches,-christian maidens, even at the
feast of roses, clad in white, with shining veils, sought, in long procession, the places consecrated to
their religion, filling the air with their hymns; while, ever and anon, from the lips of some poor
mourner in the crowd, a voice of wailing burst, and the rest looked up, fancying they could discern
the sweeping wings of angels, who passed over the earth, lamenting the disasters about to fall on
man. In the sunny clime of Persia, in the crowded cities of China, amidst the aromatic groves of Cashmere,
and along the southern shores of the Mediterranean, such scenes had place. Even in Greece the tale
of the sun of darkness encreased the fears and despair of the dying multitude. We, in our cloudy isle,
were far removed from danger, and the only circumstance that brought these disasters at all home
to us, was the daily arrival of vessels from the east, crowded with emigrants, mostly English; for the
Moslems, though the fear of death was spread keenly among them, still clung together; that, if they
were to die (and if they were, death would as readily meet them on the homeless sea, or in far
England, as in Persia,)- if they were to die, their bones might rest in earth made sacred by the relics
of true believers. Mecca had never before been so crowded with pilgrims; yet the Arabs neglected to
pillage the caravans, but, humble and weaponless, they joined the procession, praying Mahomet to
avert plague from their tents and deserts. I cannot describe the rapturous delight with which I turned from political brawls at home, and the
physical evils of distant countries, to my own dear home, to the selected abode of goodness and
love; to peace, and the interchange of every sacred sympathy. Had I never quitted Windsor, these
emotions would not have been so intense; but I had in Greece been the prey of fear and deplorable
change; in Greece, after a period of anxiety and sorrow, I had seen depart two, whose very names
were the symbol of greatness and virtue. But such miseries could never intrude upon the domestic
circle left to me, while, secluded in our beloved forest, we passed our lives in tranquillity. Some small
change indeed the progress of years brought here; and time, as it is wont, stamped the traces of
mortality on our pleasures and expectations. Idris, the most affectionate wife, sister and friend, was
a tender and loving mother. The feeling was not with her as with many, a pastime; it was a passion. We had had three children; one, the second in age, died while I was in Greece. This had dashed the
triumphant and rapturous emotions of maternity with grief and fear. Before this event, the little
beings, sprung from herself, the young heirs of her transient life, seemed to have a sure lease of
existence; now she dreaded that the pitiless destroyer might snatch her remaining darlings, as it had
snatched their brother. The least illness caused throes of terror; she was miserable if she were at all
absent from them; her treasure of happiness she had garnered in their fragile being, and kept forever
on the watch, lest the insidious thief should as before steal these valued gems. She had fortunately
small cause for fear. Alfred, now nine years old, was an upright, manly little fellow, with radiant
brow, soft eyes, and gentle, though independent disposition. Our youngest was yet in infancy; but his
downy cheek was sprinkled with the roses of health, and his unwearied vivacity filled our halls with
innocent laughter. Clara had passed the age which, from its mute ignorance, was the source of the fears of Idris. Clara
was dear to her, to all. There was so much intelligence combined with innocence, sensibility with
forbearance, and seriousness with perfect good-humour, a beauty so transcendant, united to such
endearing simplicity, that she hung like a pearl in the shrine of our possessions, a treasure of wonder
and excellence. At the beginning of winter our Alfred, now nine years of age, first went to school at Eton. This
appeared to him the primary step towards manhood, and he was proportionably pleased. Community of study and amusement developed the best parts of his character, his steady
perseverance, generosity, and well-governed firmness. What deep and sacred emotions are excited
in a father's bosom, when he first becomes convinced that his love for his child is not a mere instinct,
but worthily bestowed, and that others, less akin, participate his approbation! It was supreme
happiness to Idris and myself, to find that the frankness which Alfred's open brow indicated, the
intelligence of his eyes, the tempered sensibility of his tones, were not delusions, but indications of
talents and virtues, which would "grow with his growth, and strengthen with his strength." At this
period, the termination of an animal's love for its offspring,-the true affection of the human parent
commences. We no longer look on this dearest part of ourselves, as a tender plant which we must
cherish, or a plaything for an idle hour. We build now on his intellectual faculties, we establish our
hopes on his moral propensities. His weakness still imparts anxiety to this feeling, his ignorance
prevents entire intimacy; but we begin to respect the future man, and to endeavour to secure his
esteem, even as if he were our equal. What can a parent have more at heart than the good opinion
of his child? In all our transactions with him our honour must be inviolate, the integrity of our
relations untainted: fate and circumstance may, when he arrives at maturity, separate us for ever-
but, as his aegis in danger, his consolation in hardship, let the ardent youth for ever bear with him
through the rough path of life, love and honour for his parents. We had lived so long in the vicinity of Eton, that its population of young folks was well known to us. Many of them had been Alfred's playmates, before they became his school-fellows. We now watched
this youthful congregation with redoubled interest. We marked the difference of character among
the boys, and endeavoured to read the future man in the stripling. There is nothing more lovely, to
which the heart more yearns than a free-spirited boy, gentle, brave, and generous. Several of the
Etonians had these characteristics; all were distinguished by a sense of honour, and spirit of
enterprize; in some, as they verged towards manhood, this degenerated into presumption; but the
younger ones, lads a little older than our own, were conspicuous for their gallant and sweet
dispositions. Here were the future governors of England; the men, who, when our ardour was cold, and our
projects completed or destroyed for ever, when, our drama acted, we doffed the garb of the hour,
and assumed the uniform of age, or of more equalizing death; here were the beings who were to
carry on the vast machine of society; here were the lovers, husbands, fathers; here the landlord, the
politician, the soldier; some fancied that they were even now ready to appear on the stage, eager to
make one among the dramatis personae of active life. It was not long since I was like one of these
beardless aspirants; when my boy shall have obtained the place I now hold, I shall have tottered into
a grey-headed, wrinkled old man. Strange system! riddle of the Sphynx, most awe-striking! that thus
man remains, while we the individuals pass away. Such is, to borrow the words of an eloquent and
philosophic writer, "the mode of existence decreed to a permanent body composed of transitory
parts; wherein, by the disposition of a stupendous wisdom, moulding together the great mysterious
incorporation of the human race, the whole, at one time, is never old, or middle-aged, or young, but,
in a condition of unchangeable constancy, moves on through the varied tenour of perpetual decay,
fall, renovation, and progression." Willingly do I give place to thee, dear Alfred! advance, offspring of tender love, child of our hopes;
advance a soldier on the road to which I have been the pioneer! I will make way for thee. I have
already put off the carelessness of childhood, the unlined brow, and springy gait of early years, that
they may adorn thee. Advance; and I will despoil myself still further for thy advantage. Time shall rob
me of the graces of maturity, shall take the fire from my eyes, and agility from my limbs, shall steal
the better part of life, eager expectation and passionate love, and shower them in double portion on
thy dear head. Advance! avail thyself of the gift, thou and thy comrades; and in the drama you are
about to act, do not disgrace those who taught you to enter on the stage, and to pronounce
becomingly the parts assigned to you! May your progress be uninterrupted and secure; born during
the spring-tide of the hopes of man, may you lead up the summer to which no winter may succeed! SOME disorder had surely crept into the course of the elements, destroying their benignant
influence. The wind, prince of air, raged through his kingdom, lashing the sea into fury, and subduing
the rebel earth into some sort of obedience. The God sends down his angry plagues from high,
  Famine and pestilence in heaps they die. Again in vengeance of his wrath he falls
  On their great hosts, and breaks their tottering walls;
  Arrests their navies on the ocean's plain,
  And whelms their strength with mountains of the main. Their deadly power shook the flourishing countries of the south, and during winter, even, we, in our
northern retreat, began to quake under their ill effects. That fable is unjust, which gives the superiority to the sun over the wind. Who has not seen the
lightsome earth, the balmy atmosphere, and basking nature become dark, cold and ungenial, when
the sleeping wind has awoke in the east? Or, when the dun clouds thickly veil the sky, while
exhaustless stores of rain are poured down, until, the dank earth refusing to imbibe the
superabundant moisture, it lies in pools on the surface; when the torch of day seems like a meteor,
to be quenched; who has not seen the cloud-stirring north arise, the streaked blue appear, and soon
an opening made in the vapours in the eye of the wind, through which the bright azure shines? The
clouds become thin; an arch is formed for ever rising upwards, till, the universal cope being unveiled,
the sun pours forth its rays, re-animated and fed by the breeze. Then mighty art thou, O wind, to be throned above all other vicegerents of nature's power; whether
thou comest destroying from the east, or pregnant with elementary life from the west; thee the
clouds obey; the sun is subservient to thee; the shoreless ocean is thy slave! Thou sweepest over the
earth, and oaks, the growth of centuries, submit to thy viewless axe; the snow-drift is scattered on
the pinnacles of the Alps, the avalanche thunders down their vallies. Thou holdest the keys of the
frost, and canst first chain and then set free the streams; under thy gentle governance the buds and
leaves are born, they flourish nursed by thee.