Then we
would visit her directly! but, upon my soul, it is impossible that I can introduce to Lady
Caroline any woman of equivocal character!" Yes,-such is the common-place jargon of
impure nobility!-All correct attention to etiquette is right-but when it sits on the lip of
the libertine; when the immodest and licentious dame of quality pretends to shrink with
horror, from a female who perhaps never knew but one virtuous and constant attachment,
decorum laughs, and virtue scoffs at the prudish grimace. It is only the few among the


rich and noble, that should dare to be thus precisely correct, who are themselves patterns
of purity; but amongst those we find such an outrageous show of virtue least displayed. A smile of indignation overspread the countenance of Sir Edward, as he looked on
Lady Caroline, who had just folded up two letters which she had been writing; one to her
worthless sister, who had absconded from her husband, and the other to a near relation
she had in parliament, to know if he could not make a proposal, the next sessions, for a
tax to be laid on the men who carried milk about, in the different parishes, and have it
made an emolument to the different livings in town, being made payable to the clergyman
of each respective rectory: this tax, if it could be levied, Mr. Leslie had promised to allow
her, to fill her card-purse. *
These two virtuous letters she had read aloud, pro bono publico. However, Sir
Edward resumed his subject. "There may be family reasons," said he, "why Mr. Rouveau may not choose to own
his relationship to Mrs. Edmonds; I understand he has children by his late wife, whose
jealousy might be excited by such a disclosure: at present, they all love and respect her." "Only a proof," said Lady Isabella, who just laid down her netting, "of their liberality
of sentiment: why, surely, if my father chose to keep a mistress, do you think I would not
countenance her? Aye, and I could love her too, if she was worthy." "Or if my husband," said Lady Caroline, "had twenty illegitimate children, by as
many different women, do you think he would not own them, sooner than they should be
excluded from every high and respectable circle, which they would be entitled to shine
amongst, as his acknowledged offspring? But of course, if we countenance the children,
we cannot the mothers. Let Mr. Rouveau marry this accomplished creature, and then we
can all visit her, after she has been properly brought out!" Sir Edward bowed and was silent, yet could not help secretly remarking, how very
liberal each of the ladies had shewn themselves, except-where true liberality was
required! But the real truth was, that Mr. Rouveau, our amiable Swiss, had been very unhappy
in an early marriage, and had solemnly vowed when he was again at liberty, never to enter
the state again: and, even had he been so inclined, he had too much real wisdom and
prudence than to unite himself to a woman whom he regarded only as a child, when
compared to himself. Mr. Rouveau and Mrs. Edmonds spoke, en passant, to the Marshams; they had not
yet visited; for Ralph, like Mr. Rouveau, was never forward in forming new acquaintance. Charles, a single unincumbered man, and passionately fond of vocal music, passed many
of his leisure hours at the hospitable villa; for it was a general and received opinion
among all who heard her, that no singer, either public or private, ever could boast of a
voice of so much sweetness and pathos, with so much compass, attended with so little
exertion, as that of Mrs. Edmonds. Here, with all the ardent enthusiasm of a true soldier's feelings, would Charles sit,
while she sang to him the sweet and plaintive air of Rosline Castle: the expression she
threw into her song, made the tear flow down his cheek, to the memory of those many
fellow-veterans who had perished, either quietly in garrison, or in the more active field of
honour:
*Historique. "Their bodies lie buried in peace!" The sweet requiem of Rosline Castle followed them to their final abode, and their faithful
soldiers, the followers of their fortunes, have fired the last volley over their grave! All the
powers of Charles Marsham's mind seemed to take their visionary flight to the tomb of
the warrior. The melody of Mrs. Edmond's voice carried him there; its melody brought
him back to reason. --To dazzle let the vain design;
To raise the thought, and touch the heart, be thine. POPE. MARY, on her return home from Mrs. Susanna Bradbury's, crept softly to her
chamber, and found her sister in a profound sleep: her back being turned towards her, she
did not discover the rueful appearance of her wounded face till the morning; when she
saw her eyes swelled and black, and her cheeks bearing several scratches; while she
complained that her limbs ached to that degree, she could not stir from her bed. Margaret confessed what had happened to her, yet she was ashamed to divulge, even
to her sister, the primary cause of her disaster: but Mary had penetration enough to know
that some flight of imagination had carried her sister to that shattered part of the house in
search of adventures. Margaret was prevented going to church by the woeful appearance of her figure, and
her sister stayed at home with her, to nurse and amuse her: however, she felt herself able
to rise some time before dinner, and when she saw the roast-pig put on the table, she
could not forbear blushing, especially as she saw a broad grin on the face of Phelim, as he
glanced towards it when he was helping the servant (who generally attended at table) to
carry in the rest of the dinner articles. Scarcely had they sat down at the hour of three, when the Rector and Sir Charles
made their appearance to pay a morning visit; both expressing much concern to hear the
cause of the young ladies being absent from church, which they had learnt from the
Reverend Mr. Marsham. Sir Charles, with great difficulty, kept his countenance, but was
the most voluble of the two, while the Rector in evident confusion cast down his eyes,
particularly when they met those of Mary, who blushed at the recollection of his improper
behaviour to her the evening she last saw him. "I am ashamed," said Mr. Leslie, "to call at this unseasonable hour; but I came to
request your company next Wednesday to dine only with ourselves, en famille, quite in
the rough; all of you must come positively." "I am afraid," said Mr. Edward Marsham, "that it will not be in the power of my girls
to accept the honour of your invitation; for you see the condition of Margaret, from a bad
fall she had yesterday, and I am sure her sister will not leave her. "-"And I am sure she
shall not leave her!" quickly replied the Rector, "because my house is such a short
distance, that, she will be well enough to go there; and what signifies her appearance? Not
a soul will see her but ourselves." "Besides," said Sir Charles, looking passionately on
Margaret, "nothing can diminish the loveliness of Miss Margaritta's countenance, nor
divest it of its charms, and----." "Sir," said Edward gravely, "my daughters have neither of them any pretensions to
beauty, and whoever extols that of this poor girl," added he, as he leant over Margaret's


chair, "is only, by such pointed ridicule, affronting her understanding, and rendering
himself despicable!" Sir Charles bit his lips, and felt too much mortified to dare look up to Margaret; who
was casting up her eyes, and giving him every meaning glance which might serve to
express the hard rigidity of her father: while the Rector sighed, and still hung down his
head. Sir Charles endeavoured to stammer out something of peculiar fascinations, and
that beauty was all in idea, that which pleased one taste, might not another, with all the
et-ceteras of common-place stuff adopted on similar occasions. The Rector relieved him, by saying, as he addressed himself particularly to Ralph,
"Come, I assure you, my good sir, it is rather an interested motive, which makes me
request the favour of your company: I have a pond, well stocked with carp and tench, but
I think it wants dragging, will you lend me two of your men on Wednesday, and let them
come early; we'll have a carp feast, and be as snug and merry as possible." He then with
all the ease of a man who knows how to be at home every where, walked to the sideboard
and helped himself to a glass of ale. It gave our farm-house inhabitants, together with the worthy Curate, much
consequence in the country, to be so particularly noticed by the Rector and his noble
family; and they all consented to go, if Margaret was well enough. The Rector, who was
the last to quit the parlour, purposely dropped his glove: matter of fact Ralph, who
thought it not possible for a clergyman, a man married too, and to a fine young woman, to
make love to his niece, said, "Mary, my dear, give Mr. Leslie his glove." Mary picked it
up, and said, "Sir, you have dropped your glove." He affected not to hear, and Mary had
to follow him into the hall; where he said, as he took the glove from her, "Oh, Miss
Marsham, forgive my rudeness last Thursday night! Forgive the effects of inebriety, and
honour me by only reading that paper," and hastily putting a small note into her hand, he
darted out of the house. Mary may be accused of imprudence, because she before kept to herself the Rector's
libertine behaviour, and also that she instantly consigned to her pocket the aforesaid note,
and sat down again to table, though not without confusion, yet with all the composure she
could assume. But Mary by such conduct shewed exemplary prudence: she knew the
Rector had it in his power, should her father offend him, not only to deprive him of his
countenance, but of his present situation as curate of Eglantine; and she knew her parent
would not tamely see his daughter insulted, without offending the insultor; and also, that
her uncle Charles, warm in his temper to a degree of rashness, would annihilate the being
who should dare to take an improper liberty with either of his nieces, particularly with
his favourite Mary. She knew also that every virtuous woman has an impenetrable shield,
in the correctness of her own conduct, and without the parade of outrageous chastity,
Mary was purity and prudence personified. After dinner she retired to her chamber, and fastening the door, perused the following
lines with great satisfaction, ignorant of, and inexperienced in the arts of libertines. "MADAM,
"With the deepest sense of my impropriety of behaviour, suffer me to intreat, and
obtain from your clemency, forgiveness for the rude manner in which I treated you at the
time you was attending to the fire-works last Thursday. What must you think of a man,
under the most sacred character, a man wedded to the woman whom alone he loves! bound by the laws of hospitality, at his own house and table to afford comfort to all, nor
pain the mind or feelings of one individual. Oh! Miss Marsham, my guests were
numerous; wine, that fatal enemy to prudence and virtue, flowed in abundance; and it is
the master's task not only to promote, but to do honour to every bumper: the pernicious
juice of the grape made me mad! but returning reason brought to my conscious
remembrance, my shameful behaviour to you. Assure me, when next we meet, by that
sweet freedom, by that enchanting cheerfulness you observe with those you esteem, that
you sincerely and readily pardon him, who will ever be, with the most profound respect,
MADAM,
your most obedient,
humble servant,
THEODORE LESLIE." Mary felt happy and gratified; for she had dreaded a second visit to the rectory. "Mr.
Leslie," said she to herself, "sees much of the great world; fashion warps his manners,
and often spoils his conversation, but I believe his heart is good: I entirely forgive him,
and it behoves me to treat with cheerful respect a person so much above us, and who may
be a friend to my father and my uncle Charles." We will pass over the days till the arrival of Wednesday: the scratches of Margaret's
face, being only on the surface, were healed; but under her eyes, the convalescent bruises
were turned green; however, her father and uncles, knowing, in her best looks, she never
could charm by her beauty, persuaded her to go in a bonnet, or put a green shade over her
eyes; but that she positively refused to do. Mary, with great taste, pinned a veil on her sister's head, which partially hid her eyes,
gave a softness to her features, and Margaret never looked so well in her life: but no, she
persisted in the resolution she had formed in the morning, which was to go habited as
Prior's nut-brown maid; therefore, a blue bandeau of ribbon was the only covering she
would put on her head, which she brought down a little over the worst-looking eye. Mary, in spite of a kind of lowness of spirits, which she endeavoured to persuade
herself proceeded only from the indifference she felt about going to this chit-chat dinner,
yet never was longer in dressing, nor ever took more pains with her person; she drew the
little straggling ringlet over the temple, displayed the well-turned arm through a sleeve of
cobweb thinness, and
"All was art, that look'd like accident." Alas! the sisters found, on their arrival at the parsonage, that they had essayed to
charm in vain; for, to the disappointment of Mary, Lady Isabella and Frederic Harrington
had gone out together, and were not expected home till the evening-this disappointment
too, we must confess, was embittered by a tincture of jealousy. Sir Charles Sefton was gone on a fishing party, and it was quite uncertain whether he
would return home that night: the dinner party, therefore, consisted only of Lady Caroline
Leslie, who had the vapours, and was consequently very indifferent company; as all the
entertainment she afforded was in gaping, and then most politely apologizing for her


rudeness: Mrs. Kennedy was cross and disappointed, from her book-seller having beat
down her lately-disposed of work to a few guineas, for which she had promised herself an
hundred pounds; Sir Edward Harrington, always amiable, always steadily cheerful, as
usual; the Rector, softly insinuating to Mary, and kindly civil to all his guests; Ralph,
plain and honest, with now and then a dry joke escaping him; Edward, serious and
taciturne; Charles, gay and happy; and poor Mary, desirous of shewing forgiveness with a
sweet smile, timidly extended her hand to the seemingly contrite Theodore as she first
entered, which he gratefully took, without, however, daring to give it the smallest
pressure. After partaking of a dinner which was given at rather an early hour for such polite
people as the Leslies, a walk was proposed by the Rector to the fish-pond at the bottom of
his garden, and which was not to be dragged till the evening; and Mr. Leslie, drawing his
lady's arm through his, said, "Come, Caroline, you do not seem well to-day, the air will
do you good." Charles mechanically took the hand of his favourite niece, who was
rejoiced to see so unusual a sight as the Rector and his wife walking together! Sir
Edward, who never liked to see any one an object of neglect, took hold of Margaret to
escort her, and kindly chatted with her on various subjects: he found she did not want
sense, though in his life he had never met so romantic a character; he warned her, with the
gentleness of a parent, to be careful of giving way to it: and, though neither his fine manly
person, nor his ideas were at all to her taste, yet she plumed herself on a new conquest,
and dreaded the persecutions of this tyrannical old lover. Phelim O'Gurphy chanced to be one of Mr. Marsham's men, who was employed as
an assistant to drag the fish-ponds-arrayed in a dirty striped waistcoat, sans chemise, but
not a sans-culotte, he displayed, by a chasm between his waistcoat and the waistband of
his lower garments, the natural and almost snowy whiteness of his skin; Margaret loosed
her arm from that of the Baronet, and
"Sigh'd and look'd,
"Sigh'd and look'd,
"And sigh'd again." Sir Edward walked round to the other side of the pond, with the rest of the gentlemen, to
look at the full net which the men had brought to land; and while Lady Caroline
condescended to ask Mary a few trifling questions, the most of which she answered
herself, Margaret, lost in rhapsodical musings, at length uttered in soliloquy,
"How oft had Henry chang'd his sly disguise,"
when a voice from behind sighed out the following answer-
"Unmark'd by all but beauteous Emma's eyes!" She turned their bruise-encompassed orbs, and beheld Sir Charles Sefton, standing close
beside her, arrayed in a fustain jacket; a pair of brown leather gaiters, not very clean; a
leathern cap on his head, and a yellow silk handkerchief, spotted with black, round his


neck; nor was he, thus "unadorned, adorned the most," for he really looked hideous: yet
Margaret directly discovered in the disguise, and especially from the words he addressed
to her, something strangely mysterious, some great adventure in agitation. While she stood buried in profound thought, he said, "Will my charming Margaritta
excuse me, while I go and arrange my appearance a little? I hastened from the party I was
engaged with, in order that I might enjoy the company of the most bewitching among her
sex." He then, bowing, hastened to his toilette. The truth was, that, fatigued with the angling sport, where he had not experienced the
good luck of even one nibble, he had returned to the parsonage, vexed and disappointed;
but seeing poor Margaret making that rueful appearance, and apparently in one of her
enthusiastic musings, his mischievous humour returned, and he found himself standing by
her at the very moment when she uttered aloud her quotation from Prior. Sir Charles was apt, and had a good memory; his own deshabille, his determination
to make a sport of Margaret in every way he could think of, caused him to answer her in
that way, which proved most delightful to her gratified vanity, and she turned from
Phelim in disgust; who, notwithstanding his ugliness, and even under his present
habiliments, was the best-looking of her two imaginary rivals. She now joined the rest of the female party; and the ladies walked towards an arbour,
where, as the evening was uncommonly warm, sat Mrs. Kennedy enjoying the shade, and
pensively leaning her cheek on her hand: at her entrance into this arbour, the cheek of
Mary glowed, and her bosom heaved with various emotions: here she had witnessed the
protestations of love from Frederic Harrington to Lady Isabella Emerson; and here too,
she recollected, with not an unpleasurable sensation, how ardent he had been to be
reinstated in her own favour, and how anxious at the distress he saw her in! Lady Caroline kept musing on pic repic and capot, the four honours, the grand
decided cassino, at one deal! the subtle and quickly-gained reserv�, and all the delightful
visions of a run of luck at the gaming-table! Margaret's anxious eyes were frequently turned towards the entrance: every minute
appeared to her an age, that kept Sir Charles at his toilette; and many and careful were the
minutes which he dedicated to his mirror! At length she heard footsteps, which she felt
assured were those of a man; but they appeared too heavy for those of her devoted
Knight, and she feared they proceeded from some one of more corpulency; however, she
consoled herself with thinking that perhaps some other "sly disguise" might be the cause,
and she ventured to peep out at the flowery arch which opened into this fragrant abode. Thence she beheld, breathing hard and fanning herself with her pocket-handkerchief,
the delectable Lady Wringham; who, entering the arbour, exclaimed, "Dear me, how hot
it is!" The ladies rose, and Lady Caroline gave her a distant curtesy "Well! my lady," said
lady Wringham, "what does your ladyship think? Mr. Leslie came, you know, on
Monday, to ax us to dinner:"-"Did he?" said Lady Caroline. "Why yes, to be sure, my
lady, did not your ladyship know that? "-"No," said Lady Caroline, with the utmost sang
froid, as she sat picking a rose to pieces: "Well, howsoever," continues Lady Wringham,
"we could not come, 'cause we expected a gentleman from London; but Mr. Leslie would
not let me rest, and there he comes just now, this a'ternoon, and absolutely dragged me
away, as a body may say, from my company; he said I must come and sup with you, and
he would hardly let me stay to make my 'pologies." The polite Lady Caroline forced herself to say, "We are very glad of your company,
Lady Wringham, and we hope Sir John will bring his friend with him." "La! I don't
know," said Lady Wringham, "Mr. Leslie said, as how, if he had but me, he did not care;"
and she gave a girlish giggle. Lady Caroline looked at Mrs. Kennedy, and gave a shrug and a sneer, not unseen by
Lady Wringham, who giving Mary a jog with her elbow, said in a whisper, "I'll be hang'd
if she isn't jealous!" The sentence did not quite escape Lady Caroline; poor Mary was
embarrassed at perceiving it; while the high dame of quality regarded them both with
scorn. Lady Wringham, was, however, in high spirits, and nothing seemed to embarrass
her. "Do you know, my lady," said she, "just as your ladyship's husband came in, I was in
the midst of a grand argument with our London friend about titles, and I cannot make it
out, my lady, why your ladyship is a lady, and your husband is not a lord!" "Because," replied Lady Caroline, "my husband's near relation, the Marquis, is yet
living; besides, if he was not, Mr. Leslie is not the first to inherit the title: now, for
instance, if Sir John Wringham had brothers or nephews, would not your eldest son be Sir
John, after his father's death, before them?" "Yes, yes, my lady, I know all that; but then, as you are called my lady, why is not he
called my lord? "-"Because," replied Lady Caroline, "I am a lady in my own right; my
father was an earl; I therefore still retain my maiden title of Lady Caroline, though I have
altered my surname to Leslie. "-"Well then, I say," answered the ignorant Lady
Wringham, "that I think he ought to be called Lord Caroline!" None of the ladies could forbear a smile; but Lady Caroline was so vexed to find the
explanation she had given her so little comprehended, that she said with some degree of
sarcastic spite, "Why, Lady Wringham, a woman never can exalt a man to her dignity, but
I am sure you very well know that a man of title and fortune can raise a woman to the
rank of lady, though she might be in a very low situation indeed, before he rendered both
himself and her ridiculous by such disproportioned marriage." The Baronet's lady had
understanding enough, however, perfectly to take in the full sense of her ladyship's
pointed speech; and a silence commenced, which threatened to continue long and
obstinate, when, as the dusky shades of night appeared fast approaching, entered Lady
Isabella, gay as Euphrosyne, and looking all that was lovely and fascinating: close, like
her shadow, followed Frederic Harrington. And now various sentiments shot like
lightning across the breasts of the inmates of the bower. A deep blush mutually dyed the
cheeks of Frederic and Mary, though glad to see her ladyship. Margaret was disappointed
that her valiant and constant Knight was so long in arranging his dress, and did not yet
make his appearance. A gleam of comfort entered the bosom of Lady Caroline, when she
reflected that she should be able, with the assistance of her obliging Harrington, to make
an excellent whist party. Lady Isabella had hoped that some of the fine things that
Frederic had said to her, as he drove her home in his uncle's curricle, had their origin in
truth; she was, therefore, in too good a humour, to be given much that evening to her
natural propensity of quizzing; and, passing Margaret with a slight "how d'ye," and a still
slighter one to Mary, she sat herself down by her Kennedy, as she called her, and restored,
by her charming conversation and condescending familiarity, some degree of alacrity to
that lady's depressed spirits. On the joyful news that Lady Isabella was returned, Sir Charles Sefton, though he
took more pains with his person, dispatched the arrangement of his figure as quick as
possible; and highly perfumed with esprit de rose, dressed most becomingly, and
animated with the unexpected joy of finding her he idolized returned so soon, his glass
reflected to his imagination, what indeed he did almost look,-a little bit, a very, very
little bit of-an Adonis! Margaret's heart fluttered as he entered the arbour, but, alas! advancing to Lady
Isabella, he seemed not even to see "the most bewitching among her sex!" but intreated in
a loud, though tender whisper, that her ladyship would not risk a health so precious to
him, by remaining any longer in the night air. All the gentlemen were now seen approaching; and they enforced the same request to
every lady. The exterior of Sir Charles Sefton, with all its dissipation-acquired defects,
evinced the man of fashion; Lady Isabella had never seen him look so well as on that
evening, and she thought, if he always looked so, she should be, by no means, ashamed of
being the rich and dashing wife of such a man: but she had also another more powerful
motive for holding out to him every hope, at the present hour,-she thought herself sure
of Frederic Harrington's heart, and she was determined to prove it, by exciting his
jealousy: she therefore engrossed Sir Charles entirely to herself, and took no notice
whatever of either the friend she had before hailed by the appellation of "sweet interesting
girl," and whom she promised to make the depository of her most secret thoughts, nor yet
of the man whom she really loved, and who, a few hours before, had well nigh drawn
from her the confession of her regard for him. Lady Caroline approved of the proposal of instantly quitting the gardens, and,
unasked, took the arm of Frederic. Sir Edward Harrington still walked with Edward
Marsham, the former shewing him some pointed epigrams, which he had received from a
correspondent, composed upon Mr. W. and Mrs. C.; and he rejoiced with the good
Curate, to see faction and enmity to royalty defeating themselves: while Charles, deeply
interested in all that could give comfort to the parental bosom of his sovereign, and in
each thing that tended to clear the fame of every branch of his illustrious family, looked
the happiest of the happy; particularly as news of a private nature had also arrived from
this correspondent of the worthy Sir Edward, which materially concerned the brave
lieutenant; and Charles, on moving from the arbour, took an hand of each of his nieces,
telling them with a smile beaming satisfaction, that he had fine news to tell them when he
got home: he then quitted them, wondering at what it could be, to join his brother Ralph. Margaret sent round "her inquiring eye," but saw Sir Charles looking on Lady
Isabella with so much passionate adoration, and so assiduously attentive to wrap her
shawl about her fine form, while his adored Margaritta was suffered, neglected and
unobserved, to pull her very small cambric pocket-handkerchief over her bosom, and
which did not half cover it, and content herself with the arm of her sister, without any
complaisant beau so much as seeming to know they were in the company. The officious Rector escorted Lady Wringham, who bore upon his arm with a weight
he seemed ready to sink under; and in this state they entered the house. It had not yet struck ten, and it was impossible to think of going to supper! Lady
Caroline, Frederic Harrington, Sir Charles Sefton, and Lady Isabella (who hated whist,
but yet would play to oblige him), made up a whist party; but as it was impossible to


secure the attention of the volatite lady to so serious a game, they changed it to a cassino:
she lost there immensely, threw up her cards, and challenged Edward Marsham, who had
just finished a game at piquet with Mrs. Kennedy, to a game at chess, which he gladly
accepted; while Mrs. Kennedy took the seat of Lady Isabella, and the cassino was again
changed to whist. Sir Edward Harrington and Ralph occupied a back-gammon table;
while the Rector, Lady Wringham, Charles, and his two nieces, made a party at loo. Lady Caroline, who never knew when to rise from the card-table, continued at it till
near one o'clock, when, after the Rector frequently reminding her, she discovered it was
time to go to supper! and they descended to the dining-parlour to partake of an elegant
cold collation. Mrs. Kennedy had been a winner; Lady Caroline, as usual, a considerable loser; she
was therefore scarcely civil to Mrs. Kennedy, who was in high spirits, resolving, if her
ladyship's ill humour continued, or indeed if she saw any prospect of her borrowing the
sum of her, which she had just lost, she would set off for London directly, or pay some
other convenient visit. Mrs. Kennedy had a talent of telling fortunes, by a pack of cards, and that in a very
diverting kind of way, entirely out of the common track; and, like the jumble of
accidental predictions in an almanack, some things she foretold, had really come to pass. Our farm-house party were moving to withdraw, just before the hour sounded three; but
the Rector positively swore they should not stir yet, and said, "Come, Kennedy, give us a
shuffle, you understand me!" Mrs. Kennedy desired a servant to bring her down one of the packs of cards from the
drawing-room: "Now," said she, "you must not one of you move, till I have told all your
fortunes: I cast a spell around you," continued she, and rising with the most playful and
good-humoured badinage, she waved her little circular fan round the head of each, and
reseated herself. Margaret trembled, but instantly sent a look across the table to Sir Charles Sefton,
but had the mortification of finding it not returned. Lady Caroline, who seemed to revive
at only the sight of her favourite book, smiled and said, "What a droll creature, Kennedy,
you are!" and now, with much ingenuity and archness, did Mrs. Kennedy tell that kind of
fortune, which she thought would give her rich and noble listeners most pleasure. Lady
Isabella was less pleased with what she told her, than Sir Charles; yet, to carry on the
farce of the evening against Frederic, who was seated on the other side of her, directly
opposite to Mary, she smiled on Sir Charles with much seeming satisfaction, while, to the
great astonishment of Margaret, he blessed Mrs. Kennedy as a dear witty little angel! The fortuneteller told Lady Wringham, that though she was married, there was a
black man who sighed for her; and loved her dearly.-The noble and reverend Theodore
hereupon gave a soft sigh, and Lady Wringham simpered, and said, "La! Mrs.
Thingummy, how could you find that out? Well, I declare I never had any faith in omiums
before, but I do really believe as how you're a witch!"