That rascal, now, knows more old ballads and traditions than any other
man in this and the four next parishes. And after all,” continued he,
softening as he went on describing Edie’s good gifts, “the dog has some
good humour. He has borne his hard fate with unbroken spirits, and it’s
cruel to deny him the comfort of a laugh at his betters. The pleasure of
having quizzed me, as you gay folk would call it, will be meat and drink
to him for a day or two. But I must go back and look after him, or he
will spread his d--d nonsensical story over half the country.” 

 Note C. Praetorium. So saying our heroes parted, Mr. Oldbuck to return to his hospitium at
Monkbarns, and Lovel to pursue his way to Fairport, where he arrived
without farther adventure. Launcelot Gobbo. Mark me now:
                      Now will I raise the waters. Merchant of Venice. The theatre at Fairport had opened, but no Mr. Lovel appeared on the
boards, nor was there anything in the habits or deportment of the young
gentleman so named, which authorised Mr. Oldbuck’s conjecture that his
fellow-traveller was a candidate for the public favour. Regular were the
Antiquary’s inquiries at an old-fashioned barber who dressed the only
three wigs in the parish which, in defiance of taxes and times, were
still subjected to the operation of powdering and frizzling, and who for
that purpose divided his time among the three employers whom fashion
had yet left him; regular, I say, were Mr. Oldbuck’s inquiries at
this personage concerning the news of the little theatre at Fairport,
expecting every day to hear of Mr. Lovel’s appearance; on which occasion
the old gentleman had determined to put himself to charges in honour of
his young friend, and not only to go to the play himself, but to
carry his womankind along with him. But old Jacob Caxon conveyed no
information which warranted his taking so decisive a step as that of
securing a box. He brought information, on the contrary, that there was a young man
residing at Fairport, of whom the town (by which he meant all the
gossips, who, having no business of their own, fill up their leisure
moments by attending to that of other people) could make nothing. He
sought no society, but rather avoided that which the apparent gentleness
of his manners, and some degree of curiosity, induced many to offer him. Nothing could be more regular, or less resembling an adventurer, than
his mode of living, which was simple, but so completely well arranged,
that all who had any transactions with him were loud in their
approbation. “These are not the virtues of a stage-struck hero,” thought Oldbuck to
himself; and, however habitually pertinacious in his opinions, he must
have been compelled to abandon that which he had formed in the
present instance, but for a part of Caxon’s communication. “The young
gentleman,” he said, “was sometimes heard speaking to himsell, and
rampauging about in his room, just as if he was ane o’ the player folk.”

Nothing, however, excepting this single circumstance, occurred to
confirm Mr. Oldbuck’s supposition; and it remained a high and doubtful
question, what a well-informed young man, without friends, connections,
or employment of any kind, could have to do as a resident at Fairport. Neither port wine nor whist had apparently any charms for him. He
declined dining with the mess of the volunteer cohort which had been
lately embodied, and shunned joining the convivialities of either of
the two parties which then divided Fairport, as they did more important
places. He was too little of an aristocrat to join the club of
Royal True Blues, and too little of a democrat to fraternise with an
affiliated society of the soi-disant Friends of the People, which the
borough had also the happiness of possessing. A coffee-room was his
detestation; and, I grieve to say it, he had as few sympathies with the
tea-table.--In short, since the name was fashionable in novel-writing,
and that is a great while agone, there was never a Master Lovel of whom
so little positive was known, and who was so universally described by
negatives. One negative, however, was important--nobody knew any harm of Lovel. Indeed, had such existed, it would have been speedily made public; for
the natural desire of speaking evil of our neighbour could in his case
have been checked by no feelings of sympathy for a being so unsocial. On
one account alone he fell somewhat under suspicion. As he made free use
of his pencil in his solitary walks, and had drawn several views of the
harbour, in which the signal tower, and even the four-gun battery, were
introduced, some zealous friends of the public sent abroad a whisper,
that this mysterious stranger must certainly be a French spy. The
Sheriff paid his respects to Mr. Lovel accordingly; but in the interview
which followed, it would seem that he had entirely removed that
magistrate’s suspicions, since he not only suffered him to remain
undisturbed in his retirement, but it was credibly reported, sent him
two invitations to dinner-parties, both which were civilly declined. But
what the nature of the explanation was, the magistrate kept a profound
secret, not only from the public at large, but from his substitute, his
clerk, his wife and his two daughters, who formed his privy council on
all questions of official duty. All these particulars being faithfully reported by Mr. Caxon to his
patron at Monkbarns, tended much to raise Lovel in the opinion of his
former fellow-traveller. “A decent sensible lad,” said he to himself,
“who scorns to enter into the fooleries and nonsense of these idiot
people at Fairport--I must do something for him--I must give him a
dinner;--and I will write Sir Arthur to come to Monkbarns to meet him. I
must consult my womankind.”

Accordingly, such consultation having been previously held, a special
messenger, being no other than Caxon himself, was ordered to prepare
for a walk to Knockwinnock Castle with a letter, “For the honoured Sir
Arthur Wardour, of Knockwinnock, Bart.” The contents ran thus:

“Dear Sir Arthur,

“On Tuesday the 17th curt. _stilo novo_, I hold a coenobitical symposion at
Monkbarns, and pray you to assist thereat, at four o’clock precisely. If
my fair enemy, Miss Isabel, can and will honour us by accompanying you,
my womankind will be but too proud to have the aid of such an auxiliary
in the cause of resistance to awful rule and right supremacy. If not,
I will send the womankind to the manse for the day. I have a young
acquaintance to make known to you, who is touched with some strain of
a better spirit than belongs to these giddy-paced times--reveres his
elders, and has a pretty notion of the classics--and, as such a youth
must have a natural contempt for the people about Fairport, I wish to
show him some rational as well as worshipful society.--I am, Dear Sir
Arthur, etc. etc. etc.”

“Fly with this letter, Caxon,” said the senior, holding out his missive,
signatum atque sigillatum, “fly to Knockwinnock, and bring me back an
answer. Go as fast as if the town-council were met and waiting for the
provost, and the provost was waiting for his new-powdered wig.”

“Ah sir,” answered the messenger, with a deep sigh, “thae days hae lang
gane by. Deil a wig has a provost of Fairport worn sin’ auld Provost
Jervie’s time--and he had a quean of a servant-lass that dressed it
herself, wi’ the doup o’ a candle and a drudging-box. But I hae seen the
day, Monkbarns, when the town-council of Fairport wad hae as soon wanted
their town-clerk, or their gill of brandy ower-head after the haddies,
as they wad hae wanted ilk ane a weel-favoured, sonsy, decent periwig on
his pow. Hegh, sirs! nae wonder the commons will be discontent and rise
against the law, when they see magistrates and bailies, and deacons, and
the provost himsell, wi’ heads as bald and as bare as ane o’ my blocks!”

“And as well furnished within, Caxon. But away with you!--you have an
excellent view of public affairs, and, I dare say, have touched the
cause of our popular discontent as closely as the provost could have
done himself. But away with you, Caxon!”

And off went Caxon upon his walk of three miles--

                  He hobbled--but his heart was good! Could he go faster than he could?--

While he is engaged in his journey and return, it may not be impertinent
to inform the reader to whose mansion he was bearing his embassy. We have said that Mr. Oldbuck kept little company with the surrounding
gentlemen, excepting with one person only. This was Sir Arthur Wardour,
a baronet of ancient descent, and of a large but embarrassed fortune. His father, Sir Anthony, had been a Jacobite, and had displayed all the
enthusiasm of that party, while it could be served with words only. No
man squeezed the orange with more significant gesture; no one could more
dexterously intimate a dangerous health without coming under the penal
statutes; and, above all, none drank success to the cause more deeply
and devoutly. But, on the approach of the Highland army in 1745,
it would appear that the worthy baronet’s zeal became a little more
moderate just when its warmth was of most consequence. He talked much,
indeed, of taking the field for the rights of Scotland and Charles
Stuart; but his demi-pique saddle would suit only one of his horses;
and that horse could by no means be brought to stand fire. Perhaps
the worshipful owner sympathized in the scruples of this sagacious
quadruped, and began to think, that what was so much dreaded by the
horse could not be very wholesome for the rider. At any rate, while Sir
Anthony Wardour talked, and drank, and hesitated, the Sturdy provost of
Fairport (who, as we before noticed, was the father of our Antiquary)
sallied from his ancient burgh, heading a body of whig-burghers,
and seized at once, in the name of George II., upon the Castle of
Knockwinnock, and on the four carriage-horses, and person of the
proprietor. Sir Anthony was shortly after sent off to the Tower of
London by a secretary of state’s warrant, and with him went his son,
Arthur, then a youth. But as nothing appeared like an overt act of
treason, both father and son were soon set at liberty, and returned to
their own mansion of Knockwinnock, to drink healths five fathoms deep,
and talk of their sufferings in the royal cause. This became so much a
matter of habit with Sir Arthur, that, even after his father’s death,
the non-juring chaplain used to pray regularly for the restoration
of the rightful sovereign, for the downfall of the usurper, and for
deliverance from their cruel and bloodthirsty enemies; although all idea
of serious opposition to the House of Hanover had long mouldered away,
and this treasonable liturgy was kept up rather as a matter of form
than as conveying any distinct meaning. So much was this the case, that,
about the year 1770, upon a disputed election occurring in the county,
the worthy knight fairly gulped down the oaths of abjuration
and allegiance, in order to serve a candidate in whom he was
interested;--thus renouncing the heir for whose restoration he weekly
petitioned Heaven, and acknowledging the usurper whose dethronement he
had never ceased to pray for. And to add to this melancholy instance
of human inconsistency, Sir Arthur continued to pray for the House
of Stuart even after the family had been extinct, and when, in truth,
though in his theoretical loyalty he was pleased to regard them as
alive, yet, in all actual service and practical exertion, he was a most
zealous and devoted subject of George III. In other respects, Sir Arthur Wardour lived like most country gentlemen
in Scotland, hunted and fished--gave and received dinners--attended races
and county meetings--was a deputy-lieutenant and trustee upon turnpike
acts. But, in his more advanced years, as he became too lazy or unwieldy
for field-sports, he supplied them by now and then reading Scottish
history; and, having gradually acquired a taste for antiquities, though
neither very deep nor very correct, he became a crony of his neighbour,
Mr. Oldbuck of Monkbarns, and a joint-labourer with him in his
antiquarian pursuits. There were, however, points of difference between these two humourists,
which sometimes occasioned discord. The faith of Sir Arthur, as an
antiquary, was boundless, and Mr. Oldbuck (notwithstanding the affair
of the Praetorium at the Kaim of Kinprunes) was much more scrupulous in
receiving legends as current and authentic coin. Sir Arthur would have
deemed himself guilty of the crime of leze-majesty had he doubted the
existence of any single individual of that formidable head-roll of one
hundred and four kings of Scotland, received by Boethius, and rendered
classical by Buchanan, in virtue of whom James VI. claimed to rule his
ancient kingdom, and whose portraits still frown grimly upon the walls
of the gallery of Holyrood. Now Oldbuck, a shrewd and suspicious man,
and no respecter of divine hereditary right, was apt to cavil at this
sacred list, and to affirm, that the procession of the posterity
of Fergus through the pages of Scottish history, was as vain and
unsubstantial as the gleamy pageant of the descendants of Banquo through
the cavern of Hecate. Another tender topic was the good fame of Queen Mary, of which the
knight was a most chivalrous assertor, while the esquire impugned it,
in spite both of her beauty and misfortunes. When, unhappily, their
conversation turned on yet later times, motives of discord occurred in
almost every page of history. Oldbuck was, upon principle, a staunch
Presbyterian, a ruling elder of the kirk, and a friend to revolution
principles and Protestant succession, while Sir Arthur was the very
reverse of all this. They agreed, it is true, in dutiful love and
allegiance to the sovereign who now fills the throne; but this was
their only point of union. The reader will understand that this refers to the reign of our late
gracious Sovereign, George the Third. It therefore often happened, that bickerings hot broke out between them,
in which Oldbuck was not always able to suppress his caustic humour,
while it would sometimes occur to the Baronet that the descendant of a
German printer, whose sires had “sought the base fellowship of paltry
burghers,” forgot himself, and took an unlicensed freedom of debate,
considering the rank and ancient descent of his antagonist. This, with
the old feud of the coach-horses, and the seizure of his manor-place and
tower of strength by Mr. Oldbuck’s father, would at times rush upon his
mind, and inflame at once his cheeks and his arguments. And, lastly, as
Mr. Oldbuck thought his worthy friend and compeer was in some respects
little better than a fool, he was apt to come more near communicating
to him that unfavourable opinion, than the rules of modern politeness
warrant. In such cases they often parted in deep dudgeon, and with
something like a resolution to forbear each other’s company in future:

But with the morning calm reflection came; and as each was sensible that
the society of the other had become, through habit, essential to
his comfort, the breach was speedily made up between them. On such
occasions, Oldbuck, considering that the Baronet’s pettishness resembled
that of a child, usually showed his superior sense by compassionately
making the first advances to reconciliation. But it once or twice
happened that the aristocratic pride of the far-descended knight took
a flight too offensive to the feelings of the representative of the
typographer. In these cases, the breach between these two originals
might have been immortal, but for the kind exertion and interposition
of the Baronet’s daughter, Miss Isabella Wardour, who, with a son, now
absent upon foreign and military service, formed his whole surviving
family. She was well aware how necessary Mr. Oldbuck was to her father’s
amusement and comfort, and seldom failed to interpose with effect, when
the office of a mediator between them was rendered necessary by the
satirical shrewdness of the one, or the assumed superiority of the
other. Under Isabella’s mild influence, the wrongs of Queen Mary were
forgotten by her father, and Mr. Oldbuck forgave the blasphemy which
reviled the memory of King William. However, as she used in general to
take her father’s part playfully in these disputes, Oldbuck was wont to
call Isabella his fair enemy, though in fact he made more account of her
than any other of her sex, of whom, as we have seen, he, was no admirer. There existed another connection betwixt these worthies, which had
alternately a repelling and attractive influence upon their intimacy. Sir Arthur always wished to borrow; Mr. Oldbuck was not always willing
to lend. Mr. Oldbuck, per contra, always wished to be repaid with
regularity; Sir Arthur was not always, nor indeed often, prepared to
gratify this reasonable desire; and, in accomplishing an arrangement
between tendencies so opposite, little miffs would occasionally take
place. Still there was a spirit of mutual accommodation upon the whole,
and they dragged on like dogs in couples, with some difficulty and
occasional snarling, but without absolutely coming to a stand-still or
throttling each other. Some little disagreement, such as we have mentioned, arising out of
business, or politics, had divided the houses of Knockwinnock and
Monkbarns, when the emissary of the latter arrived to discharge his
errand. In his ancient Gothic parlour, whose windows on one side looked
out upon the restless ocean, and, on the other, upon the long straight
avenue, was the Baronet seated, now turning over the leaves of a folio,
now casting a weary glance where the sun quivered on the dark-green
foliage and smooth trunks of the large and branching limes with which
the avenue was planted. At length, sight of joy! a moving object is
seen, and it gives rise to the usual inquiries, Who is it? and what can
be his errand? The old whitish-grey coat, the hobbling gait, the hat
half-slouched, half-cocked, announced the forlorn maker of periwigs, and
left for investigation only the second query. This was soon solved by a
servant entering the parlour,--“A letter from Monkbarns, Sir Arthur.”

Sir Arthur took the epistle with a due assumption of consequential
dignity. “Take the old man into the kitchen, and let him get some refreshment,”
 said the young lady, whose compassionate eye had remarked his thin grey
hair and wearied gait. “Mr. Oldbuck, my love, invites us to dinner on Tuesday the 17th,” said
the Baronet, pausing;--“he really seems to forget that he has not of late
conducted himself so civilly towards me as might have been expected.”

“Dear sir, you have so many advantages over poor Mr. Oldbuck, that no
wonder it should put him a little out of humour; but I know he has much
respect for your person and your conversation;--nothing would give him
more pain than to be wanting in any real attention.”

“True, true, Isabella; and one must allow for the original
descent;--something of the German boorishness still flows in the blood;
something of the whiggish and perverse opposition to established rank
and privilege. You may observe that he never has any advantage of me
in dispute, unless when he avails himself of a sort of pettifogging
intimacy with dates, names, and trifling matters of fact--a tiresome and
frivolous accuracy of memory, which is entirely owing to his mechanical
descent.”

“He must find it convenient in historical investigation, I should think,
sir?” said the young lady. “It leads to an uncivil and positive mode of disputing; and nothing
seems more unreasonable than to hear him impugn even Bellenden’s rare
translation of Hector Boece, which I have the satisfaction to possess,
and which is a black-letter folio of great value, upon the authority of
some old scrap of parchment which he has saved from its deserved destiny
of being cut up into tailor’s measures. And besides, that habit of
minute and troublesome accuracy leads to a mercantile manner of doing
business, which ought to be beneath a landed proprietor whose family has
stood two or three generations. I question if there’s a dealer’s clerk
in Fairport that can sum an account of interest better than Monkbarns.”

“But you’ll accept his invitation, sir?”

“Why, ye--yes; we have no other engagement on hand, I think. Who can the
young man be he talks of?--he seldom picks up new acquaintance; and he
has no relation that I ever heard of.”

“Probably some relation of his brother-in-law Captain M’Intyre.”

“Very possibly--yes, we will accept--the M’Intyres are of a very ancient
Highland family. You may answer his card in the affirmative, Isabella; I
believe I have, no leisure to be Dear Sirring myself.”

So this important matter being adjusted, Miss Wardour intimated “her
own and Sir Arthur’s compliments, and that they would have the honour of
waiting upon Mr. Oldbuck. Miss Wardour takes this opportunity to renew
her hostility with Mr. Oldbuck, on account of his late long absence from
Knockwinnock, where his visits give so much pleasure.” With this placebo
she concluded her note, with which old Caxon, now refreshed in limbs and
wind, set out on his return to the Antiquary’s mansion. Moth. By Woden, God of Saxons,
            From whence comes Wensday, that is, Wodnesday,
                   Truth is a thing that I will ever keep
                   Unto thylke day in which I creep into
                             My sepulcre--
                             Cartwright’s Ordinary. Our young friend Lovel, who had received a corresponding invitation,
punctual to the hour of appointment, arrived at Monkbarns about five
minutes before four o’clock on the 17th of July. The day had been
remarkably sultry, and large drops of rain had occasionally fallen,
though the threatened showers had as yet passed away. Mr. Oldbuck received him at the Palmer’s-port in his complete brown
suit, grey silk stockings, and wig powdered with all the skill of the
veteran Caxon, who having smelt out the dinner, had taken care not to
finish his job till the hour of eating approached. “You are welcome to my symposion, Mr. Lovel. And now let me introduce
you to my Clogdogdo’s, as Tom Otter calls them--my unlucky and
good-for-nothing womankind--malae bestiae, Mr. Lovel.”

“I shall be disappointed, sir, if I do not find the ladies very
undeserving of your satire.”

“Tilley-valley, Mr. Lovel,--which, by the way, one commentator derives
from tittivillitium, and another from talley-ho--but tilley-valley, I
say--a truce with your politeness. You will find them but samples of
womankind--But here they be, Mr. Lovel. I present to you in due order, my
most discreet sister Griselda, who disdains the simplicity, as well as
patience annexed to the poor old name of Grizzel; and my most exquisite
niece Maria, whose mother was called Mary, and sometimes Molly.”

The elderly lady rustled in silks and satins, and bore upon her head a
structure resembling the fashion in the ladies’ memorandum-book for the
year 1770--a superb piece of architecture, not much less than a modern
Gothic castle, of which the curls might represent the turrets, the black
pins the chevaux de frise, and the lappets the banners. The face, which, like that of the ancient statues of Vesta, was thus
crowned with towers, was large and long, and peaked at nose and chin,
and bore, in other respects, such a ludicrous resemblance to the
physiognomy of Mr. Jonathan Oldbuck, that Lovel, had they not appeared
at once, like Sebastian and Viola in the last scene of the “Twelfth
Night,” might have supposed that the figure before him was his old
friend masquerading in female attire. An antique flowered silk gown
graced the extraordinary person to whom belonged this unparalleled tete,
which her brother was wont to say was fitter for a turban for Mahound
or Termagant, than a head-gear for a reasonable creature, or Christian
gentlewoman. Two long and bony arms were terminated at the elbows by
triple blond ruffles, and being, folded saltire-ways in front of her
person, and decorated with long gloves of a bright vermilion colour,
presented no bad resemblance to a pair of gigantic lobsters. High-heeled
shoes, and a short silk cloak, thrown in easy negligence over her
shoulders, completed the exterior of Miss Griselda Oldbuck. Her niece, the same whom Lovel had seen transiently during his first
visit, was a pretty young woman, genteelly dressed according to the
fashion of the day, with an air of espieglerie which became her very
well, and which was perhaps derived from the caustic humour peculiar to
her uncle’s family, though softened by transmission. Mr. Lovel paid his respects to both ladies, and was answered by the
elder with the prolonged courtesy of 1760, drawn from the righteous
period,

                       When folks conceived a grace
                       Of half an hour’s space,
                       And rejoiced in a Friday’s capon,

and by the younger with a modern reverence, which, like the festive
benediction of a modern divine, was of much shorter duration. While this salutation was exchanging, Sir Arthur, with his fair daughter
hanging upon his arm, having dismissed his chariot, appeared at the
garden door, and in all due form paid his respects to the ladies. “Sir Arthur,” said the Antiquary, “and you, my fair foe, let me make
known to you my young friend Mr. Lovel, a gentleman who, during the
scarlet-fever which is epidemic at present in this our island, has the
virtue and decency to appear in a coat of a civil complexion. You see,
however, that the fashionable colour has mustered in his cheeks which
appears not in his garments. Sir Arthur, let me present to you a young
gentleman, whom your farther knowledge will find grave, wise, courtly,
and scholar-like, well seen, deeply read, and thoroughly grounded in all
the hidden mysteries of the green-room and stage, from the days of Davie
Lindsay down to those of Dibdin--he blushes again, which is a sign of
grace.”

“My brother,” said Miss Griselda, addressing Lovel, “has a humorous way
of expressing himself, sir; nobody thinks anything of what Monkbarns
says--so I beg you will not be so confused for the matter of his
nonsense; but you must have had a warm walk beneath this broiling
sun--would you take anything?--a glass of balm-wine?”

Ere Lovel could answer, the Antiquary interposed. “Aroint thee, witch! wouldst thou poison my guests with thy infernal decoctions? Dost thou
not remember how it fared with the clergyman whom you seduced to partake
of that deceitful beverage?”

“O fy, fy, brother!--Sir Arthur, did you ever hear the like?--he must have
everything his ain way, or he will invent such stories--But there goes
Jenny to ring the old bell to tell us that the dinner is ready.”

Rigid in his economy, Mr. Oldbuck kept no male servant. This he
disguised under the pretext that the masculine sex was too noble to
be employed in those acts of personal servitude, which, in all early
periods of society, were uniformly imposed on the female. “Why,”
 would he say, “did the boy, Tam Rintherout, whom, at my wise sister’s
instigation, I, with equal wisdom, took upon trial--why did he pilfer
apples, take birds’ nests, break glasses, and ultimately steal my
spectacles, except that he felt that noble emulation which swells in the
bosom of the masculine sex, which has conducted him to Flanders with
a musket on his shoulder, and doubtless will promote him to a glorious
halbert, or even to the gallows? And why does this girl, his full
sister, Jenny Rintherout, move in the same vocation with safe and
noiseless step--shod, or unshod--soft as the pace of a cat, and docile as
a spaniel--Why? but because she is in her vocation. Let them minister to
us, Sir Arthur,--let them minister, I say,--it’s the only thing they are
fit for. All ancient legislators, from Lycurgus to Mahommed, corruptly
called Mahomet, agree in putting them in their proper and subordinate
rank, and it is only the crazy heads of our old chivalrous ancestors
that erected their Dulcineas into despotic princesses.”

Miss Wardour protested loudly against this ungallant doctrine; but the
bell now rung for dinner. “Let me do all the offices of fair courtesy to so fair an antagonist,”
 said the old gentleman, offering his arm. “I remember, Miss Wardour,
Mahommed (vulgarly Mahomet) had some hesitation about the mode
of summoning his Moslemah to prayer. He rejected bells as used by
Christians, trumpets as the summons of the Guebres, and finally adopted
the human voice. I have had equal doubt concerning my dinner-call. Gongs, now in present use, seemed a newfangled and heathenish invention,
and the voice of the female womankind I rejected as equally shrill and
dissonant; wherefore, contrary to the said Mahommed, or Mahomet, I have
resumed the bell. It has a local propriety, since it was the conventual
signal for spreading the repast in their refectory, and it has the
advantage over the tongue of my sister’s prime minister, Jenny, that,
though not quite so loud and shrill, it ceases ringing the instant you
drop the bell-rope: whereas we know, by sad experience, that any attempt
to silence Jenny, only wakes the sympathetic chime of Miss Oldbuck and
Mary M’Intyre to join in chorus.”

With this discourse he led the way to his dining-parlour, which Lovel
had not yet seen;--it was wainscotted, and contained some curious
paintings. The dining-table was attended by Jenny; but an old
superintendent, a sort of female butler, stood by the sideboard, and
underwent the burden of bearing several reproofs from Mr. Oldbuck, and
inuendos, not so much marked, but not less cutting, from his sister. The dinner was such as suited a professed antiquary, comprehending many
savoury specimens of Scottish viands, now disused at the tables of those
who affect elegance. There was the relishing Solan goose, whose smell is
so powerful that he is never cooked within doors. Blood-raw he proved to
be on this occasion, so that Oldbuck half threatened to throw the
greasy sea-fowl at the head of the negligent housekeeper, who acted as
priestess in presenting this odoriferous offering. But, by good-hap,
she had been most fortunate in the hotch-potch, which was unanimously
pronounced to be inimitable. “I knew we should succeed here,” said
Oldbuck exultingly, “for Davie Dibble, the gardener (an old bachelor
like myself), takes care the rascally women do not dishonour our
vegetables. And here is fish and sauce, and crappit-heads--I acknowledge
our womankind excel in that dish--it procures them the pleasure of
scolding, for half an hour at least, twice a-week, with auld Maggy
Mucklebackit, our fish-wife. The chicken-pie, Mr. Lovel, is made after
a recipe bequeathed to me by my departed grandmother of happy memory--And
if you will venture on a glass of wine, you will find it worthy of
one who professes the maxim of King Alphonso of Castile,--Old wood to
burn--old books to read--old wine to drink--and old friends, Sir Arthur--ay,
Mr. Lovel, and young friends too, to converse with.”

“And what news do you bring us from Edinburgh, Monkbarns?” said Sir
Arthur; “how wags the world in Auld Reekie?”

“Mad, Sir Arthur, mad--irretrievably frantic--far beyond dipping in the
sea, shaving the crown, or drinking hellebore. The worst sort of frenzy,
a military frenzy, hath possessed man, woman, and child.”

“And high time, I think,” said Miss Wardour, “when we are threatened
with invasion from abroad and insurrection at home.”

“O, I did not doubt you would join the scarlet host against me--women,
like turkeys, are always subdued by a red rag--But what says Sir Arthur,
whose dreams are of standing armies and German oppression?”

“Why, I say, Mr. Oldbuck,” replied the knight, “that so far as I am
capable of judging, we ought to resist cum toto corpore regni--as the
phrase is, unless I have altogether forgotten my Latin--an enemy who
comes to propose to us a Whiggish sort of government, a republican
system, and who is aided and abetted by a sort of fanatics of the worst
kind in our own bowels. I have taken some measures, I assure you, such
as become my rank in the community; for I have directed the constables
to take up that old scoundrelly beggar, Edie Ochiltree, for spreading
disaffection against church and state through the whole parish. He said
plainly to old Caxon, that Willie Howie’s Kilmarnock cowl covered more
sense than all the three wigs in the parish--I think it is easy to make
out that inuendo--But the rogue shall be taught better manners.”

“O no, my dear sir,” exclaimed Miss Wardour, “not old Edie, that we have
known so long;--I assure you no constable shall have my good graces that
executes such a warrant.”

“Ay, there it goes,” said the Antiquary; “you, to be a staunch Tory, Sir
Arthur, have nourished a fine sprig of Whiggery in your bosom--Why,
Miss Wardour is alone sufficient to control a whole quarter-session--a
quarter-session? ay, a general assembly or convocation to boot--a
Boadicea she--an Amazon, a Zenobia.”

“And yet, with all my courage, Mr. Oldbuck, I am glad to hear our people
are getting under arms.”

“Under arms, Lord love thee! didst thou ever read the history of Sister
Margaret, which flowed from a head, that, though now old and somedele
grey, has more sense and political intelligence than you find now-a-days
in the whole synod? Dost thou remember the Nurse’s dream in that
exquisite work, which she recounts in such agony to Hubble Bubble?--When
she would have taken up a piece of broad-cloth in her vision, lo! it
exploded like a great iron cannon; when she put out her hand to save a
pirn, it perked up in her face in the form of a pistol. My own vision in
Edinburgh has been something similar. I called to consult my lawyer; he
was clothed in a dragoon’s dress, belted and casqued, and about to mount
a charger, which his writing-clerk (habited as a sharp-shooter) walked
to and fro before his door. I went to scold my agent for having sent me
to advise with a madman; he had stuck into his head the plume, which
in more sober days he wielded between his fingers, and figured as an
artillery officer. My mercer had his spontoon in his hand, as if he
measured his cloth by that implement, instead of a legitimate yard. The
banker’s clerk, who was directed to sum my cash-account, blundered
it three times, being disordered by the recollection of his military
tellings-off at the morning-drill. I was ill, and sent for a surgeon--

               He came--but valour so had fired his eye,
               And such a falchion glittered on his thigh,
               That, by the gods, with such a load of steel,
              I thought he came to murder,--not to heal. I had recourse to a physician, but he also was practising a more
wholesale mode of slaughter than that which his profession had been
supposed at all times to open to him. And now, since I have returned
here, even our wise neighbours of Fairport have caught the same valiant
humour. I hate a gun like a hurt wild duck--I detest a drum like a
quaker;--and they thunder and rattle out yonder upon the town’s common,
so that every volley and roll goes to my very heart.”

“Dear brother, dinna speak that gate o’ the gentlemen volunteers--I am
sure they have a most becoming uniform--Weel I wot they have been wet to
the very skin twice last week--I met them marching in terribly doukit, an
mony a sair hoast was amang them--And the trouble they take, I am sure it
claims our gratitude.”

“And I am sure,” said Miss M’Intyre, “that my uncle sent twenty guineas
to help out their equipments.”

“It was to buy liquorice and sugar-candy,” said the cynic, “to encourage
the trade of the place, and to refresh the throats of the officers who
had bawled themselves hoarse in the service of their country.”

“Take care, Monkbarns! we shall set you down among the black-nebs by and
by.”

“No Sir Arthur--a tame grumbler I. I only claim the privilege of croaking
in my own corner here, without uniting my throat to the grand chorus of
the marsh--Ni quito Rey, ni pongo Rey--I neither make king nor mar king,
as Sancho says, but pray heartily for our own sovereign, pay scot and
lot, and grumble at the exciseman--But here comes the ewe-milk cheese in
good time; it is a better digestive than politics.”

When dinner was over, and the decanters placed on the table, Mr. Oldbuck
proposed the King’s health in a bumper, which was readily acceded to
both by Lovel and the Baronet, the Jacobitism of the latter being now a
sort of speculative opinion merely,--the shadow of a shade. After the ladies had left the apartment, the landlord and Sir Arthur
entered into several exquisite discussions, in which the younger guest,
either on account of the abstruse erudition which they involved, or
for some other reason, took but a slender share, till at length he was
suddenly started out of a profound reverie by an unexpected appeal to
his judgment. “I will stand by what Mr. Lovel says; he was born in the north of
England, and may know the very spot.”

Sir Arthur thought it unlikely that so young a gentleman should have
paid much attention to matters of that sort. “I am avised of the contrary,” said Oldbuck. “How say you, Mr. Lovel?--speak up for your own credit, man.”

Lovel was obliged to confess himself in the ridiculous situation of one
alike ignorant of the subject of conversation and controversy which had
engaged the company for an hour. “Lord help the lad, his head has been wool-gathering!--I thought how it
would be when the womankind were admitted--no getting a word of sense out
of a young fellow for six hours after.--Why, man, there was once a people
called the Piks”--

“More properly Picts,” interrupted the Baronet. “I say the Pikar, Pihar, Piochtar, Piaghter, or Peughtar,” vociferated
Oldbuck; “they spoke a Gothic dialect”--

“Genuine Celtic,” again asseverated the knight. “Gothic! Gothic! I’ll go to death upon it!” counter-asseverated the
squire. “Why, gentlemen,” sad Lovel, “I conceive that is a dispute which may
be easily settled by philologists, if there are any remains of the
language.”

“There is but one word,” said the Baronet, “but, in spite of Mr.
Oldbuck’s pertinacity, it is decisive of the question.”

“Yes, in my favour,” said Oldbuck: “Mr. Lovel, you shall be judge--I have
the learned Pinkerton on my side.”

“I, on mine, the indefatigable and erudite Chalmers.”

“Gordon comes into my opinion.”

“Sir Robert Sibbald holds mine.”

“Innes is with me!” vociferated Oldbuck. “Riston has no doubt!” shouted the Baronet. “Truly, gentlemen,” said Lovel, “before you muster your forces and
overwhelm me with authorities, I should like to know the word in
dispute.”

“Benval” said both the disputants at once. “Which signifies caput valli,” said Sir Arthur. “The head of the wall,” echoed Oldbuck. There was a deep pause.--“It is rather a narrow foundation to build a
hypothesis upon,” observed the arbiter. “Not a whit, not a whit,” said Oldbuck; “men fight best in a narrow
ring--an inch is as good as a mile for a home-thrust.”

“It is decidedly Celtic,” said the Baronet; “every hill in the Highlands
begins with Ben.”

“But what say you to Val, Sir Arthur; is it not decidedly the Saxon
wall?”

“It is the Roman vallum,” said Sir Arthur;--“the Picts borrowed that part
of the word.”

“No such thing; if they borrowed anything, it must have been your Ben,
which they might have from the neighbouring Britons of Strath Cluyd.”

“The Piks, or Picts,” said Lovel, “must have been singularly poor in
dialect, since, in the only remaining word of their vocabulary, and that
consisting only of two syllables, they have been confessedly obliged to
borrow one of them from another language; and, methinks, gentlemen, with
submission, the controversy is not unlike that which the two knights
fought, concerning the shield that had one side white and the other
black. Each of you claim one-half of the word, and seem to resign the
other. But what strikes me most, is the poverty of the language which
has left such slight vestiges behind it.”

“You are in an error,” said Sir Arthur; “it was a copious language,
and they were a great and powerful people; built two steeples--one at
Brechin, one at Abernethy. The Pictish maidens of the blood-royal were
kept in Edinburgh Castle, thence called Castrum Puellarum.”

“A childish legend,” said Oldbuck, “invented to give consequence to
trumpery womankind. It was called the Maiden Castle, quasi lucus a non
lucendo, because it resisted every attack, and women never do.”

“There is a list of the Pictish kings,” persisted Sir Arthur, “well
authenticated from Crentheminachcryme (the date of whose reign is
somewhat uncertain) down to Drusterstone, whose death concluded their
dynasty. Half of them have the Celtic patronymic Mac prefixed--Mac,
id est filius;--what do you say to that, Mr. Oldbuck? There is Drust
Macmorachin, Trynel Maclachlin (first of that ancient clan, as it may
be judged), and Gormach Macdonald, Alpin Macmetegus, Drust Mactallargam”
 (here he was interrupted by a fit of coughing)--“ugh, ugh, ugh--Golarge
Macchan--ugh, ugh--Macchanan--ugh--Macchananail, Kenneth--ugh--ugh--
Macferedith, Eachan Macfungus--and twenty more, decidedly Celtic names,
which I could repeat, if this damned cough would let me.”

“Take a glass of wine, Sir Arthur, and drink down that bead-roll of
unbaptized jargon, that would choke the devil--why, that last fellow has
the only intelligible name you have repeated--they are all of the tribe
of Macfungus--mushroom monarchs every one of them; sprung up from the
fumes of conceit, folly, and falsehood, fermenting in the brains of some
mad Highland seannachie.”

“I am surprised to hear you, Mr. Oldbuck: you know, or ought to know,
that the list of these potentates was copied by Henry Maule of Melguin,
from the Chronicles of Loch Leven and St. Andrews, and put forth by him
in his short but satisfactory history of the Picts, printed by Robert
Freebairn of Edinburgh, and sold by him at his shop in the Parliament
Close, in the year of God seventeen hundred and five, or six, I am not
precisely certain which--but I have a copy at home that stands next to my
twelvemo copy of the Scots Acts, and ranges on the shelf with them very
well. What say you to that, Mr. Oldbuck?”

“Say?--why, I laugh at Harry Maule and his history,” answered Oldbuck,
“and thereby comply with his request, of giving it entertainment
according to its merits.”

“Do not laugh at a better man than yourself,” said Sir Arthur, somewhat
scornfully. “I do not conceive I do, Sir Arthur, in laughing either at him or his
history.”

“Henry Maule of Melgum was a gentleman, Mr. Oldbuck.”

“I presume he had no advantage of me in that particular,” replied the
Antiquary, somewhat tartly. “Permit me, Mr. Oldbuck--he was a gentleman of high family, and ancient
descent, and therefore”--

“The descendant of a Westphalian printer should speak of him with
deference? Such may be your opinion, Sir Arthur--it is not mine. I
conceive that my descent from that painful and industrious typographer,
Wolfbrand Oldenbuck, who, in the month of December 1493, under the
patronage, as the colophon tells us, of Sebaldus Scheyter and Sebastian
Kammermaister, accomplished the printing of the great Chronicle of
Nuremberg--I conceive, I say, that my descent from that great restorer
of learning is more creditable to me as a man of letters, than if I had
numbered in my genealogy all the brawling, bullet-headed, iron-fisted,
old Gothic barons since the days of Crentheminachcryme--not one of whom,
I suppose, could write his own name.”

“If you mean the observation as a sneer at my ancestry,” said the
knight, with an assumption of dignified superiority and composure, “I
have the pleasure to inform you, that the name of my ancestor, Gamelyn
de Guardover, Miles, is written fairly with his own hand in the earliest
copy of the Ragman-roll.”

“Which only serves to show that he was one of the earliest who set the
mean example of submitting to Edward I. What have, you to say for the
stainless loyalty of your family, Sir Arthur, after such a backsliding
as that?”

“It’s enough, sir,” said Sir Arthur, starting up fiercely, and pushing
back his chair; “I shall hereafter take care how I honour with my
company one who shows himself so ungrateful for my condescension.”

“In that you will do as you find most agreeable, Sir Arthur;--I hope,
that as I was not aware of the extent of the obligation which you have
done me by visiting my poor house, I may be excused for not having
carried my gratitude to the extent of servility.”

“Mighty well--mighty well, Mr. Oldbuck--I wish you a good evening--Mr.
a--a--a--Shovel--I wish you a very good evening.”

Out of the parlour door flounced the incensed Sir Arthur, as if the
spirit of the whole Round Table inflamed his single bosom, and traversed
with long strides the labyrinth of passages which conducted to the
drawing-room. “Did you ever hear such an old tup-headed ass?” said Oldbuck, briefly
apostrophizing Lovel.