“--And with this ageement the friends separated. Of seats they tell, where priests, ‘mid tapers dim,
          Breathed the warm prayer, or tuned the midnight hymn
               To scenes like these the fainting soul retired;
               Revenge and Anger in these cells expired:
             By Pity soothed, Remorse lost half her fears,
             And softened Pride dropped penitential tears. Crabbe’s Borough. The morning of Friday was as serene and beautiful as if no pleasure
party had been intended; and that is a rare event, whether in
novel-writing or real life. Lovel, who felt the genial influence of the
weather, and rejoiced at the prospect of once more meeting with Miss
Wardour, trotted forward to the place of rendezvous with better spirits
than he had for some time enjoyed. His prospects seemed in many respects
to open and brighten before him--and hope, although breaking like the
morning sun through clouds and showers, appeared now about to illuminate
the path before him. He was, as might have been expected from this state
of spirits, first at the place of meeting,--and, as might also have been
anticipated, his looks were so intently directed towards the road from
Knockwinnock Castles that he was only apprized of the arrival of
the Monkbarns division by the gee-hupping of the postilion, as the
post-chaise lumbered up behind him. In this vehicle were pent up, first,
the stately figure of Mr. Oldbuck himself; secondly, the scarce less
portly person of the Reverend Mr. Blattergowl, minister of Trotcosey,
the parish in which Monkbarns and Knockwinnock were both situated. The
reverend gentleman was equipped in a buzz wig, upon the top of which
was an equilateral cocked hat. This was the paragon of the three yet
remaining wigs of the parish, which differed, as Monkbarns used to
remark, like the three degrees of comparison--Sir Arthur’s ramilies being
the positive, his own bob-wig the comparative, and the overwhelming
grizzle of the worthy clergyman figuring as the superlative. The
superintendent of these antique garnitures, deeming, or affecting to
deem, that he could not well be absent on an occasion which assembled
all three together, had seated himself on the board behind the carriage,
“just to be in the way in case they wanted a touch before the gentlemen
sat down to dinner.” Between the two massive figures of Monkbarns
and the clergyman was stuck, by way of bodkin, the slim form of Mary
M’Intyre, her aunt having preferred a visit to the manse, and a social
chat with Miss Beckie Blattergowl, to investigating the ruins of the
priory of Saint Ruth. As greetings passed between the members of the Monkbarns party and Mr.
Lovel, the Baronet’s carriage, an open barouche, swept onward to the
place of appointment, making, with its smoking bays, smart drivers,
arms, blazoned panels, and a brace of outriders, a strong contrast with
the battered vehicle and broken-winded hacks which had brought thither
the Antiquary and his followers. The principal seat of the carriage
was occupied by Sir Arthur and his daughter. At the first glance which
passed betwixt Miss Wardour and Lovel, her colour rose considerably;--but
she had apparently made up her mind to receive him as a friend, and only
as such, and there was equal composure and courtesy in the mode of her
reply to his fluttered salutation. Sir Arthur halted the barouche to
shake his preserver kindly by the hand, and intimate the pleasure he had
on this opportunity of returning him his personal thanks; then mentioned
to him, in a tone of slight introduction, “Mr. Dousterswivel, Mr.
Lovel.”

Lovel took the necessary notice of the German adept, who occupied the
front seat of the carriage, which is usually conferred upon dependants
or inferiors. The ready grin and supple inclination with which his
salutation, though slight, was answered by the foreigner, increased the
internal dislike which Lovel had already conceived towards him; and it
was plain, from the lower of the Antiquary’s shaggy eye-brow, that he
too looked with displeasure on this addition to the company. Little
more than distant greeting passed among the members of the party, until,
having rolled on for about three miles beyond the place at which
they met, the carriages at length stopped at the sign of the Four
Horse-shoes, a small hedge inn, where Caxon humbly opened the door, and
let down the step of the hack-chaise, while the inmates of the barouche
were, by their more courtly attendants, assisted to leave their
equipage. Here renewed greetings passed: the young ladies shook hands; and
Oldbuck, completely in his element, placed himself as guide and cicerone
at the head of the party, who were now to advance on foot towards the
object of their curiosity. He took care to detain Lovel close beside him
as the best listener of the party, and occasionally glanced a word
of explanation and instruction to Miss Wardour and Mary M’Intyre, who
followed next in order. The Baronet and the clergyman he rather avoided,
as he was aware both of them conceived they understood such matters as
well, or better than he did; and Dousterswivel, besides that he looked
on him as a charlatan, was so nearly connected with his apprehended loss
in the stock of the mining company, that he could not abide the sight
of him. These two latter satellites, therefore, attended upon the orb
of Sir Arthur, to whom, moreover, as the most important person of the
society, they were naturally induced to attach themselves. It frequently happens that the most beautiful points of Scottish scenery
lie hidden in some sequestered dell, and that you may travel through the
country in every direction without being aware of your vicinity to what
is well worth seeing, unless intention or accident carry you to the
very spot. This is particularly the case in the country around Fairport,
which is, generally speaking, open, unenclosed, and bare. But here and
there the progress of rills, or small rivers, has formed dells, glens,
or as they are provincially termed, dens, on whose high and rocky banks
trees and shrubs of all kinds find a shelter, and grow with a luxuriant
profusion, which is the more gratifying, as it forms an unexpected
contrast with the general face of the country. This was eminently the
case with the approach to the ruins of Saint Ruth, which was for some
time merely a sheep-track, along the side of a steep and bare hill. By
degrees, however, as this path descended, and winded round the hillside,
trees began to appear, at first singly, stunted, and blighted, with
locks of wool upon their trunks, and their roots hollowed out into
recesses, in which the sheep love to repose themselves--a sight much more
gratifying to the eye of an admirer of the picturesque than to that of
a planter or forester. By and by the trees formed groups, fringed on the
edges, and filled up in the middle, by thorns and hazel bushes; and at
length these groups closed so much together, that although a broad glade
opened here and there under their boughs, or a small patch of bog or
heath occurred which had refused nourishment to the seed which they
sprinkled round, and consequently remained open and waste, the scene
might on the whole be termed decidedly woodland. The sides of the valley
began to approach each other more closely; the rush of a brook was heard
below, and between the intervals afforded by openings in the natural
wood, its waters were seen hurling clear and rapid under their silvan
canopy. Oldbuck now took upon himself the full authority of cicerone, and
anxiously directed the company not to go a foot-breadth off the track
which he pointed out to them, if they wished to enjoy in full perfection
what they came to see. “You are happy in me for a guide, Miss Wardour,”
 exclaimed the veteran, waving his hand and head in cadence as he
repeated with emphasis,

               I know each lane, and every alley green,
               Dingle, or bushy dell, of this wild wood,
               And every bosky bower from side to side. (Milton’s Comus.) Ah! deuce take it!--that spray of a bramble has demolished all
Caxon’s labours, and nearly canted my wig into the stream--so much for
recitations, hors de propos.”

“Never mind, my dear sir,” said Miss Wardour; “you have your faithful
attendant ready to repair such a disaster when it happens, and when you
appear with it as restored to its original splendour, I will carry on
the quotation:

                So sinks the day-star in the ocean bed,
                And yet anon repairs his drooping head,
               And tricks his beams, and with new-spangled ore
                       Flames on the forehead”--

 (Lycidas.) “O! enough, enough!” answered Oldbuck; “I ought to have known what it
was to give you advantage over me--But here is what will stop your career
of satire, for you are an admirer of nature, I know.” In fact, when they
had followed him through a breach in a low, ancient, and ruinous wall,
they came suddenly upon a scene equally unexpected and interesting. They stood pretty high upon the side of the glen, which had suddenly
opened into a sort of amphitheatre to give room for a pure and profound
lake of a few acres extent, and a space of level ground around it. The
banks then arose everywhere steeply, and in some places were varied by
rocks--in others covered with the copse, which run up, feathering their
sides lightly and irregularly, and breaking the uniformity of the green
pasture-ground.--Beneath, the lake discharged itself into the huddling
and tumultuous brook, which had been their companion since they had
entered the glen. At the point at which it issued from “its parent
lake,” stood the ruins which they had come to visit. They were not
of great extent; but the singular beauty, as well as the wild and
sequestered character of the spot on which they were situated, gave them
an interest and importance superior to that which attaches itself
to architectural remains of greater consequence, but placed near to
ordinary houses, and possessing less romantic accompaniments. The
eastern window of the church remained entire, with all its ornaments
and tracery work; and the sides, upheld by flying buttresses whose airy
support, detached from the wall against which they were placed, and
ornamented with pinnacles and carved work, gave a variety and lightness
to the building. The roof and western end of the church were completely
ruinous; but the latter appeared to have made one side of a square, of
which the ruins of the conventual buildings formed other two, and the
gardens a fourth. The side of these buildings which overhung the brook,
was partly founded on a steep and precipitous rock; for the place had
been occasionally turned to military purposes, and had been taken with
great slaughter during Montrose’s wars. The ground formerly occupied
by the garden was still marked by a few orchard trees. At a greater
distance from the buildings were detached oaks and elms and chestnuts,
growing singly, which had attained great size. The rest of the space
between the ruins and the hill was a close-cropt sward, which the
daily pasture of the sheep kept in much finer order than if it had been
subjected to the scythe and broom. The whole scene had a repose, which
was still and affecting without being monotonous. The dark, deep basin,
in which the clear blue lake reposed, reflecting the water lilies which
grew on its surface, and the trees which here and there threw their arms
from the banks, was finely contrasted with the haste and tumult of the
brook which broke away from the outlet, as if escaping from confinement
and hurried down the glen, wheeling around the base of the rock on which
the ruins were situated, and brawling in foam and fury with every shelve
and stone which obstructed its passage. A similar contrast was seen
between the level green meadow, in which the ruins were situated, and
the large timber-trees which were scattered over it, compared with the
precipitous banks which arose at a short distance around, partly fringed
with light and feathery underwood, partly rising in steeps clothed with
purple heath, and partly more abruptly elevated into fronts of grey
rock, chequered with lichen, and with those hardy plants which find root
even in the most arid crevices of the crags. “There was the retreat of learning in the days of darkness, Mr. Lovel!”
 said Oldbuck,--around whom the company had now grouped themselves while
they admired the unexpected opening of a prospect so romantic;--“there
reposed the sages who were aweary of the world, and devoted either to
that which was to come, or to the service of the generations who should
follow them in this. I will show you presently the library;--see that
stretch of wall with square-shafted windows--there it existed, stored,
as an old manuscript in my possession assures me, with five thousand
volumes. And here I might well take up the lamentation of the learned
Leland, who, regretting the downfall of the conventual libraries,
exclaims, like Rachel weeping for her children, that if the Papal laws,
decrees, decretals, clementines, and other such drugs of the devil--yea,
if Heytesburg’s sophisms, Porphyry’s universals, Aristotle’s logic,
and Dunse’s divinity, with such other lousy legerdemains (begging your
pardon, Miss Wardour) and fruits of the bottomless pit,--had leaped
out of our libraries, for the accommodation of grocers, candlemakers,
soapsellers, and other worldly occupiers, we might have been therewith
contented. But to put our ancient chronicles, our noble histories,
our learned commentaries, and national muniments, to such offices of
contempt and subjection, has greatly degraded our nation, and showed
ourselves dishonoured in the eyes of posterity to the utmost stretch of
time--O negligence most unfriendly to our land!”

“And, O John Knox” said the Baronet, “through whose influence, and under
whose auspices, the patriotic task was accomplished!”

The Antiquary, somewhat in the situation of a woodcock caught in his own
springe, turned short round and coughed, to excuse a slight blush as he
mustered his answer--“as to the Apostle of the Scottish Reformation”--

But Miss Wardour broke in to interrupt a conversation so dangerous. “Pray, who was the author you quoted, Mr. Oldbuck?”

“The learned Leland, Miss Wardour, who lost his senses on witnessing the
destruction of the conventual libraries in England.”

“Now, I think,” replied the young lady, “his misfortune may have saved
the rationality of some modern antiquaries, which would certainly have
been drowned if so vast a lake of learning had not been diminished by
draining.”

“Well, thank Heaven, there is no danger now--they have hardly left us a
spoonful in which to perform the dire feat.”

So saying, Mr. Oldbuck led the way down the bank, by a steep but secure
path, which soon placed them on the verdant meadow where the ruins
stood. “There they lived,” continued the Antiquary, “with nought to do
but to spend their time in investigating points of remote antiquity,
transcribing manuscripts, and composing new works for the information of
posterity.”

“And,” added the Baronet, “in exercising the rites of devotion with a
pomp and ceremonial worthy of the office of the priesthood.”

“And if Sir Arthur’s excellence will permit,” said the German, with a
low bow, “the monksh might also make de vary curious experiment in deir
laboraties, both in chemistry and magia naturalis.”

“I think,” said the clergyman, “they would have enough to do in
collecting the teinds of the parsonage and vicarage of three good
parishes.”

“And all,” added Miss Wardour, nodding to the Antiquary, “without
interruption from womankind.”

“True, my fair foe,” said Oldbuck; “this was a paradise where no Eve was
admitted, and we may wonder the rather by what chance the good fathers
came to lose it.”

With such criticisms on the occupations of those by whom the ruins had
been formerly possessed, they wandered for some time from one moss-grown
shrine to another, under the guidance of Oldbuck, who explained,
with much plausibility, the ground-plan of the edifice, and read and
expounded to the company the various mouldering inscriptions which yet
were to be traced upon the tombs of the dead, or under the vacant niches
of the sainted images. “What is the reason,” at length Miss Wardour asked the Antiquary, “why
tradition has preserved to us such meagre accounts of the inmates of
these stately edifices, raised with such expense of labour and taste,
and whose owners were in their times personages of such awful power and
importance? The meanest tower of a freebooting baron or squire who lived
by his lance and broadsword, is consecrated by its appropriate legend,
and the shepherd will tell you with accuracy the names and feats of
its inhabitants;--but ask a countryman concerning these beautiful and
extensive remains--these towers, these arches, and buttresses,
and shafted windows, reared at such cost,--three words fill up his
answer--they were made up by the monks lang syne.’”

The question was somewhat puzzling. Sir Arthur looked upward, as if
hoping to be inspired with an answer--Oldbuck shoved back his wig--the
clergyman was of opinion that his parishioners were too deeply impressed
with the true presbyterian doctrine to preserve any records concerning
the papistical cumberers of the land, offshoots as they were of the
great overshadowing tree of iniquity, whose roots are in the bowels
of the seven hills of abomination--Lovel thought the question was best
resolved by considering what are the events which leave the deepest
impression on the minds of the common people--“These,” he contended,
“were not such as resemble the gradual progress of a fertilizing river,
but the headlong and precipitous fury of some portentous flood. The eras
by which the vulgar compute time, have always reference to some period
of fear and tribulation, and they date by a tempest, an earthquake, or
burst of civil commotion. When such are the facts most alive, in the
memory of the common people, we cannot wonder,” he concluded, “that the
ferocious warrior is remembered, and the peaceful abbots are abandoned
to forgetfulness and oblivion.”

“If you pleashe, gentlemans and ladies, and ashking pardon of Sir Arthur
and Miss Wardour, and this worthy clergymansh, and my goot friend Mr.
Oldenbuck, who is my countrymansh, and of goot young Mr. Lofel also, I
think it is all owing to de hand of glory.”

“The hand of what?” exclaimed Oldbuck. “De hand of glory, my goot Master Oldenbuck, which is a vary great and
terrible secrets--which de monksh used to conceal their treasures when
they were triven from their cloisters by what you call de Reform.”

“Ay, indeed! tell us about that,” said Oldbuck, “for these are secrets
worth knowing.”

“Why, my goot Master Oldenbuck, you will only laugh at me--But de hand of
glory is vary well known in de countries where your worthy progenitors
did live--and it is hand cut off from a dead man, as has been hanged for
murther, and dried very nice in de shmoke of juniper wood; and if you
put a little of what you call yew wid your juniper, it will not be any
better--that is, it will not be no worse--then you do take something of de
fatsh of de bear, and of de badger, and of de great eber, as you call
de grand boar, and of de little sucking child as has not been christened
(for dat is very essentials), and you do make a candle, and put it
into de hand of glory at de proper hour and minute, with de proper
ceremonish, and he who seeksh for treasuresh shall never find none at
all.”

“I dare take my corporal oath of that conclusion,” said the Antiquary. “And was it the custom, Mr. Dousterswivel, in Westphalia, to make use of
this elegant candelabrum?”

“Alwaysh, Mr. Oldenbuck, when you did not want nobody to talk of nothing
you wash doing about--And the monksh alwaysh did this when they did hide
their church-plates, and their great chalices, and de rings, wid very
preshious shtones and jewels.”

“But, notwithstanding, you knights of the Rosy Cross have means, no
doubt, of breaking the spell, and discovering what the poor monks have
put themselves to so much trouble to conceal?”

“Ah! goot Mr. Oldenbuck,” replied the adept, shaking his head
mysteriously, “you was very hard to believe; but if you had seen de
great huge pieces of de plate so massive, Sir Arthur,--so fine fashion,
Miss Wardour--and de silver cross dat we did find (dat was Schroepfer and
my ownself) for de Herr Freygraf, as you call de Baron Von Blunderhaus,
I do believe you would have believed then.”

“Seeing is believing indeed. But what was your art--what was your
mystery, Mr. Dousterswivel?”

“Aha, Mr. Oldenbuck! dat is my little secret, mine goot sir--you sall
forgife me that I not tell that. But I will tell you dere are various
ways--yes, indeed, dere is de dream dat you dream tree times--dat is a
vary goot way.”

“I am glad of that,” said Oldbuck; “I have a friend” (with a side-glance
to Lovel) “who is peculiarly favoured by the visits of Queen Mab.”

“Den dere is de sympathies, and de antipathies, and de strange
properties and virtues natural of divers herb, and of de little
divining-rod.”

“I would gladly rather see some of these wonders than hear of them,”
 said Miss Wardour. “Ah, but, my much-honoured young lady, this is not de time or de way to
do de great wonder of finding all de church’s plate and treasure; but
to oblige you, and Sir Arthur my patron, and de reverend clergymans,
and goot Mr. Oldenbuck, and young Mr. Lofel, who is a very goot young
gentleman also, I will show you dat it is possible, a vary possible,
to discover de spring, of water, and de little fountain hidden in de
ground, without any mattock, or spade, or dig at all.”

“Umph!” quoth the Antiquary, “I have heard of that conundrum. That will
be no very productive art in our country;--you should carry that property
to Spain or Portugal, and turn it to good account.”

“Ah! my goot Master Oldenbuck, dere is de Inquisition and de
Auto-da-fe--they would burn me, who am but a simple philosopher, for one
great conjurer.”

“They would cast away their coals then,” said Oldbuck; “but,” continued
he, in a whisper to Lovel, “were they to pillory him for one of the
most impudent rascals that ever wagged a tongue, they would square the
punishment more accurately with his deserts. But let us see: I think he
is about to show us some of his legerdemain.”

In truth, the German was now got to a little copse-thicket at some
distance from the ruins, where he affected busily to search for such
a wand as would suit the purpose of his mystery: and after cutting and
examining, and rejecting several, he at length provided himself with a
small twig of hazel terminating in a forked end, which he pronounced
to possess the virtue proper for the experiment that he was about to
exhibit. Holding the forked ends of the wand, each between a finger and
thumb, and thus keeping the rod upright, he proceeded to pace the ruined
aisles and cloisters, followed by the rest of the company in admiring
procession. “I believe dere was no waters here,” said the adept, when he
had made the round of several of the buildings, without perceiving
any of those indications which he pretended to expect--“I believe those
Scotch monksh did find de water too cool for de climate, and alwaysh
drank de goot comfortable, Rhinewine. But, aha!--see there!” Accordingly,
the assistants observed the rod to turn in his fingers, although
he pretended to hold it very tight.--“Dere is water here about, sure
enough,” and, turning this way and that way, as the agitation of the
divining-rod seemed to increase or diminish, he at length advanced into
the midst of a vacant and roofless enclosure which had been the kitchen
of the priory, when the rod twisted itself so as to point almost
straight downwards. “Here is de place,” said the adept, “and if you do
not find de water here, I will give you all leave to call me an impudent
knave.”

“I shall take that license,” whispered the Antiquary to Lovel, “whether
the water is discovered or no.”

A servant, who had come up with a basket of cold refreshments, was now
despatched to a neighbouring forester’s hut for a mattock and pick-axe. The loose stones and rubbish being removed from the spot indicated by
the German, they soon came to the sides of a regularly-built well; and
when a few feet of rubbish were cleared out by the assistance of the
forester and his sons, the water began to rise rapidly, to the delight
of the philosopher, the astonishment of the ladies, Mr. Blattergowl, and
Sir Arthur, the surprise of Lovel, and the confusion of the incredulous
Antiquary. He did not fail, however, to enter his protest in Lovers ear
against the miracle. “This is a mere trick,” he said; “the rascal had
made himself sure of the existence of this old well, by some means or
other, before he played off this mystical piece of jugglery. Mark
what he talks of next. I am much mistaken if this is not intended as
a prelude to some more serious fraud. See how the rascal assumes
consequence, and plumes himself upon the credit of his success, and how
poor Sir Arthur takes in the tide of nonsense which he is delivering to
him as principles of occult science!”

“You do see, my goot patron, you do see, my goot ladies, you do see,
worthy Dr. Bladderhowl, and even Mr. Lofel and Mr. Oldenbuck may see, if
they do will to see, how art has no enemy at all but ignorance. Look at
this little slip of hazel nuts--it is fit for nothing at all but to
whip de little child”--(“I would choose a cat and nine tails for your
occasions,” whispered Oldbuck apart)--“and you put it in the hands of a
philosopher--paf! it makes de grand discovery. But this is nothing,
Sir Arthur,--nothing at all, worthy Dr. Botherhowl--nothing at all,
ladies--nothing at all, young Mr. Lofel and goot Mr. Oldenbuck, to what
art can do. Ah! if dere was any man that had de spirit and de courage, I
would show him better things than de well of water--I would show him”--

“And a little money would be necessary also, would it not?” said the
Antiquary. “Bah! one trifle, not worth talking about, maight be necessaries,”
 answered the adept. “I thought as much,” rejoined the Antiquary, drily; “and I, in the
meanwhile, without any divining-rod, will show you an excellent venison
pasty, and a bottle of London particular Madeira, and I think that will
match all that Mr. Dousterswivel’s art is like to exhibit.”

The feast was spread fronde super viridi, as Oldbuck expressed himself,
under a huge old tree called the Prior’s Oak, and the company, sitting
down around it, did ample honour to the contents of the basket. As when a Gryphon through the wilderness,
               With winged course, o’er hill and moory dale,
                 Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stealth
                 Had from his wakeful custody purloined
                  The guarded gold: So eagerly the Fiend--
                                   Paradise Lost. When their collation was ended, Sir Arthur resumed the account of the
mysteries of the divining-rod, as a subject on which he had formerly
conversed with Dousterswivel. “My friend Mr. Oldbuck will now be
prepared, Mr. Dousterswivel, to listen with more respect to the stories
you have told us of the late discoveries in Germany by the brethren of
your association.”

“Ah, Sir Arthur, that was not a thing to speak to those gentlemans,
because it is want of credulity--what you call faith--that spoils the
great enterprise.”

“At least, however, let my daughter read the narrative she has taken
down of the story of Martin Waldeck.”

“Ah! that was vary true story--but Miss Wardour, she is so sly and so
witty, that she has made it just like one romance--as well as Goethe or
Wieland could have done it, by mine honest wort.”

“To say the truth, Mr. Dousterswivel,” answered Miss Wardour, “the
romantic predominated in the legend so much above the probable, that it
was impossible for a lover of fairyland like me to avoid lending a few
touches to make it perfect in its kind. But here it is, and if you do
not incline to leave this shade till the heat of the day has somewhat
declined, and will have sympathy with my bad composition, perhaps Sir
Arthur or Mr. Oldbuck will read it to us.”

“Not I,” said Sir Arthur; “I was never fond of reading aloud.”

“Nor I,” said Oldbuck, “for I have forgot my spectacles. But here is
Lovel, with sharp eyes and a good voice; for Mr. Blattergowl, I know,
never reads anything, lest he should be suspected of reading his
sermons.”

The task was therefore imposed upon Lovel, who received, with some
trepidation, as Miss Wardour delivered, with a little embarrassment, a
paper containing the lines traced by that fair hand, the possession of
which he coveted as the highest blessing the earth could offer to
him. But there was a necessity of suppressing his emotions; and after
glancing over the manuscript, as if to become acquainted with the
character, he collected himself, and read the company the following
tale:--

The Fortunes of Martin Waldeck. The solitudes of the Harz forest in Germany, but especially the
mountains called Blocksberg, or rather Brockenberg, are the chosen
scenes for tales of witches, demons, and apparitions. The occupation of the inhabitants, who are either miners or foresters,
is of a kind that renders them peculiarly prone to superstition, and
the natural phenomena which they witness in pursuit of their solitary or
subterraneous profession, are often set down by them to the interference
of goblins or the power of magic. Among the various legends current in
that wild country, there is a favourite one, which supposes the Harz to
be haunted by a sort of tutelar demon, in the shape of a wild man,
of huge stature, his head wreathed with oak leaves, and his middle
cinctured with the same, bearing in his hand a pine torn up by the
roots. It is certain that many persons profess to have seen such a form
traversing, with huge strides, in a line parallel to their own course,
the opposite ridge of a mountain, when divided from it by a narrow glen;
and indeed the fact of the apparition is so generally admitted, that
modern scepticism has only found refuge by ascribing it to optical
deception. The shadow of the person who sees the phantom, being reflected upon a
cloud of mist, like the image of the magic lantern upon a white sheet,
is supposed to have formed the apparition. In elder times, the intercourse of the demon with the inhabitants was
more familiar, and, according to the traditions of the Harz, he was
wont, with the caprice usually ascribed to these earth-born powers,
to interfere with the affairs of mortals, sometimes for their weal,
sometimes for their wo. But it was observed that even his gifts often
turned out, in the long run, fatal to those on whom they were bestowed,
and it was no uncommon thing for the pastors, in their care of their
flocks, to compose long sermons, the burden whereof was a warning
against having any intercourse, direct or indirect, with the Harz demon. The fortunes of Martin Waldeck have been often quoted by the aged to
their giddy children, when they were heard to scoff at a danger which
appeared visionary. A travelling capuchin had possessed himself of the pulpit of the
thatched church at a little hamlet called Morgenbrodt, lying in the
Harz district, from which he declaimed against the wickedness of the
inhabitants, their communication with fiends, witches, and fairies, and,
in particular, with the woodland goblin of the Harz. The doctrines of
Luther had already begun to spread among the peasantry (for the incident
is placed under the reign of Charles V. ), and they laughed to scorn the
zeal with which the venerable man insisted upon his topic. At length,
as his vehemence increased with opposition, so their opposition rose
in proportion to his vehemence. The inhabitants did not like to hear an
accustomed quiet demon, who had inhabited the Brockenberg for so many
ages, summarily confounded with Baal-peor, Ashtaroth, and Beelzebub
himself, and condemned without reprieve to the bottomless Tophet. The
apprehensions that the spirit might avenge himself on them for listening
to such an illiberal sentence, added to their national interest in his
behalf. A travelling friar, they said, that is here to-day and away
to-morrow, may say what he pleases: but it is we, the ancient and
constant inhabitants of the country, that are left at the mercy of the
insulted demon, and must, of course, pay for all. Under the irritation
occasioned by these reflections, the peasants from injurious language
betook themselves to stones, and having pebbled the priest pretty
handsomely, they drove him out of the parish to preach against demons
elsewhere. Three young men, who had been present and assisting on this occasion
were upon their return to the hut where they carried on the laborious
and mean occupation of preparing charcoal for the smelting furnaces. On
the way, their conversation naturally turned upon the demon of the Harz
and the doctrine of the capuchin. Max and George Waldeck, the two elder
brothers, although they allowed the language of the capuchin to have
been indiscreet and worthy of censure, as presuming to determine upon
the precise character and abode of the spirit, yet contended it was
dangerous, in the highest degree, to accept of his gifts, or hold any
communication with him, He was powerful, they allowed, but wayward and
capricious, and those who had intercourse with him seldom came to a good
end. Did he not give the brave knight, Ecbert of Rabenwald, that famous
black steed, by means of which he vanquished all the champions at
the great tournament at Bremen? and did not the same steed afterwards
precipitate itself with its rider into an abyss so steep and fearful,
that neither horse nor man were ever seen more? Had he not given to Dame
Gertrude Trodden a curious spell for making butter come? and was she not
burnt for a witch by the grand criminal judge of the Electorate, because
she availed herself of his gift? But these, and many other instances
which they quoted, of mischance and ill-luck ultimately attending on
the apparent benefits conferred by the Harz spirit, failed to make any
impression upon Martin Waldeck, the youngest of the brothers. Martin was youthful, rash, and impetuous; excelling in all the exercises
which distinguish a mountaineer, and brave and undaunted from his
familiar intercourse with the dangers that attend them. He laughed at
the timidity of his brothers. “Tell me not of such folly,” he said; “the
demon is a good demon--he lives among us as if he were a peasant like
ourselves--haunts the lonely crags and recesses of the mountains like
a huntsman or goatherd--and he who loves the Harz forest and its wild
scenes cannot be indifferent to the fate of the hardy children of the
soil. But, if the demon were as malicious as you would make him, how
should he derive power over mortals, who barely avail themselves of his
gifts, without binding themselves to submit to his pleasure? When you
carry your charcoal to the furnace, is not the money as good that is
paid you by blaspheming Blaize, the old reprobate overseer, as if you
got it from the pastor himself? It is not the goblins gifts which can
endanger you, then, but it is the use you shall make of them that you
must account for. And were the demon to appear to me at this moment,
and indicate to me a gold or silver mine, I would begin to dig away
even before his back were turned,--and I would consider myself as under
protection of a much Greater than he, while I made a good use of the
wealth he pointed out to me.”

To this the elder brother replied, that wealth ill won was seldom well
spent; while Martin presumptuously declared, that the possession of all
the treasures of the Harz would not make the slightest alteration on his
habits, morals, or character. His brother entreated Martin to talk less wildly upon the subject, and
with some difficulty contrived to withdraw his attention, by calling it
to the consideration of the approaching boar-chase. This talk brought
them to their hut, a wretched wigwam, situated upon one side of a wild,
narrow, and romantic dell, in the recesses of the Brockenberg. They
released their sister from attending upon the operation of charring the
wood, which requires constant attention, and divided among themselves
the duty of watching it by night, according to their custom, one always
waking, while his brothers slept. Max Waldeck, the eldest, watched during the first two hours of the
night, and was considerably alarmed by observing, upon the opposite
bank of the glen, or valley, a huge fire surrounded by some figures that
appeared to wheel around it with antic gestures. Max at first bethought
him of calling up his brothers; but recollecting the daring character of
the youngest, and finding it impossible to wake the elder without also
disturbing Martin--conceiving also what he saw to be an illusion of the
demon, sent perhaps in consequence of the venturous expressions used by
Martin on the preceding evening, he thought it best to betake himself to
the safeguard of such prayers as he could murmur over, and to watch in
great terror and annoyance this strange and alarming apparition. After
blazing for some time, the fire faded gradually away into darkness, and
the rest of Max’s watch was only disturbed by the remembrance of its
terrors. George now occupied the place of Max, who had retired to rest. The
phenomenon of a huge blazing fire, upon the opposite bank of the glen,
again presented itself to the eye of the watchman. It was surrounded
as before by figures, which, distinguished by their opaque forms, being
between the spectator and the red glaring light, moved and fluctuated
around it as if engaged in some mystical ceremony. George, though
equally cautious, was of a bolder character than his elder brother. He resolved to examine more nearly the object of his wonder; and,
accordingly after crossing the rivulet which divided the glen, he
climbed up the opposite bank, and approached within an arrow’s flight
of the fire, which blazed apparently with the same fury as when he first
witnessed it. The appearance, of the assistants who surrounded it resembled those
phantoms which are seen in a troubled dream, and at once confirmed the
idea he had entertained from the first, that they did not belong to
the human world. Amongst these strange unearthly forms, George Waldeck
distinguished that of a giant overgrown with hair, holding an uprooted
fir in his hand, with which, from time to time, he seemed to stir the
blazing fire, and having no other clothing than a wreath of oak leaves
around his forehead and loins. George’s heart sunk within him at
recognising the well-known apparition of the Harz demon, as he had been
often described to him by the ancient shepherds and huntsmen who had
seen his form traversing the mountains. He turned, and was about to fly;
but upon second thoughts, blaming his own cowardice, he recited mentally
the verse of the Psalmist, “All good angels, praise the Lord!” which
is in that country supposed powerful as an exorcism, and turned himself
once more towards the place where he had seen the fire. But it was no
longer visible. The pale moon alone enlightened the side of the valley; and when George,
with trembling steps, a moist brow, and hair bristling upright under
his collier’s cap, came to the spot on which the fire had been so lately
visible, marked as it was by a scathed oak-tree, there appeared not on
the heath the slightest vestiges of what he had seen. The moss and wild
flowers were unscorched, and the branches of the oak-tree, which had so
lately appeared enveloped in wreaths of flame and smoke, were moist with
the dews of midnight. George returned to his hut with trembling steps, and, arguing like his
elder brother, resolved to say nothing of what he had seen, lest he
should awake in Martin that daring curiosity which he almost deemed to
be allied with impiety. It was now Martin’s turn to watch. The household cock had given his
first summons, and the night was well-nigh spent. Upon examining the
state of the furnace in which the wood was deposited in order to its
being coked or charred, he was surprised to find that the fire had not
been sufficiently maintained; for in his excursion and its consequences,
George had forgot the principal object of his watch. Martin’s first
thought was to call up the slumberers; but observing that both his
brothers slept unwontedly deep and heavily, he respected their repose,
and set himself to supply the furnace with fuel without requiring
their aid. What he heaped upon it was apparently damp and unfit for the
purpose, for the fire seemed rather to decay than revive. Martin next
went to collect some boughs from a stack which had been carefully cut
and dried for this purpose; but, when he returned, he found the fire
totally extinguished. This was a serious evil, and threatened them
with loss of their trade for more than one day. The vexed and mortified
watchman set about to strike a light in order to rekindle the fire
but the tinder was moist, and his labour proved in this respect also
ineffectual. He was now about to call up his brothers, for circumstances
seemed to be pressing, when flashes of light glimmered not only through
the window, but through every crevice of the rudely built hut, and
summoned him to behold the same apparition which had before alarmed
the successive watches of his brethren. His first idea was, that the
Muhllerhaussers, their rivals in trade, and with whom they had had many
quarrels, might have encroached upon their bounds for the purpose of
pirating their wood; and he resolved to awake his brothers, and
be revenged on them for their audacity. But a short reflection and
observation on the gestures and manner of those who seemed to “work
in the fire,” induced him to dismiss this belief, and although
rather sceptical in such matters, to conclude that what he saw was a
supernatural phenomenon. “But be they men or fiends,” said the undaunted
forester, “that busy themselves yonder with such fantastical rites and
gestures, I will go and demand a light to rekindle our furnace.” He,
relinquished at the same time the idea of awaking his brethren. There
was a belief that such adventures as he was about to undertake were
accessible only to one person at a time; he feared also that his
brothers, in their scrupulous timidity, might interfere to prevent his
pursuing the investigation he had resolved to commence; and, therefore,
snatching his boar-spear from the wall, the undaunted Martin Waldeck set
forth on the adventure alone. With the same success as his brother George, but with courage far
superior, Martin crossed the brook, ascended the hill, and approached
so near the ghostly assembly, that he could recognise, in the presiding
figure, the attributes of the Harz demon. A cold shuddering assailed him
for the first time in his life; but the recollection that he had at a
distance dared and even courted the intercourse which was now about to
take place, confirmed his staggering courage; and pride supplying what
he wanted in resolution, he advanced with tolerable firmness towards
the fire, the figures which surrounded it appearing still more wild,
fantastical, and supernatural, the more near he approached to the
assembly. He was received with a loud shout of discordant and unnatural
laughter, which, to his stunned ears, seemed more alarming than a
combination of the most dismal and melancholy sounds that could be
imagined. “Who art thou?” said the giant, compressing his savage and
exaggerated features into a sort of forced gravity, while they were
occasionally agitated by the convulsion of the laughter which he seemed
to suppress. “Martin Waldeck, the forester,” answered the hardy youth;--“and who are
you?”

“The King of the Waste and of the Mine,” answered the spectre;--“and why
hast thou dared to encroach on my mysteries?”

“I came in search of light to rekindle my fire,” answered Martin,
hardily, and then resolutely asked in his turn, “What mysteries are
those that you celebrate here?”

“We celebrate,” answered the complaisant demon, “the wedding of Hermes
with the Black Dragon--But take thy fire that thou camest to seek, and
begone! no mortal may look upon us and live.”

The peasant struck his spear-point into a large piece of blazing wood,
which he heaved up with some difficulty, and then turned round to regain
his hut, the shouts of laughter being renewed behind him with treble
violence, and ringing far down the narrow valley. When Martin returned
to the hut, his first care, however much astonished with what he had
seen, was to dispose the kindled coal among the fuel so as might best
light the fire of his furnace; but after many efforts, and all exertions
of bellows and fire-prong, the coal he had brought from the demon’s fire
became totally extinct without kindling any of the others. He turned
about, and observed the fire still blazing on the hill, although those
who had been busied around it had disappeared. As he conceived the
spectre had been jesting with him, he gave way to the natural hardihood
of his temper, and, determining to see the adventure to an end, resumed
the road to the fire, from which, unopposed by the demon, he brought off
in the same manner a blazing piece of charcoal, but still without being
able to succeed in lighting his fire. Impunity having increased his
rashness, he resolved upon a third experiment, and was as successful as
before in reaching the fire; but when he had again appropriated a
piece of burning coal, and had turned to depart, he heard the harsh and
supernatural voice which had before accosted him, pronounce these words,
“Dare not return hither a fourth time!”

The attempt to kindle the fire with this last coal having proved as
ineffectual as on the former occasions, Martin relinquished the hopeless
attempt, and flung himself on his bed of leaves, resolving to delay till
the next morning the communication of his supernatural adventure to his
brothers. He was awakened from a heavy sleep into which he had sunk,
from fatigue of body and agitation of mind, by loud exclamations
of surprise and joy. His brothers, astonished at finding the fire
extinguished when they awoke, had proceeded to arrange the fuel in order
to renew it, when they found in the ashes three huge metallic masses,
which their skill (for most of the peasants in the Harz are practical
mineralogists) immediately ascertained to be pure gold. It was some damp upon their joyful congratulations when they learned
from Martin the mode in which he had obtained this treasure, to which
their own experience of the nocturnal vision induced them to give full
credit. But they were unable to resist the temptation of sharing in
their brother’s wealth. Taking now upon him as head of the house, Martin
Waldeck bought lands and forests, built a castle, obtained a patent of
nobility, and, greatly to the indignation of the ancient aristocracy
of the neighbourhood, was invested with all the privileges of a man of
family. His courage in public war, as well as in private feuds, together
with the number of retainers whom he kept in pay, sustained him for some
time against the odium which was excited by his sudden elevation, and
the arrogance of his pretensions. And now it was seen in the instance of Martin Waldeck, as it has been in
that of many others, how little mortals can foresee the effect of
sudden prosperity on their own disposition. The evil propensities in his
nature, which poverty had checked and repressed, ripened and bore their
unhallowed fruit under the influence of temptation and the means of
indulgence. As Deep calls unto Deep, one bad passion awakened another
the fiend of avarice invoked that of pride, and pride was to be
supported by cruelty and oppression. Waldeck’s character, always bold
and daring but rendered harsh and assuming by prosperity, soon made him
odious, not to the nobles only, but likewise to the lower ranks, who
saw, with double dislike, the oppressive rights of the feudal nobility
of the empire so remorselessly exercised by one who had risen from the
very dregs of the people. His adventure, although carefully concealed,
began likewise to be whispered abroad, and the clergy already
stigmatized as a wizard and accomplice of fiends, the wretch, who,
having acquired so huge a treasure in so strange a manner, had not
sought to sanctify it by dedicating a considerable portion to the use
of the church. Surrounded by enemies, public and private, tormented by
a thousand feuds, and threatened by the church with excommunication,
Martin Waldeck, or, as we must now call him, the Baron von Waldeck,
often regretted bitterly the labours and sports of his unenvied poverty. But his courage failed him not under all these difficulties, and seemed
rather to augment in proportion to the danger which darkened around him,
until an accident precipitated his fall. A proclamation by the reigning Duke of Brunswick had invited to a solemn
tournament all German nobles of free and honourable descent; and Martin
Waldeck, splendidly armed, accompanied by his two brothers, and a
gallantly-equipped retinue, had the arrogance to appear among the
chivalry of the province, and demand permission to enter the lists. This
was considered as filling up the measure of his presumption. A thousand
voices exclaimed, “We will have no cinder-sifter mingle in our games of
chivalry.” Irritated to frenzy, Martin drew his sword and hewed down the
herald, who, in compliance with the general outcry, opposed his entry
into the lists. An hundred swords were unsheathed to avenge what was in
those days regarded as a crime only inferior to sacrilege or regicide. Waldeck, after defending himself like a lion, was seized, tried on
the spot by the judges of the lists, and condemned, as the appropriate
punishment for breaking the peace of his sovereign, and violating the
sacred person of a herald-at-arms, to have his right hand struck from
his body, to be ignominiously deprived of the honour of nobility, of
which he was unworthy, and to be expelled from the city. When he had
been stripped of his arms, and sustained the mutilation imposed by this
severe sentence, the unhappy victim of ambition was abandoned to the
rabble, who followed him with threats and outcries levelled alternately
against the necromancer and oppressor, which at length ended in
violence. His brothers (for his retinue were fled and dispersed) at
length succeeded in rescuing him from the hands of the populace, when,
satiated with cruelty, they had left him half dead through loss
of blood, and through the outrages he had sustained. They were not
permitted, such was the ingenious cruelty of their enemies, to make use
of any other means of removing him, excepting such a collier’s cart as
they had themselves formerly used, in which they deposited their brother
on a truss of straw, scarcely expecting to reach any place of shelter
ere death should release him from his misery. When the Waldecks, journeying in this miserable manner, had approached
the verge of their native country, in a hollow way, between two
mountains, they perceived a figure advancing towards them, which at
first sight seemed to be an aged man.