Who, I ask? But I got a prize in the lottery. So
this is all I can think to tell of myself; and, Mr. Grundy, your
health, and a good wife to you, Sir.' After this eloquent piece of biography, we requested of Higginson to
recount his adventures; and he read a short sketch, which was to have
accompanied a volume of poems, had not the booksellers refused to
publish them. I copy it for you. MEMOIRS OF JAMES HIGGINSON

    BY HIMSELF:

    'Of the lives of poets, collected from posthumous record, and oral
    tradition, as little is known with certainty, much must be left to
    conjecture. He therefore, who presents his own memoirs to the
    public, may surely merit the reasonable applause of all, whose
    minds are emancipated from the petulance of envy, the
    fastidiousness of hypercriticism, and the exacerbation of party. 'I was born in the year 1771, at 24, Swallow Street; and should the
    curious reader wish to examine the mansion, he has every thing to
    hope from the alert urbanity of its present landlord, and the civil
    obsequiousness of his notable lady. He who gives civility, gives
    what costs him little, while remuneration may be multiplied in an
    indefinite ratio. 'My parents were reputable tobacconists, and kept me behind the
    counter, to negociate the titillating dust, and the tranquillizing
    quid. Of genius the first spark which I elicited, was reading a
    ballad in the shop, while the woman who sold it to me was stealing
    a canister of snuff. This specimen of mental abstraction (a quality
    which I still preserve), shewed that I would never make a good
    tradesman; but it also shewed, that I would make an excellent
    scholar. A tutor was accordingly appointed for me; and during a
    triennial course of study, I had passed from the insipidity of the
    incipient _hic_, _hæc_, _hoc_, to the music of a Virgil, and the
    thunder of a Demosthenes. 'Debarred by my secluded life from copying the polished converse of
    high society, I have at least endeavoured to avoid the vulgar
    phraseology of low; and to discuss the very weather with a
    sententious association of polysyllabical ratiocination. 'With illustrations of my juvenile character, recollection but ill
    supplies me. That I have always disliked the diurnal ceremony of
    ablution, and a hasty succession of linen, is a truth which he who
    has a sensitive texture of skin will easily credit; which he who
    will not credit, may, if he pleases, deny; and may, if he can,
    controvert. But I assert the fact, and I expect to be believed,
    because I assert it. Life, among its quiet blessings, can boast of
    few things more comfortable than indifference to dress. 'To honey with my bread, and to apple-sauce with my goose, I have
    ever felt a romantic attachment, resulting from the classical
    allusions which they inspire. That man is little to be envied,
    whose honey would not remind him of the Hyblean honey, and whose
    apple-sauce would not suggest to him the golden apple. 'But notwithstanding my cupidity for such dainties, I have that
    happy adaptation of taste which can banquet, with delight, upon
    hesternal offals; can nibble ignominious radishes, or masticate
    superannuated mutton. 'My first series of teeth I cut at the customary time, and the
    second succeeded them with sufficient punctuality. This fact I had
    from my mother. 'My first poetical attempt was an epitaph on the death of my tutor,
    and it was produced at the precocious age of ten. EPITAPH

        Here lies the body of John Tomkins, who
        Departed this life, aged fifty-two;
        After a long and painful illness, that
        He bore with Christian fortitude, though fat. He died lamented deeply by this poem,
        And all who had the happiness to know him. 'This composition my father did not long survive; and my mother, to
    the management of the business feeling quite unequal, relinquished
    it altogether, and retired with the respectable accumulation of a
    thousand pounds. 'I still pursued my studies, and from time to time accommodated
    confectionaries and band-boxes with printed sheets, which the world
    might have read, had it pleased, and might have been pleased with,
    had it read. For some years past, however, the booksellers have
    declined to publish my productions at all. Envious enemies poison
    their minds against me, and persuade them that my brain is
    disordered. For, like Rousseau, I am the victim of implacable foes;
    but my genius, like an arch, becomes stronger the more it is
    opprest. 'On a pretty little maid of my mother's, I made my next poetical
    effort, which I present to the reader. TO DOROTHY PULVERTAFT

        If Black-sea, White-sea, Red-sea ran
        One tide of ink to Ispahan;
        If all the geese in Lincoln fens,
        Produc'd spontaneous, well-made pens;
        If Holland old or Holland new,
        One wond'rous sheet of paper grew;
        Could I, by stenographic power,
        Write twenty libraries an hour;
        And should I sing but half the grace
        Of half a freckle on thy face;
        Each syllable I wrote, should reach
        From Inverness to Bognor's beach;
        Each hairstroke be a river Rhine,
        Each verse an equinoctial line. 'Of the girl, an immediate dismission ensued; but for what reason, let
the sedulous researches of future biographers decide. 'At length, having resolved on writing a volume of Eclogues, I
undertook an excursion into the country to learn pastoral manners, and
write in comfort, far from my tailor. An amputated loaf, and a
contracted Theocritus, constituted my companions. Not a cloud blotted
the blue concave, not a breeze superinduced undulation over the verdant
tresses of the trees. 'In vain I questioned the youths and maidens about their Damons and
Delias; their Dryads and Hamadryads; their Amaboean contentions and
their amorous incantations. When I talked of Pan, they asked me if it
was a pan of milk; when I requested to see the pastoral pipe, they
shewed me a pipe of tobacco; when I spoke of satyrs with horns, they
bade me go to the husbands; and when I spoke of fawns with cloven heel,
they bade me go to the Devil. While charmed with a thatched and shaded
cottage, its slimy pond or smoking dunghill disgusted me; and when I
recumbed on a bank of cowslips and primroses, my features were
transpierced by wasps and ants and nettles. I fell asleep under
sunshine, and awoke under a torrent of rain. Dripping and disconsolate,
I returned to my mother, drank some whey; and since that misadventurous
perambulation have never ruralized again. To him who subjects himself
to a recurrence of disaster, the praise of boldness may possibly be
accorded, but the praise of prudence must certainly be denied. 'A satirical eclogue, however, was the fruit of this expedition. It is
called Antique Amours, and is designed to shew, that passions which are
adapted to one time of life, appear ridiculous in another. The reader
shall have it. ANTIQUE AMOUR

        AN ECLOGUE

          'Tis eve. The sun his ardent axle cools
        In ocean. Dripping geese shake off the pools. An elm men's shadows measure; red and dun,
        The shattered leaves are rustling as they run;
        While an aged bachelor and ancient maid,
        Sit amorous under an old oak decayed. He (for blue vapours damp the scanty grass)
        Strews fodder underneath the hoary lass;
        Then thus,--O matchless piece of season'd clay,
        'Tis Autumn, all things shrivel and decay. Yet as in withered Autumn, charms we see,
        Say, faded maiden, may we not in thee? What tho' thy cheek have furrows? ne'er deplore;
        For wrinkles are the dimples of threescore:
        Tho' from those azure lips the crimson flies,
        It fondly circles round those roseate eyes;
        And while thy nostrils snuff the fingered grain,
        The tinct thy locks have lost, thy lips obtain. Come then, age urges, hours have winged feet,
        Ah! press the wedding ere the winding sheet. To clasp that waist compact in stiffened fold,
        Of woof purpureal, flowered with radiant gold;
        Then, after stately kisses, to repair
        That architectural edifice of hair,
        These, these are blessings.--O my grey delight,
        O venerable nymph, O painted blight,
        Give me to taste of these. By Heaven above,
        I tremble less with palsy than with love;
        And tho' my husky murmurs creak uncouth,
        My words flow unobstructed by a tooth. Come then, age urges, hours have winged feet,
        Ah! press the wedding ere the winding sheet. Come, thou wilt ne'er provoke crimconic law,
        Nor lie, maternal, on the pale-eyed straw. Come, and in formal frolic intertwine,
        The braided silver of thy hair with mine. Then sing some bibulous and reeling glee,
        And drink crusht juices of the grape with me. Sing, for the wine no water shall dilute;
        'Tis drinking water makes the fishes mute. Come then, age urges, hours have winged feet;
        Ah! press the wedding, ere the winding sheet. So spoke the slim and elderly remains
        Of once a youth. A staff his frame sustains;
        And aids his aching limbs, from knee to heel,
        Thin as the spectre of a famished eel. Sharpening the blunted glances of her eyes,
        The virgin a decrepid simper tries,
        Then stretches rigid smiles, which shew him plain,
        Her passion, and the teeth that still remain. Innocent pair! But now the rain begins,
        So both knot kerchiefs underneath their chins. And homeward haste. Such loves the Poet wrote,
        In the patch'd poverty of half a coat;
        Then diadem'd with quills his brow sublime,
        Magnanimously mad in mighty rhime. 'With my venerable parent, I now pass a harmless life. As we have
    no society, we have no scandal; ourselves, therefore, we make our
    favourite topic, and ourselves we are unwilling to dispraise. 'Whether the public will admire my works, as well as my mother
    does, far be from me to determine. If they cannot boast of wit and
    judgment, to the praise of truth and modesty they may at least lay
    claim. To be unassuming in an age of impudence, and veracious in an
    age of mendacity, is to combat with a sword of glass against a
    sword of steel; the transparency of the one may be more beautiful
    than the opacity of the other; yet let it be recollected, that the
    transparency is accompanied with brittleness, and the opacity with
    consolidation.' *      *      *      *      *

I listened with much compassion to this written evidence of a perverted
intellect. O my friend, what a frightful disorder is madness! My turn came next, and I repeated the fictitious tale that Montmorenci
had taught me. He confirmed it; and on being asked to relate his own
life, gave us, with great taste, such a natural narrative of a man
living on his wits, that any one who knew not his noble origin must
have believed it. Soon afterwards, he retired to dress for the theatre; and when he
returned, I beheld a perfect hero. He was habited in an Italian
costume; his hair hung in ringlets, and mustachios embellished his lip. He then departed in a coach, and as soon as he had left us:

'I declare,' said the landlady to me, 'I do not like your cousin's
style of beauty at all; particularly his pencilled eyebrows and curled
locks, they look so womanish.' 'What!' said I, 'not admire Hesperian, Hyacinthine, clustering curls? Surely you would not have a hero with overhanging brows and lank hair? These are worn by none but the villains and assassins.' I perceived poor Higginson colouring, and twisting his fingers; and I
then recollected that his brows and hair have precisely the faults
which I reprobated. 'Dear, dear, dear!' muttered he, and made a precipitate retreat from
the room. I retired soon after; and I now hasten to throw myself on my bed, dream
of love and Montmorenci, and wake unrefreshed, from short and
distracted slumbers. Adieu. This morning, soon after breakfast, I heard a gentle knocking at my
door, and, to my great astonishment, a figure, cased in shining armour,
entered. Oh! ye conscious blushes, it was my Montmorenci! A plume of
white feathers nodded on his helmet, and neither spear nor shield were
wanting. 'I come,' cried he, bending on one knee, and pressing my hand to his
lips, 'I come in the ancient armour of my family, to perform my promise
of recounting to you the melancholy memoirs of my life.' 'My lord,' said I, 'rise and be seated. Cherubina knows how to
appreciate the honour that Montmorenci confers.' He bowed; and having laid by his spear, shield, and helmet, he placed
himself beside me on the sofa, and began his heart-rending history. 'All was dark. The hurricane howled, the hail rattled, and the thunder
rolled. Nature was convulsed, and the traveller inconvenienced. 'In the province of Languedoc stood the Gothic Castle of Montmorenci. Before it ran the Garonne, and behind it rose the Pyrenees, whose
summits exhibiting awful forms, seen and lost again, as the partial
vapours rolled along, were sometimes barren, and gleamed through the
blue tinge of air, and sometimes frowned with forests of gloomy fir,
that swept downward to their base. 'My lads, are your carbines charged, and your daggers sharpened?' whispered Rinaldo, with his plume of black feathers, to the banditti,
in their long cloaks. 'If they an't,' said Bernardo, 'by St. Jago, we might load our carbines
with the hail, and sharpen our daggers against this confounded
north-wind.' 'The wind is east-south-east,' said Ugo. 'At this moment the bell of Montmorenci Castle tolled one. The sound
vibrated through the long corridors, the spiral staircases, the suites
of tapestried apartments, and the ears of the personage who has the
honour to address you. Much alarmed, I started from my couch, which was
of exquisite workmanship; the coverlet of flowered gold, and the canopy
of white velvet painted over with jonquils and butterflies, by Michael
Angelo. But conceive my horror when I beheld my chamber filled with
banditti! 'Snatching my sword, I flew to a corner, where my coat of mail lay
heapt. The bravos rushed upon me; but I fought and dressed, and dressed
and fought, till I had perfectly completed my unpleasing toilette. 'I then stood alone, firm, dignified, collected, and only fifteen years
of age. Alack! there lies more peril in thine eye,
    Than twenty of their swords.--

'To describe the horror of the contest that followed, were beyond the
pen of an Anacreon. In short, I fought till my silver skin was laced
with my golden blood; while the bullets flew round me, thick as hail,

    And whistled as they went for want of thought. 'At length my sword broke, so I set sail for England. 'As I first touched foot on her chalky beach; Hail! exclaimed I, happy
land, thrice hail! Take to thy fostering bosom the destitute
Montmorenci--Montmorenci, once the first and richest of the Gallic
nobility--Montmorenci, whom wretches drove from his hereditary
territories, for loyalty to his monarch, and opposition to the
atrocities of exterminators and revolutionists. 'Nine days and nights I wandered through the country, the rivulet my
beverage, and the berry my repast: the turf my couch, and the sky my
canopy.' 'Ah!' interrupted I, 'how much you must have missed the canopy of white
velvet painted over with jonquils and butterflies!' 'Extremely,' said he, 'for during sixteen long years, I had not a roof
over my head.--I was an itinerant beggar! 'One summer's day, the cattle lay panting under the broad umbrage; the
sun had burst into an immoderate fit of splendour, and the struggling
brook chided the matted grass for obstructing it. I sat under a hedge,
and began eating wild strawberries; when lo! a form, flexile as the
flame ascending from a censer, and undulating with the sighs of a dying
vestal, flitted inaudible by me, nor crushed the daisies as it trod. What a divinity! she was fresh as the Anadyomene of Apelles, and
beautiful as the Gnidus of Praxitiles, or the Helen of Zeuxis. Her eyes
dipt in Heaven's own hue.' ----

'Sir,' said I, 'you need not mind her eyes: I dare say they were blue
enough. But pray who was this immortal doll of your's?' 'Who!' cried he. 'Why who but--shall I speak it? Who but--the LADY
CHERUBINA DE WILLOUGHBY!!!' 'I!' 'You!' 'Ah! Montmorenci!' 'Ah! Cherubina! I followed you with cautious steps,' continued he,
'till I traced you into your--you had a garden, had you not?' 'Yes.' 'Into your garden. I thought ten thousand flowerets would have leapt
from their beds to offer you a nosegay. But the age of gallantry is
past, that of merchants, placemen, and fortune-hunters has succeeded,
and the glory of Cupid is extinguished for ever! 'You disappeared, I uttered incoherent sentences, and next morning
resumed my station at a corner of the garden.' 'At which corner?' asked I. 'Why really,' said he, 'I cannot explain; for the place was then new to
me, and the ground was covered with snow.' 'With snow!' cried I. 'Why I thought you were eating wild strawberries
only the day before.' 'I!' said he. 'Sure you mistake.' 'I declare most solemnly you told me so,' cried I. 'Why then,' said he, 'curse me if I did.' 'Sir,' said I. 'I must remark that your manners----'

'Bless me!' cried he, 'yes, I did say so, sure enough, and I did eat
wild strawberries too; but they were _preserved_ wild strawberries. I
had got a small crock of them from an oyster woman, who was opening
oysters in a meadow, for a hysterical butcher; and her knife having
snapt in two, I lent her my sword; so, out of gratitude, she made me a
present of the preserves. By the bye, they were mouldy. 'One morning, as I sat at the side of the road, asking alms, some
provincial players passed by me. I accosted them, and offered my
services. In short, they took me with them; I performed, was applauded;
and at length my fame reached London, where I have now been acting some
years, with much success; anxious as I am, to realize a little money,
that I may return, in disguise, to my native country, and petition
Napoleon to restore my forfeited estates. 'Such, fair lady, such is my round, unvarnished tale. 'But wherefore,' cried he, starting from his seat; 'wherefore talk of
the past? Oh! let me tell you of the present and of the future. Oh! let
me tell you, how dearly, how devotedly I love you!' 'Love me!' cried I, giving such a start as the nature of the case
required. 'My lord, this is so--really now so----'

'Pardon this abrupt avowal of my unhappy passion,' said he, flinging
himself at my feet. 'Fain would I have let concealment, like a worm in
the bud, feed on my damask cheek; but, oh! who could resist the
maddening sight of so much beauty?' I remained silent, and with the elegant embarrassment of modesty, cast
my blue eyes to the ground. I never looked so lovely. 'But I go!' cried he, springing on his feet. 'I fly from you for ever! No more shall Cherubina be persecuted with my hopeless love. But
Cherubina, the hills and the vallies shall echo, and the songsters of
the grove shall articulate Cherubina. I will shake the leaves of the
forest with my sighs, and make the stream so briny with my tears, that
the turbot shall swim into it, and the sea-weed grow upon its banks!' 'Ah, do not!' said I, with a look of unutterable anguish. 'I will!' exclaimed he, pacing the chamber with long strides, and
slapping his heart, 'and I call all the stars of respectability to
witness the vow. Then, Lady Cherubina,' continued he, stopping short
before me; 'then, when maddened and emaciated, I shall pillow my
haggard head on a hard rock, and lulled by the hurricanes of Heaven,
shall sink into the sleep of the grave.' ----

'Dear Montmorenci!' said I, quite overcome, 'live for my sake--as you
value my--friendship,--live.' 'Friendship!' echoed he. 'Oh! Cherubina, Oh! my soul's precious
treasure, say not that icy word. Say hatred, disgust, horror; any thing
but friendship.' 'What shall I say?' cried I, ineffably affected, 'or what shall I do?' 'What you please,' muttered he, looking wild and pressing his forehead. 'My brain is on fire. Hark! chains are clanking--The furies are
whipping me with their serpents--What smiling cherub arrests yon bloody
hand? Ha! 'tis Cherubina. And now she frowns at me--she darts at
me--she pierces my heart with an arrow of ice!' He threw himself on the floor, groaned grievously, and tore his hair. I
was horror-struck. 'I declare,' said I, 'I would say any thing on earth to relieve
you;--only tell me what.' 'Angel of light!' exclaimed he, springing upon his feet, and beaming on
me a smile that might liquefy marble. 'Have I then hope? Dare I say it? Dare I pronounce the divine words, she loves me?' 'I am thine and thou art mine!' murmured I, while the room swam before
me. He took both my hands in his own, pressed them to his forehead and
lips, and leaned his burning cheek upon them. 'My sight is confused,' said he, 'my breathing is opprest; I hear
nothing, my veins swell, a palpitation seizes my heart, and I scarcely
know where I am, or whether I exist!' Then softly encircling my waist with his arm, he pressed me to his
heart. With what modesty I tried to extricate myself from his embrace;
yet with what willing weakness I trembled on his bosom. It was
Cherubina's hand that fell on his shoulder, it was Cherubina's tress
that played on his cheek, it was Cherubina's sigh that breathed on his
lip. 'Moment of a pure and exquisite emotion!' cried he. 'In the life of man
you are known but once; yet once known, can you ever be forgotten? Now
to die would be to die most blest!' Suddenly he caught me under the chin, and kissed me. I struggled from
him, and sprang to the other end of the room, while my neck and face
were suffused with a glow of indignation. 'Really,' said I, panting with passion, 'this is so unprovoked, so
presuming.' He cast himself at my feet, execrated his folly, and swore that he had
merely fulfilled an etiquette indispensible among lovers in his own
country. ''Tis not usual here, my lord,' said I; 'and I have no notion of
submitting to any freedom that is not sanctioned by the precedent of
those exalted models whom I have the honour to imitate. 'I fancy, my lord, you will find, that, as far as a kiss on the hand,
or an arm round the waist, they have no particular objection. But a
salute on the lip is considered inaccurate. My lord, on condition that
you never repeat the liberty, here is my hand.' He snatched it with ardor, and strained it to his throbbing bosom. 'And now,' cried he, 'make my happiness complete, by making this hand
mine for ever.' On a sudden an air of dignified grandeur involved my form. My mind, for
the first time, was called upon to reveal its full force. It felt the
solemnity of the appeal, and triumphed in its conscious ability. 'What!' cried I, 'knowest thou not the fatal, the inscrutable, the
mysterious destiny, which must ever prevent our union?' 'Speak, I conjure you,' cried he, 'or I expire on the spot.' 'Alas!' exclaimed I, 'can'st thou suppose the poor orphan Cherubina so
destitute of principle and of pride, as to intrude herself unknown,
unowned, unfriended; mysterious in her birth, and degraded in her
situation, on the ancient and illustrious House of Montmorenci? 'Here then I most solemnly vow, never to wed, till the horrible mystery
which hangs over my birth be developed.' You know, Biddy, that a heroine ought always to snatch at an
opportunity of making a fatal vow. When things are going on too smooth,
and interest drooping, a fatal vow does wonders. I remember reading in
some romance, of a lady, who having vowed never to divulge a certain
secret, kept it twenty years; and with such inviolability, that she
lived to see it the death of all her children, several of her friends,
and a fine old aunt. As soon as I had made this fatal vow, his lordship fell into the most
afflicting agonies and attitudes. 'Oh!' cried he, 'to be by your side, to see you, touch you, talk to
you, love you, adore you, and yet find you lost to me for ever. Oh! 'tis too much, too much.' 'The milliner is here, Miss,' said the maid, tapping at the door. 'Bid her call again,' said I. 'Beloved of my soul!' murmured his lordship. 'Ma'am,' interrupted the maid, opening the door, 'she cannot call
again, as she must go from this to Kensington.' 'Then let her come in,' said I, and she entered with a charming
assortment of bonnets and dresses. 'We will finish the scene another time,' whispered I to his lordship. His lordship swore that he would drop dead that instant. The milliner declared that she had brought me the newest patterns. 'On my honour,' said I to his lordship, 'you shall finish this scene
to-morrow morning, if you wish it.' 'You may go and be---- Heigho!' said he, suddenly checking himself. What he was about to say, I know not; something mysterious, I should
think, by the knitting of his brows. However, he snatched his spear,
shield, and helmet, made a low bow, laid his hand on his heart, and
stalked out of the chamber. Interesting youth! I then ran in debt for some millinery, drank hartshorn, and chafed my
temples. I think I was right about the kiss. I confess I am not one of those
girls who try to attract men through the medium of the touch; and who
thus excite passion at the expence of respect. Lips are better employed
in sentiment, than in kissing. Indeed, had I not been fortified by the
precedent of other heroines, I should have felt, and I fear, did
actually feel, even the classical embrace of Montmorenci too great a
freedom. But remember I am still in my noviciate. After a little
practice, I shall probably think it rather a pleasure to be strained,
and prest, and folded to the heart. Yet of this I am certain, that I
shall never attain sufficient hardihood to ravish a kiss from a man's
mouth; as the divine Heloise did; who once ran at St. Preux, and
astonished him with the most balmy and remarkable kiss upon record. Poor fellow! he was never the same after it. I must say too, that Montmorenci did not shew much judgment in urging
me to marry him, before I had undergone adventures for four volumes. Because, though the heroic etiquette allowed me to fall in love at
first sight, and confess it at second sight, yet it would not authorize
me to marry myself off quite so smoothly. A heroine is never to be got
without agony and adventure. Even the ground must be lacerated, before
it will bring forth fruits, and often we cannot reach the lovely
violet, till we have torn our hands with brambles. I did not see his lordship again until dinner time; and we had almost
finished our repast, before the poet made his appearance and his bow. His bow was as usual, but his appearance was strangely changed. His
hair stood in stiff ringlets on his forehead, and he had pruned his
bushy eyebrows, till hardly one bristle remained; while a pair of white
gloves, small enough for myself, were forced upon his hands. He glanced
at us with a conscious eye, and hurried to his seat at table. 'Ovid's Metamorphoses, by Jupiter!' exclaimed Montmorenci. 'Why,
Higginson, how shameful for the mice to have nibbled your eyebrows,
while Apollo Belvidere was curling your hair!' The poet blushed, and ate with great assiduity. 'My dear fellow,' continued his lordship, 'we can dispense with those
milk-white gloves during dinner. Tell me, are they mamma's, dear
mamma's?' 'I will tell my mother of you!' cried the poet, half rising from his
chair. Now his mother is an old bed-ridden lady in one of the garrets. I then
interfered in his behalf, and peace was restored. After dinner, I took an opportunity, when the landlady had left the
room, to request ten pounds from his lordship, for the purpose of
paying the milliner. Never was regret so finely pictured in a face as
in his, while he swore that he had not a penny upon earth. Indeed so
graceful was his lamentation, so interesting his penury, that though
the poet stole out of the room for ten pounds, which he slipped into my
hand, I preferred the refusal of the one to the donation of the other. Yes, this amiable young nobleman increases in my estimation every
moment. Never can you catch him out of a picturesque position. He would
exhaust in an hour all the attitudes of all the statues; when he talks
tenderness, his eyes glow with a moist fire, and he always brings in
his heart with peculiar happiness. Then too, his oaths are at once well
conceived and elegantly expressed. Thunderbolts and the fixed stars are
ever at his elbow, and no man can sink himself to perdition with so
fine a grace. But I could write of him, talk of him, think of him, hour after hour,
minute after minute; even now, while the shadows of night are
blackening the blushes of the rose, till dawn shall stain with her
ruddy fire, the snows of the naked Apennine; till the dusky streams
shall be pierced with darts of light, and the sun shall quaff his dewy
beverage from the cup of the tulip, and the chalice of the lily. That
is pretty painting.