Her most private thoughts are pure as
purity itself, and her--." "But, begging your pardon, my lord, how can you possibly know all this?" said the prince. "I do know it," said the other, "it is no matter how: I cannot hear my
fair cousin wronged; and I know that she will remain true to Musgrave,
and have nothing to do with you." "I will bet an earldom on that head, said the prince, "if I chuse to
lay siege to her." "Done!" said the other, and they joined hands on the bargain; but they
had no sooner laid their hands into one another's than they hastily
withdrew them, with a sort of trepidation, that none of the lookers on,
save the two pages, who kept close by their masters, appeared to
comprehend. They, too, were both mistaken in the real cause; but of that
it does not behove to speak at present. "I will let you see," said the prince, recovering himself, "that this
celebrated cousin of yours shall not be so ill to win as the castle of
Roxburgh; and I'll let Musgrave see for how much truth and virgin
fidelity he has put his life in his hand; and when I have her I'll cage
her, for I don't like her. I would give that same earldom to have her in
my power to-night." The young Lord Tudor looked about as if he meditated an escape to
another part of the table; but, after a touch that his page gave him on
the sleeve, he sat still, and mustered up courage for a reply. "And pray, sir prince, what would you do with her if you had her in your
power to-night?" "Something very different from what I would do with you, my lord. But
please describe her to me, for my very heart is yearning to behold
her,--describe every point of her form, and lineament of her features." "She is esteemed as very beautiful; for my part I think her but so so,"
said Tudor: "She has fair hair, light full blue eyes, and ruddy cheeks;
and her brow, I believe, is as fine and as white as any brow can be." "O frightful! what a description! what an ugly minx it must be! Fair
hair! red, I suppose, or dirty dull yellow! Light blue eyes! mostly
white I fancy? Ah, what a frightful immodest ape it must be! I could
spit upon the huzzy!" "Mary shield us!" exclaimed young Tudor, moving farther away from the
prince, and striking lightly with his hand on his doublet as if
something unclean had been squirted on it. "Mary shield us! What does
the saucy Scot mean?" Every one of the troopers put his hand to his sword, and watched the eye
of his master. The prince beckoned to the Scots to be quiet; but Lord
Tudor did no such thing, for he was flustered and wroth. "Pardon me, my lord," said the prince, "I may perhaps suffer enough from
the beauty and perfections of your fair cousin after I see her; you may
surely allow me to deride them now. I am trying to depreciate the charms
I dread. But I do not like the description of her. Tell me seriously do
you not think her very intolerable?" "I tell you, prince, I think quite otherwise. I believe Jane to be fifty
times more lovely than any dame in Scotland; and a hundred times more
beautiful than your tawny virago of a sister, whom I shall rejoice to
tame like a spaniel. The haughty, vain, conceited, swart venom, that she
should lay her commands on the Douglas to conquer or die for her! A fine
presumption, forsooth! But the world shall see whether the charms of my
cousin, Lady Jane Howard, or those of your grim and tawdry princess,
have most power." "Yes, they shall, my lord," said the prince: "In the mean time let us
drop the subject. I see I have given you offence, not knowing that you
were in love with Lady Jane, which now I clearly see to be the case. Nevertheless, go on with the description, for I am anxious to hear all
about her, and I promise to approve if there be a bare possibility of
it." "Her manner is engaging, and her deportment graceful and easy; her waist
is slim, and her limbs slender and elegant beyond any thing you ever
saw," said Lord Tudor. "O shocking!" exclaimed the prince, quite forgetting himself: "Worst of
all! I declare I have no patience with the creature. After such a
description, who can doubt the truth of the reports about the extreme
levity of her conduct? Confess now, my lord, that she is very free of
her favours, and that the reason why so many young gentlemen visit her
is now pretty obvious." High offence was now manifest in Lord Jasper Tudor's look. He rose from
his seat, and said in great indignation, "I did not ween I should be
insulted in this guise by the meanest peasant in Scotland, far less by
one of its courtiers, and least of all by a prince of the blood royal. Yeomen, I will not, I cannot suffer this degradation. These ruffian
Scots are intruders on us,--here I desire that you will expel them the
house." The Prince of Scotland was at the head of the table, Tudor was at his
right hand; the rest of the English were all on that side, the Scots on
the other,--their numbers were equal. Dan and his three brethren sat at
the bottom of the board around the old man, who had been plying at the
beef with no ordinary degree of perseverance, nor did he cease when the
fray began. Every one of the two adverse parties was instantly on his
feet, with his sword gleaming in his hand; but finding that the benches
from which they had arisen hampered them, they with one accord sprung on
the tops of these, and crossed their swords. The pages screamed like
women. The two noble adventurers seemed scarcely to know the use of
their weapons, but looked on with astonishment. At length the prince,
somewhat collecting himself, drew out his shabby whanger, and brandished
it in a most unwarlike guise, on which the blue-eyed Tudor retreated
behind his attendants, holding up his hands, but still apparently intent
on revenge for the vile obloquy thrown on the character of _his cousin_,
Lady Jane Howard. "Tis just pe te shance she vantit," said the Scot next
to the prince. "My certy, man, we'll get a paick at the louns now," said the second. "Fat te teel's ta'en 'e bits o' vee laddies to flee a' eet abeet 'er
buts o' wheers? I wudnae hae my feet i' their sheen for three plucks an
a beedle," said the third. "Thou's a' i' the wrang buox now, chaps," said the fourth. These were
all said with one breath; and before the Englishmen had time to reply,
clash went the swords across the table, and the third Scot, the true
Aberdonian, was wounded, as were also two of the Englishmen, at the very
first pass. These matters are much sooner done than described. All this was the
work of a few seconds, and done before advice could either be given or
attended to. Dan now interfered with all the spirit and authority that
he was master of. He came dashing along the middle of the board in his
great war boots, striking up their swords as he came, and interposing
his boardly frame between the combatants. "D--n ye a' for a wheen
madcaps!" cried Dan as loud as he could bawl: "What the muckle deil's
fa'en a bobbing at your midriffs now? Ye're a' my father's guests an'
mine; an', by the shin-banes o' Sant Peter, the first side that lifts a
sword, or says a misbehadden word, my three brethren and I will tak' the
tother side, an' smoor the transgressors like as mony moor-poots." "Keep your feet aff the meat, fool," said old Pate. "Gude sauff us!" continued Dan, "What has been said to gie ony offence? What though the young gentlewoman dis tak a stown jink o' a' chap that's
her ain sweet-heart whiles? Where's the harm in that? There's little
doubt o' the thing. An' for my part, gin she didna"--

Here Dan was interrupted in his elegant harangue by a wrathful hysteric
scream from young Tudor, who pulled out his whinyard, and ran at Dan,
boring at him in awkward but most angry sort, crying all the while, "I
will not bear this insult! Will my followers hear me traduced to my
face?" "Deil's i' e' wee but steepid laddie," said Buchan the Aberdonian; "it
thinks 'at 'er preeving it to be a wheer 'e sel o't!" Dan lifted up his heavy sword in high choler to cleave the stripling,
and he would have cloven him to the belt, but curbing his wrath, he only
struck his sword, which he made fly into pieces and jingle against the
rafters of the house; then seizing the young adventurer by the shoulder,
he snatched him up to him on the board, where he still stood, and,
taking his head below his arm, he held him fast with the one hand,
making signs with the other to his brethren to join the Scots, and
disarm the English, who were the aggressors both times. In the meantime,
he was saying to Tudor, "Hout, hout, young master, ye hae never been
o'er the Border afore; ye sude hae stayed at hame, an' wantit a wife
till ye gathered mair rummelgumption." The five English squires, now seeing themselves set upon by nine,
yielded, and suffered themselves to be disarmed. When Tudor came to himself, he appeared to be exceedingly grieved at his
imprudence, and ready to make any acknowledgment, while the prince
treated him with still more and more attention; yet these attentions
were ever and anon mixed with a teazing curiosity, and a great many
inquiries, that the young nobleman could not bear, and did not chuse to
answer. It now became necessary to make some arrangement for the parties passing
the night. Patrick Chisholm's house had but one fire-place in an
apartment which served for kitchen and hall; but it had a kind of _ben
end_, as it was then, and is always to this day, denominated in that
part of the country. There was scarcely room to move a foot in it; for,
besides two oaken beds with rowan-tree bars, it contained five huge
chests belonging to the father and his sons, that held their clothes
and warlike accoutrements. The daughters of yeomen in these days did not
sit at table with the men. They were the household servants. Two of
Pate's daughters, who had been bustling about all the evening, conducted
the two noble youths into this apartment, together with their two pages. The one bed was neatly made down with clean clothes, and the other in a
more common way. "Now," said one of the landward lasses, "You twa
masters are to sleep thegither in here,--in o' this gude bed, ye see,
an' the twa lads in o' this ane." The two young noblemen were standing
close together, as behoved in such a room. On the girl addressing them
thus, their eyes met each other's, but were as instantly withdrawn and
fixed on the floor, while a blush of the deepest tint suffused the
cheeks of both, spreading over the chin and neck of each. The pages
contemplated each other in the same way, but not with the same degree of
timidity. The English stripling seemed rather to approve of the
arrangement, or at least pretended to do so; for he frankly took the
other by the hand, and said in a sweet voice, but broad dialect, "Weall,
yuong Scuot, daghest thou lig woth mey?" The young Caledonian withdrew
his hand, and held down his head: "I always lie at my master's feet,"
said he. "And so shall you do to-night, Colin," said the prince, "for I will
share this bed with you, and let my lord take the good one." "I cannot
go to bed to-night," said Tudor, "I will rest me on this chest; I am
resolved I sha'n't go to bed, nor throw off my clothes to-night." "Ye winna?" said May Chisholm, who visibly wanted a romp with the young
blooming chief,--"Ye winna gang til nae bed, will ye nae, and me has
been at sic pains making it up til ye? Bess, come here an' help me, we
sal soon see whether he's gang til his bed or no, an' that no wi' his
braw claes on neither." So saying, the two frolicsome queans seized the
rosy stripling, and in a moment had him stretched on the bed, and,
making his doublet fly open all at one rude pull, they were proceeding
to undress him, giggling and laughing all the while. Prince Alexander,
from a momentary congenial feeling of delicacy, put his hand hastily
across to keep the lapels of Tudor's vesture together, without the
motion having been perceived by any one in the hurry, and that moment
the page flung himself across his master's breast, and reproved the
lasses so sharply that they desisted, and left them to settle the matter
as they chose. The prince had, however, made a discovery that astonished him
exceedingly; for a few minutes his head was almost turned,--but the
truth soon began to dawn on his mind, and every reflection, every
coincidence, every word that had been said, and offence that had been
taken, tended to confirm it: so he determined, not for farther trial,
but for the joke's sake, to press matters a little further. When quietness was again restored, and when the blush and the frown had
several times taken alternate sway of the young lord's face, the prince
said to him, "After all, my lord, I believe we must take share of the
same bed together for this one night. It is more proper and becoming
than to sleep with our pages. Besides, I see the bed is good and clean,
and I have many things to talk to you about our two countries, and about
our two intended brides, or sweet-hearts let us call them in the
meantime." "Oh no, no, prince," said Tudor, "indeed I cannot, I may not, I would
not sleep in the same bed with another gentleman--No--I never
did--never." "Do not say so, my dear lord, for, on my word, I am going to insist on
it," said the prince, coming close up to him, his eyes beaming with joy
at the discovery he had made. "You shall sleep by my side to-night: nay,
I will even take you in my bosom and caress you as if you were my own
sweet dear Lady Jane Howard." Tudor was now totally confounded, and knew
neither what to say for himself, nor what he did say when he spoke. He
held out both his hands, and cried, "Do not, prince, do not--I beg--I
implore do not; for I cannot, cannot consent. I never slept even in the
same apartment with a man in all my life." "What, have you always slept in a room by yourself?" asked the teazing
prince. "No, never, but always with ladies--yes, always!" was the passionate and
sincere reply. Here the prince held up his hands, and turned up his eyes. "What a young
profligate!" exclaimed he, "Mary shield us! Have you no conscience with
regard to the fair sex that you have begun so wicked a course, and that
so early? Little did I know why you took a joke on your cousin so
heinously amiss! I see it now, truth will out! Ah, you are such a youth! I will not go a foot further to see Lady Jane. What a wicked degraded
imp she must be! Do not kindle into a passion again, my dear lord. I can
well excuse your feigned wrath, it is highly honourable. I hate the
knight that blabs the favours he enjoys from the fair. He is bound to
defend the honour that has stooped to him; even though (as in the
present instance I suppose) it have stooped to half a dozen more
besides."