She wept over her little girl; she looked, she spoke, as
if she dreaded the occurrence of some frightful calamity. She was half mad from the effects of
uncontrollable agitation. Lord Raymond presented himself to the house with fearless confidence and insinuating address. After the Duke of--and Mr. Ryland had finished their speeches, he commenced. Assuredly he had
not conned his lesson; and at first he hesitated, pausing in his ideas, and in the choice of his
expressions. By degrees he warmed; his words flowed with ease, his language was full of vigour, and
his voice of persuasion. He reverted to his past life, his successes in Greece, his favour at home. Why
should he lose this, now that added years, prudence, and the pledge which his marriage gave to his
country, ought to encrease, rather than diminish his claims to confidence? He spoke of the state of
England; the necessary measures to be taken to ensure its security, and confirm its prosperity. He
drew a glowing picture of its present situation. As he spoke, every sound was hushed, every thought
suspended by intense attention. His graceful elocution enchained the senses of his hearers. In some
degree also he was fitted to reconcile all parties. His birth pleased the aristocracy; his being the
candidate recommended by Adrian, a man intimately allied to the popular party, caused a number,
who had no great reliance either on the Duke or Mr. Ryland, to range on his side. The contest was keen and doubtful. Neither Adrian nor myself would have been so anxious, if our
own success had depended on our exertions; but we had egged our friend on to the enterprise, and
it became us to ensure his triumph. Idris, who entertained the highest opinion of his abilities, was
warmly interested in the event: and my poor sister, who dared not hope, and to whom fear was
misery, was plunged into a fever of disquietude. Day after day passed while we discussed our projects for the evening, and each night was occupied
by debates which offered no conclusion. At last the crisis came: the night when parliament, which
had so long delayed its choice, must decide: as the hour of twelve passed, and the new day began, it
was by virtue of the constitution dissolved, its power extinct. We assembled at Raymond's house, we and our partizans. At half past five o'clock we proceeded to
the House. Idris endeavoured to calm Perdita; but the poor girl's agitation deprived her of all power
of self-command. She walked up and down the room,-gazed wildly when any one entered, fancying
that they might be the announcers of her doom. I must do justice to my sweet sister: it was not for
herself that she was thus agonized. She alone knew the weight which Raymond attached to his
success. Even to us he assumed gaiety and hope, and assumed them so well, that we did not divine
the secret workings of his mind. Sometimes a nervous trembling, a sharp dissonance of voice, and
momentary fits of absence revealed to Perdita the violence he did himself; but we, intent on our
plans, observed only his ready laugh, his joke intruded on all occasions, the flow of his spirits which
seemed incapable of ebb. Besides, Perdita was with him in his retirement; she saw the moodiness
that succeeded to this forced hilarity; she marked his disturbed sleep, his painful irritability-once
she had seen his tears-hers had scarce ceased to flow, since she had beheld the big drops which
disappointed pride had caused to gather in his eye, but which pride was unable to dispel. What
wonder then, that her feelings were wrought to this pitch! I thus accounted to myself for her
agitation; but this was not all, and the sequel revealed another excuse. One moment we seized before our departure, to take leave of our beloved girls. I had small hope of
success, and entreated Idris to watch over my sister. As I approached the latter, she seized my hand,
and drew me into another apartment; she threw herself into my arms, and wept and sobbed bitterly
and long. I tried to soothe her; I bade her hope; I asked what tremendous consequences would ensue
even on our failure. "My brother," she cried, "protector of my childhood, dear, most dear Lionel, my
fate hangs by a thread. I have you all about me now-you, the companion of my infancy; Adrian, as
dear to me as if bound by the ties of blood; Idris, the sister of my heart, and her lovely offspring. This,
O this may be the last time that you will surround me thus!" Abruptly she stopped, and then cried: "What have I said?-foolish false girl that I am!" She looked
wildly on me, and then suddenly calming herself, apologized for what she called her unmeaning
words, saying that she must indeed be insane, for, while Raymond lived, she must be happy; and
then, though she still wept, she suffered me tranquilly to depart. Raymond only took her hand when
he went, and looked on her expressively; she answered by a look of intelligence and assent. Poor girl! what she then suffered! I could never entirely forgive Raymond for the trials he imposed on
her, occasioned as they were by a selfish feeling on his part. He had schemed, if he failed in his
present attempt, without taking leave of any of us, to embark for Greece, and never again to revisit
England. Perdita acceded to his wishes; for his contentment was the chief object of her life, the
crown of her enjoyment; but to leave us all, her companions, the beloved partners of her happiest
years, and in the interim to conceal this frightful determination, was a task that almost conquered
her strength of mind. She had been employed in arranging for their departure; she had promised
Raymond during this decisive evening, to take advantage of our absence, to go one stage of the
journey, and he, after his defeat was ascertained, would slip away from us, and join her. Although, when I was informed of this scheme, I was bitterly offended by the small attention which
Raymond paid to my sister's feelings, I was led by reflection to consider, that he acted under the
force of such strong excitement, as to take from him the consciousness, and, consequently, the guilt
of a fault. If he had permitted us to witness his agitation, he would have been more under the
guidance of reason; but his struggles for the shew of composure, acted with such violence on his
nerves, as to destroy his power of self-command. I am convinced that, at the worst, he would have
returned from the seashore to take leave of us, and to make us the partners of his council. But the
task imposed on Perdita was not the less painful. He had extorted from her a vow of secrecy; and her
part of the drama, since it was to be performed alone, was the most agonizing that could be devised. But to return to my narrative. The debates had hitherto been long and loud; they had often been protracted merely for the sake of
delay. But now each seemed fearful lest the fatal moment should pass, while the choice was yet
undecided. Unwonted silence reigned in the house, the members spoke in whispers, and the
ordinary business was transacted with celerity and quietness. During the first stage of the election,
the Duke of--had been thrown out; the question therefore lay between Lord Raymond and Mr.
Ryland. The latter had felt secure of victory, until the appearance of Raymond; and, since his name
had been inserted as a candidate, he had canvassed with eagerness. He had appeared each evening,
impatience and anger marked in his looks, scowling on us from the opposite side of St. Stephen's, as
if his mere frown would cast eclipse on our hopes. Every thing in the English constitution had been regulated for the better preservation of peace. On
the last day, two candidates only were allowed to remain; and to obviate, if possible, the last struggle
between these, a bribe was offered to him who should voluntarily resign his pretensions; a place of
great emolument and honour was given him, and his success facilitated at a future election. Strange
to say however, no instance had yet occurred, where either candidate had had recourse to this
expedient; in consequence the law had become obsolete, nor had been referred to by any of us in
our discussions. To our extreme surprise, when it was moved that we should resolve ourselves into a
committee for the election of the Lord Protector, the member who had nominated Ryland, rose and
informed us that this candidate had resigned his pretensions. His information was at first received
with silence; a confused murmur succeeded; and, when the chairman declared Lord Raymond duly
chosen, it amounted to a shout of applause and victory. It seemed as if, far from any dread of defeat
even if Mr. Ryland had not resigned, every voice would have been united in favour of our candidate. In fact, now that the idea of contest was dismissed, all hearts returned to their former respect and
admiration of our accomplished friend. Each felt, that England had never seen a Protector so capable
of fulfilling the arduous duties of that high office. One voice made of many voices, resounded
through the chamber; it syllabled the name of Raymond. He entered. I was on one of the highest seats, and saw him walk up the passage to the table of the
speaker. The native modesty of his disposition conquered the joy of his triumph. He looked round
timidly; a mist seemed before his eyes. Adrian, who was beside me, hastened to him, and jumping
down the benches, was at his side in a moment. His appearance re-animated our friend; and, when
he came to speak and act, his hesitation vanished, and he shone out supreme in majesty and victory. The former Protector tendered him the oaths, and presented him with the insignia of office,
performing the ceremonies of installation. The house then dissolved. The chief members of the state
crowded round the new magistrate, and conducted him to the palace of government. Adrian
suddenly vanished; and, by the time that Raymond's supporters were reduced to our intimate friends
merely, returned leading Idris to congratulate her friend on his success. But where was Perdita? In securing solicitously an unobserved retreat in case of failure, Raymond
had forgotten to arrange the mode by which she was to hear of his success; and she had been too
much agitated to revert to this circumstance. When Idris entered, so far had Raymond forgotten
himself, that he asked for my sister; one word, which told of her mysterious disappearance, recalled
him. Adrian it is true had already gone to seek the fugitive, imagining that her tameless anxiety had
led her to the purlieus of the House, and that some sinister event detained her. But Raymond,
without explaining himself, suddenly quitted us, and in another moment we heard him gallop down
the street, in spite of the wind and rain that scattered tempest over the earth. We did not know how
far he had to go, and soon separated, supposing that in a short time he would return to the palace
with Perdita, and that they would not be sorry to find themselves alone. Perdita had arrived with her child at Dartford, weeping and inconsolable. She directed everything to
be prepared for the continuance of their journey, and placing her lovely sleeping charge on a bed,
passed several hours in acute suffering. Sometimes she observed the war of elements, thinking that
they also declared against her, and listened to the pattering of the rain in gloomy despair. Sometimes
she hung over her child, tracing her resemblance to the father, and fearful lest in after life she should
display the same passions and uncontrollable impulses, that rendered him unhappy. Again, with a
gush of pride and delight, she marked in the features of her little girl, the same smile of beauty that
often irradiated Raymond's countenance. The sight of it soothed her. She thought of the treasure she
possessed in the affections of her lord; of his accomplishments, surpassing those of his
contemporaries, his genius, his devotion to her.-Soon she thought, that all she possessed in the
world, except him, might well be spared, nay, given with delight, a propitiatory offering, to secure
the supreme good she retained in him. Soon she imagined, that fate demanded this sacrifice from
her, as a mark she was devoted to Raymond, and that it must be made with cheerfulness. She figured
to herself their life in the Greek isle he had selected for their retreat; her task of soothing him; her
cares for the beauteous Clara, her rides in his company, her dedication of herself to his consolation. The picture then presented itself to her in such glowing colours, that she feared the reverse, and a
life of magnificence and power in London; where Raymond would no longer be hers only, nor she the
sole source of happiness to him. So far as she merely was concerned, she began to hope for defeat;
and it was only on his account that her feelings vacillated, as she heard him gallop into the court-yard
of the inn. That he should come to her alone, wetted by the storm, careless of every thing except
speed, what else could it mean, than that, vanquished and solitary, they were to take their way from
native England, the scene of shame, and hide themselves in the myrtle groves of the Grecian isles? In a moment she was in his arms. The knowledge of his success had become so much a part of
himself, that he forgot that it was necessary to impart it to his companion. She only felt in his
embrace a dear assurance that while he possessed her, he would not despair. "This is kind," she
cried; "this is noble, my own beloved! O fear not disgrace or lowly fortune, while you have your
Perdita; fear not sorrow, while our child lives and smiles. Let us go even where you will; the love that
accompanies us will prevent our regrets." Locked in his embrace, she spoke thus, and cast back her head, seeking an assent to her words in his
eyes-they were sparkling with ineffable delight. "Why, my little Lady Protectress," said he, playfully,
"what is this you say? And what pretty scheme have you woven of exile and obscurity, while a
brighter web, a gold-enwoven tissue, is that which, in truth, you ought to contemplate?" He kissed her brow-but the wayward girl, half sorry at his triumph, agitated by swift change of
thought, hid her face in his bosom and wept. He comforted her; he instilled into her his own hopes
and desires; and soon her countenance beamed with sympathy. How very happy were they that
night! How full even to bursting was their sense of joy! HAVING seen our friend properly installed in his new office, we turned our eyes towards Windsor. The nearness of this place to London was such, as to take away the idea of painful separation, when
we quitted Raymond and Perdita. We took leave of them in the Protectoral Palace. It was pretty
enough to see my sister enter as it were into the spirit of the drama, and endeavour to fill her station
with becoming dignity. Her internal pride and humility of manner were now more than ever at war. Her timidity was not artificial, but arose from that fear of not being properly appreciated, that slight
estimation of the neglect of the world, which also characterized Raymond. But then Perdita thought
more constantly of others than he; and part of her bashfulness arose from a wish to take from those
around her a sense of inferiority; a feeling which never crossed her mind. From the circumstances of
her birth and education, Idris would have been better fitted for the formulae of ceremony; but the
very ease which accompanied such actions with her, arising from habit, rendered them tedious;
while, with every drawback, Perdita evidently enjoyed her situation. She was too full of new ideas to
feel much pain when we departed; she took an affectionate leave of us, and promised to visit us
soon; but she did not regret the circumstances that caused our separation. The spirits of Raymond
were unbounded; he did not know what to do with his new got power; his head was full of plans; he
had as yet decided on none- but he promised himself, his friends, and the world, that the aera of his
Protectorship should be signalized by some act of surpassing glory. Thus, we talked of them, and
moralized, as with diminished numbers we returned to Windsor Castle. We felt extreme delight at
our escape from political turmoil, and sought our solitude with redoubled zest. We did not want for
occupation; but my eager disposition was now turned to the field of intellectual exertion only; and
hard study I found to be an excellent medicine to allay a fever of spirit with which in indolence, I
should doubtless have been assailed. Perdita had permitted us to take Clara back with us to Windsor;
and she and my two lovely infants were perpetual sources of interest and amusement. The only circumstance that disturbed our peace, was the health of Adrian. It evidently declined,
without any symptom which could lead us to suspect his disease, unless indeed his brightened eyes,
animated look, and flustering cheeks, made us dread consumption; but he was without pain or fear. He betook himself to books with ardour, and reposed from study in the society he best loved, that of
his sister and myself. Sometimes he went up to London to visit Raymond, and watch the progress of
events. Clara often accompanied him in these excursions; partly that she might see her parents,
partly because Adrian delighted in the prattle, and intelligent looks of this lovely child. Meanwhile all went on well in London. The new elections were finished; parliament met, and
Raymond was occupied in a thousand beneficial schemes. Canals, aqueducts, bridges, stately
buildings, and various edifices for public utility, were entered upon; he was continually surrounded
by projectors and projects, which were to render England one scene of fertility and magnificence; the
state of poverty was to be abolished; men were to be transported from place to place almost with
the same facility as the Princes Houssain, Ali, and Ahmed, in the Arabian Nights. The physical state of
man would soon not yield to the beatitude of angels; disease was to be banished; labour lightened of
its heaviest burden. Nor did this seem extravagant. The arts of life, and the discoveries of science had
augmented in a ratio which left all calculation behind; food sprung up, so to say, spontaneously-
machines existed to supply with facility every want of the population. An evil direction still survived;
and men were not happy, not because they could not, but because they would not rouse themselves
to vanquish self-raised obstacles. Raymond was to inspire them with his beneficial will, and the
mechanism of society, once systematised according to faultless rules, would never again swerve into
disorder. For these hopes he abandoned his long-cherished ambition of being enregistered in the
annals of nations as a successful warrior; laying aside his sword, peace and its enduring glories
became his aim-the title he coveted was that of the benefactor of his country. Among other works of art in which he was engaged, he had projected the erection of a national
gallery for statues and pictures. He possessed many himself, which he designed to present to the
Republic; and, as the edifice was to be the great ornament of his Protectorship, he was very
fastidious in his choice of the plan on which it would be built. Hundreds were brought to him and
rejected. He sent even to Italy and Greece for drawings; but, as the design was to be characterized by
originality as well as by perfect beauty, his endeavours were for a time without avail. At length a
drawing came, with an address where communications might be sent, and no artist's name affixed. The design was new and elegant, but faulty; so faulty, that although drawn with the hand and eye of
taste, it was evidently the work of one who was not an architect. Raymond contemplated it with
delight; the more he gazed, the more pleased he was; and yet the errors multiplied under inspection. He wrote to the address given, desiring to see the draughtsman, that such alterations might be
made, as should be suggested in a consultation between him and the original conceiver. A Greek came. A middle-aged man, with some intelligence of manner, but with so common-place a
physiognomy, that Raymond could scarcely believe that he was the designer. He acknowledged that
he was not an architect; but the idea of the building had struck him, though he had sent it without
the smallest hope of its being accepted. He was a man of few words. Raymond questioned him; but
his reserved answers soon made him turn from the man to the drawing. He pointed out the errors,
and the alterations that he wished to be made; he offered the Greek a pencil that he might correct
the sketch on the spot; this was refused by his visitor, who said that he perfectly understood, and
would work at it at home. At length Raymond suffered him to depart. The next day he returned. The design had been re-drawn; but many defects still remained, and
several of the instructions given had been misunderstood. "Come," said Raymond, "I yielded to you
yesterday, now comply with my request-take the pencil." The Greek took it, but he handled it in no artist-like way; at length he said: "I must confess to you, my
Lord, that I did not make this drawing. It is impossible for you to see the real designer; your
instructions must pass through me. Condescend therefore to have patience with my ignorance, and
to explain your wishes to me; in time I am certain that you will be satisfied." Raymond questioned vainly; the mysterious Greek would say no more. Would an architect be
permitted to see the artist? This also was refused. Raymond repeated his instructions, and the visitor
retired. Our friend resolved however not to be foiled in his wish. He suspected, that unaccustomed
poverty was the cause of the mystery, and that the artist was unwilling to be seen in the garb and
abode of want. Raymond was only the more excited by this consideration to discover him; impelled
by the interest he took in obscure talent, he therefore ordered a person skilled in such matters, to
follow the Greek the next time he came, and observe the house in which he should enter. His
emissary obeyed, and brought the desired intelligence. He had traced the man to one of the most
penurious streets in the metropolis. Raymond did not wonder, that, thus situated, the artist had
shrunk from notice, but he did not for this alter his resolve. On the same evening, he went alone to the house named to him. Poverty, dirt, and squalid misery
characterized its appearance. Alas! thought Raymond, I have much to do before England becomes a
Paradise. He knocked; the door was opened by a string from above-the broken, wretched staircase
was immediately before him, but no person appeared; he knocked again, vainly-and then,
impatient of further delay, he ascended the dark, creaking stairs. His main wish, more particularly
now that he witnessed the abject dwelling of the artist, was to relieve one, possessed of talent, but
depressed by want. He pictured to himself a youth, whose eyes sparkled with genius, whose person
was attenuated by famine. He half feared to displease him; but he trusted that his generous kindness
would be administered so delicately, as not to excite repulse. What human heart is shut to kindness? and though poverty, in its excess, might render the sufferer unapt to submit to the supposed
degradation of a benefit, the zeal of the benefactor must at last relax him into thankfulness. These
thoughts encouraged Raymond, as he stood at the door of the highest room of the house. After
trying vainly to enter the other apartments, he perceived just within the threshold of this one, a pair
of small Turkish slippers; the door was ajar, but all was silent within. It was probable that the inmate
was absent, but secure that he had found the right person, our adventurous Protector was tempted
to enter, to leave a purse on the table, and silently depart. In pursuance of this idea, he pushed open
the door gently-but the room was inhabited. Raymond had never visited the dwellings of want, and the scene that now presented itself struck him
to the heart. The floor was sunk in many places; the walls ragged and bare-the ceiling weather-
stained-a tattered bed stood in the corner; there were but two chairs in the room, and a rough
broken table, on which was a light in a tin candlestick;-yet in the midst of such drear and heart
sickening poverty, there was an air of order and cleanliness that surprised him. The thought was
fleeting; for his attention was instantly drawn towards the inhabitant of this wretched abode. It was
a female. She sat at the table; one small hand shaded her eyes from the candle; the other held a
pencil; her looks were fixed on a drawing before her, which Raymond recognized as the design
presented to him. Her whole appearance awakened his deepest interest. Her dark hair was braided
and twined in thick knots like the head-dress of a Grecian statue; her garb was mean, but her
attitude might have been selected as a model of grace. Raymond had a confused remembrance that
he had seen such a form before; he walked across the room; she did not raise her eyes, merely asking
in Romaic, who is there? "A friend," replied Raymond in the same dialect. She looked up wondering,
and he saw that it was Evadne Zaimi. Evadne, once the idol of Adrian's affections; and who, for the
sake of her present visitor, had disdained the noble youth, and then, neglected by him she loved,
with crushed hopes and a stinging sense of misery, had returned to her native Greece. What
revolution of fortune could have brought her to England, and housed her thus? Raymond recognized her; and his manner changed from polite beneficence to the warmest
protestations of kindness and sympathy. The sight of her, in her present situation, passed like an
arrow into his soul. He sat by her, he took her hand, and said a thousand things which breathed the
deepest spirit of compassion and affection. Evadne did not answer; her large dark eyes were cast
down, at length a tear glimmered on the lashes. "Thus," she cried, "kindness can do, what no want,
no misery ever effected; I weep." She shed indeed many tears; her head sunk unconsciously on the
shoulder of Raymond; he held her hand: he kissed her sunken tear-stained cheek. He told her, that
her sufferings were now over: no one possessed the art of consoling like Raymond; he did not reason
or declaim, but his look shone with sympathy; he brought pleasant images before the sufferer; his
caresses excited no distrust, for they arose purely from the feeling which leads a mother to kiss her
wounded child; a desire to demonstrate in every possible way the truth of his feelings, and the
keenness of his wish to pour balm into the lacerated mind of the unfortunate. As Evadne regained
her composure, his manner became even gay; he sported with the idea of her poverty. Something
told him that it was not its real evils that lay heavily at her heart, but the debasement and disgrace
attendant on it; as he talked, he divested it of these; sometimes speaking of her fortitude with
energetic praise; then, alluding to her past state, he called her his Princess in disguise. He made her
warm offers of service; she was too much occupied by more engrossing thoughts, either to accept or
reject them; at length he left her, making a promise to repeat his visit the next day. He returned
home, full of mingled feelings, of pain excited by Evadne's wretchedness, and pleasure at the
prospect of relieving it. Some motive for which he did not account, even to himself, prevented him
from relating his adventure to Perdita. The next day he threw such disguise over his person as a cloak afforded, and revisited Evadne. As he
went, he bought a basket of costly fruits, such as were natives of her own country, and throwing over
these various beautiful flowers, bore it himself to the miserable garret of his friend. "Behold," cried
he, as he entered, "what bird's food I have brought for my sparrow on the house-top." Evadne now related the tale of her misfortunes. Her father, though of high rank, had in the end
dissipated his fortune, and even destroyed his reputation and influence through a course of dissolute
indulgence. His health was impaired beyond hope of cure; and it became his earnest wish, before he
died, to preserve his daughter from the poverty which would be the portion of her orphan state. He
therefore accepted for her, and persuaded her to accede to, a proposal of marriage, from a wealthy
Greek merchant settled at Constantinople. She quitted her native Greece; her father died; by degrees
she was cut off from all the companions and ties of her youth. The war, which about a year before the present time had broken out between Greece and Turkey,
brought about many reverses of fortune. Her husband became bankrupt, and then in a tumult and
threatened massacre on the part of the Turks, they were obliged to fly at midnight, and reached in an
open boat an English vessel under sail, which brought them immediately to this island. The few
jewels they had saved, supported them awhile. The whole strength of Evadne's mind was exerted to
support the failing spirits of her husband. Loss of property, hopelessness as to his future prospects,
the inoccupation to which poverty condemned him, combined to reduce him to a state bordering on
insanity. Five months after their arrival in England, he committed suicide. "You will ask me," continued Evadne, "what I have done since; why I have not applied for succour to
the rich Greeks resident here; why I have not returned to my native country? My answer to these
questions must needs appear to you unsatisfactory, yet they have sufficed to lead me on, day after
day, enduring every wretchedness, rather than by such means to seek relief. Shall the daughter of
the noble, though prodigal Zaimi, appear a beggar before her compeers or inferiors-superiors she
had none. Shall I bow my head before them, and with servile gesture sell my nobility for life? Had I a
child, or any tie to bind me to existence, I might descend to this-but, as it is-the world has been to
me a harsh step-mother; fain would I leave the abode she seems to grudge, and in the grave forget
my pride, my struggles, my despair. The time will soon come; grief and famine have already sapped
the foundations of my being; a very short time, and I shall have passed away; unstained by the crime
of self-destruction, unstung by the memory of degradation, my spirit will throw aside the miserable
coil, and find such recompense as fortitude and resignation may deserve. This may seem madness to
you, yet you also have pride and resolution; do not then wonder that my pride is tameless, my
resolution unalterable." Having thus finished her tale, and given such an account as she deemed fit, of the motives of her
abstaining from all endeavour to obtain aid from her countrymen, Evadne paused; yet she seemed to
have more to say, to which she was unable to give words. In the mean time Raymond was eloquent. His desire of restoring his lovely friend to her rank in society, and to her lost prosperity, animated
him, and he poured forth with energy, all his wishes and intentions on that subject. But he was
checked; Evadne exacted a promise, that he should conceal from all her friends her existence in
England. "The relatives of the Earl of Windsor," said she haughtily, "doubtless think that I injured
him; perhaps the Earl himself would be the first to acquit me, but probably I do not deserve acquittal. I acted then, as I ever must, from impulse. This abode of penury may at least prove the
disinterestedness of my conduct. No matter: I do not wish to plead my cause before any of them, not
even before your Lordship, had you not first discovered me. The tenor of my actions will prove that I
had rather die, than be a mark for scorn-behold the proud Evadne in her tatters! look on the
beggar-princess! There is aspic venom in the thought-promise me that my secret shall not be
violated by you." Raymond promised; but then a new discussion ensued. Evadne required another engagement on his
part, that he would not without her concurrence enter into any project for her benefit, nor himself
offer relief. "Do not degrade me in my own eyes," she said; "poverty has long been my nurse; hard-
visaged she is, but honest. If dishonour, or what I conceive to be dishonour, come near me, I am
lost." Raymond adduced many arguments and fervent persuasions to overcome her feeling, but she
remained unconvinced; and, agitated by the discussion, she wildly and passionately made a solemn
vow, to fly and hide herself where he never could discover her, where famine would soon bring
death to conclude her woes, if he persisted in his to her disgracing offers. She could support herself,
she said. And then she shewed him how, by executing various designs and paintings, she earned a
pittance for her support. Raymond yielded for the present. He felt assured, after he had for awhile
humoured her self-will, that in the end friendship and reason would gain the day. But the feelings that actuated Evadne were rooted in the depths of her being, and were such in their
growth as he had no means of understanding. Evadne loved Raymond. He was the hero of her
imagination, the image carved by love in the unchanged texture of her heart. Seven years ago, in her
youthful prime, she had become attached to him; he had served her country against the Turks; he
had in her own land acquired that military glory peculiarly dear to the Greeks, since they were still
obliged inch by inch to fight for their security. Yet when he returned thence, and first appeared in
public life in England, her love did not purchase his, which then vacillated between Perdita and a
crown. While he was yet undecided, she had quitted England; the news of his marriage reached her,
and her hopes, poorly nurtured blossoms, withered and fell. The glory of life was gone for her; the
roseate halo of love, which had imbued every object with its own colour, faded;-she was content to
take life as it was, and to make the best of leaden-coloured reality. She married; and, carrying her
restless energy of character with her into new scenes, she turned her thoughts to ambition, and
aimed at the title and power of Princess of Wallachia; while her patriotic feelings were soothed by
the idea of the good she might do her country, when her husband should be chief of this principality. She lived to find ambition, as unreal a delusion as love. Her intrigues with Russia for the furtherance
of her object, excited the jealousy of the Porte, and the animosity of the Greek government. She was
considered a traitor by both, the ruin of her husband followed; they avoided death by a timely flight,
and she fell from the height of her desires to penury in England. Much of this tale she concealed from
Raymond; nor did she confess, that repulse and denial, as to a criminal convicted of the worst of
crimes, that of bringing the scythe of foreign despotism to cut away the new springing liberties of her
country, would have followed her application to any among the Greeks. She knew that she was the cause of her husband's utter ruin; and she strung herself to bear the
consequences. The reproaches which agony extorted; or worse, cureless, uncomplaining depression,
when his mind was sunk in a torpor, not the less painful because it was silent and moveless. She
reproached herself with the crime of his death; guilt and its punishments appeared to surround her;
in vain she endeavoured to allay remorse by the memory of her real integrity; the rest of the world,
and she among them, judged of her actions, by their consequences. She prayed for her husband's
soul; she conjured the Supreme to place on her head the crime of his self-destruction-she vowed to
live to expiate his fault. In the midst of such wretchedness as must soon have destroyed her, one thought only was matter of
consolation. She lived in the same country, breathed the same air as Raymond. His name as Protector
was the burthen of every tongue; his achievements, projects, and magnificence, the argument of
every story. Nothing is so precious to a woman's heart as the glory and excellence of him she loves;
thus in every horror Evadne revelled in his fame and prosperity. While her husband lived, this feeling
was regarded by her as a crime, repressed, repented of. When he died, the tide of love resumed its
ancient flow, it deluged her soul with its tumultuous waves, and she gave herself up a prey to its
uncontrollable power. But never, O, never, should he see her in her degraded state. Never should he behold her fallen, as
she deemed, from her pride of beauty, the poverty-stricken inhabitant of a garret, with a name which
had become a reproach, and a weight of guilt on her soul. But though impenetrably veiled from him,
his public office permitted her to become acquainted with all his actions, his daily course of life, even
his conversation. She allowed herself one luxury, she saw the newspapers every day, and feasted on
the praise and actions of the Protector. Not that this indulgence was devoid of accompanying grief. Perdita's name was for ever joined with his; their conjugal felicity was celebrated even by the
authentic testimony of facts. They were continually together, nor could the unfortunate Evadne read
the monosyllable that designated his name, without, at the same time, being presented with the
image of her who was the faithful companion of all his labours and pleasures. They, their
Excellencies, met her eyes in each line, mingling an evil potion that poisoned her very blood. It was in the newspaper that she saw the advertisement for the design for a national gallery. Combining with taste her remembrance of the edifices which she had seen in the east, and by an
effort of genius enduing them with unity of design, she executed the plan which had been sent to the
Protector. She triumphed in the idea of bestowing, unknown and forgotten as she was, a benefit
upon him she loved; and with enthusiastic pride looked forward to the accomplishment of a work of
hers, which, immortalized in stone, would go down to posterity stamped with the name of Raymond. She awaited with eagerness the return of her messenger from the palace; she listened insatiate to his
account of each word, each look of the Protector; she felt bliss in this communication with her
beloved, although he knew not to whom he addressed his instructions. The drawing itself became
ineffably dear to her. He had seen it, and praised it; it was again retouched by her, each stroke of her
pencil was as a chord of thrilling music, and bore to her the idea of a temple raised to celebrate the
deepest and most unutterable emotions of her soul. These contemplations engaged her, when the
voice of Raymond first struck her ear, a voice, once heard, never to be forgotten; she mastered her
gush of feelings, and welcomed him with quiet gentleness. Pride and tenderness now struggled, and at length made a compromise together. She would see
Raymond, since destiny had led him to her, and her constancy and devotion must merit his
friendship. But her rights with regard to him, and her cherished independence, should not be injured
by the idea of interest, or the intervention of the complicated feelings attendant on pecuniary
obligation, and the relative situations of the benefactor, and benefited. Her mind was of uncommon
strength; she could subdue her sensible wants to her mental wishes, and suffer cold, hunger and
misery, rather than concede to fortune a contested point. Alas! that in human nature such a pitch of
mental discipline, and disdainful negligence of nature itself, should not have been allied to the
extreme of moral excellence! But the resolution that permitted her to resist the pains of privation,
sprung from the too great energy of her passions; and the concentrated self-will of which this was a
sign, was destined to destroy even the very idol, to preserve whose respect she submitted to this
detail of wretchedness. Their intercourse continued. By degrees Evadne related to her friend the whole of her story, the stain
her name had received in Greece, the weight of sin which had accrued to her from the death of her
husband. When Raymond offered to clear her reputation, and demonstrate to the world her real
patriotism, she declared that it was only through her present sufferings that she hoped for any relief
to the stings of conscience; that, in her state of mind, diseased as he might think it, the necessity of
occupation was salutary medicine; she ended by extorting a promise that for the space of one month
he would refrain from the discussion of her interests, engaging after that time to yield in part to his
wishes. She could not disguise to herself that any change would separate her from him; now she saw
him each day. His connection with Adrian and Perdita was never mentioned; he was to her a meteor,
a companionless star, which at its appointed hour rose in her hemisphere, whose appearance
brought felicity, and which, although it set, was never eclipsed. He came each day to her abode of
penury, and his presence transformed it to a temple redolent with sweets, radiant with heaven's own
light; he partook of her delirium. "They built a wall between them and the world"-Without, a
thousand harpies raved, remorse and misery, expecting the destined moment for their invasion. Within, was the peace as of innocence, reckless blindless, deluding joy, hope, whose still anchor
rested on placid but unconstant water. Thus, while Raymond had been wrapt in visions of power and fame, while he looked forward to
entire dominion over the elements and the mind of man, the territory of his own heart escaped his
notice; and from that unthought of source arose the mighty torrent that overwhelmed his will, and
carried to the oblivious sea, fame, hope, and happiness. IN the mean time what did Perdita? During the first months of his Protectorate, Raymond and she had been inseparable; each project
was discussed with her, each plan approved by her. I never beheld any one so perfectly happy as my
sweet sister. Her expressive eyes were two stars whose beams were love; hope and light-
heartedness sat on her cloudless brow. She fed even to tears of joy on the praise and glory of her
Lord; her whole existence was one sacrifice to him, and if in the humility of her heart she felt self-
complacency, it arose from the reflection that she had won the distinguished hero of the age, and
had for years preserved him, even after time had taken from love its usual nourishment. Her own
feeling was as entire as at its birth. Five years had failed to destroy the dazzling unreality of passion. Most men ruthlessly destroy the sacred veil, with which the female heart is wont to adorn the idol of
its affections. Not so Raymond; he was an enchanter, whose reign was for ever undiminished; a king
whose power never was suspended: follow him through the details of common life, still the same
charm of grace and majesty adorned him; nor could he be despoiled of the innate deification with
which nature had invested him. Perdita grew in beauty and excellence under his eye; I no longer
recognised my reserved abstracted sister in the fascinating and open-hearted wife of Raymond. The
genius that enlightened her countenance, was now united to an expression of benevolence, which
gave divine perfection to her beauty. Happiness is in its highest degree the sister of goodness. Suffering and amiability may exist together,
and writers have loved to depict their conjunction; there is a human and touching harmony in the
picture. But perfect happiness is an attribute of angels; and those who possess it, appear angelic. Fear has been said to be the parent of religion: even of that religion is it the generator, which leads
its votaries to sacrifice human victims at its altars; but the religion which springs from happiness is a
lovelier growth; the religion which makes the heart breathe forth fervent thanksgiving, and causes us
to pour out the overflowings of the soul before the author of our being; that which is the parent of
the imagination and the nurse of poetry; that which bestows benevolent intelligence on the visible
mechanism of the world, and makes earth a temple with heaven for its cope. Such happiness,
goodness, and religion inhabited the mind of Perdita. During the five years we had spent together, a knot of happy human beings at Windsor Castle, her
blissful lot had been the frequent theme of my sister's conversation. From early habit, and natural
affection, she selected me in preference to Adrian or Idris, to be the partner in her overflowings of
delight; perhaps, though apparently much unlike, some secret point of resemblance, the offspring of
consanguinity, induced this preference. Often at sunset, I have walked with her, in the sober,
enshadowed forest paths, and listened with joyful sympathy. Security gave dignity to her passion; the
certainty of a full return, left her with no wish unfulfilled. The birth of her daughter, embryo copy of
her Raymond, filled up the measure of her content, and produced a sacred and indissoluble tie
between them. Sometimes she felt proud that he had preferred her to the hopes of a crown. Sometimes she remembered that she had suffered keen anguish, when he hesitated in his choice. But this memory of past discontent only served to enhance her present joy. What had been hardly
won, was now, entirely possessed, doubly dear. She would look at him at a distance with the same
rapture, (O, far more exuberant rapture!) that one might feel, who after the perils of a tempest,
should find himself in the desired port; she would hasten towards him, to feel more certain in his
arms, the reality of her bliss. This warmth of affection, added to the depth of her understanding, and
the brilliancy of her imagination, made her beyond words dear to Raymond. If a feeling of dissatisfaction ever crossed her, it arose from the idea that he was not perfectly happy. Desire of renown, and presumptuous ambition, had characterized his youth. The one he had
acquired in Greece; the other he had sacrificed to love. His intellect found sufficient field for exercise
in his domestic circle, whose members, all adorned by refinement and literature, were many of
them, like himself, distinguished by genius. Yet active life was the genuine soil for his virtues; and he
sometimes suffered tedium from the monotonous succession of events in our retirement. Pride
made him recoil from complaint; and gratitude and affection to Perdita, generally acted as an opiate
to all desire, save that of meriting her love. We all observed the visitation of these feelings, and none
regretted them so much as Perdita. Her life consecrated to him, was a slight sacrifice to reward his
choice, but was not that sufficient-Did he need any gratification that she was unable to bestow? This was the only cloud in the azure of her happiness. His passage to power had been full of pain to both. He however attained his wish; he filled the
situation for which nature seemed to have moulded him. His activity was fed in wholesome measure,
without either exhaustion or satiety; his taste and genius found worthy expression in each of the
modes human beings have invented to encage and manifest the spirit of beauty; the goodness of his
heart made him never weary of conducing to the well-being of his fellow-creatures; his magnificent
spirit, and aspirations for the respect and love of mankind, now received fruition; true, his exaltation
was temporary; perhaps it were better that it should be so. Habit would not dull his sense of the
enjoyment of power; nor struggles, disappointment and defeat await the end of that which would
expire at its maturity. He determined to extract and condense all of glory, power, and achievement,
which might have resulted from a long reign, into the three years of his Protectorate.