“Then,” said Elspeth, “it shall burden my mind nae langer!--When she
lived, wha dared to speak what it would hae displeased her to hae had
noised abroad? But she’s gane--and I will confess all.”

Then turning to her son and daughter-in-law, she commanded them
imperatively to quit the house, and leave Lord Geraldin (for so she
still called him) alone with her. But Maggie Mucklebackit, her first
burst of grief being over, was by no means disposed in her own house to
pay passive obedience to the commands of her mother-in-law, an authority
which is peculiarly obnoxious to persons in her rank of life, and which
she was the more astonished at hearing revived, when it seemed to have
been so long relinquished and forgotten. “It was an unco thing,” she said, in a grumbling tone of voice,--for the
rank of Lord Glenallan was somewhat imposing--“it was an unco thing to
bid a mother leave her ain house wi’ the tear in her ee, the moment her
eldest son had been carried a corpse out at the door o’t.”

The fisherman, in a stubborn and sullen tone, added to the same purpose. “This is nae day for your auld-warld stories, mother. My lord, if he be
a lord, may ca’ some other day--or he may speak out what he has gotten to
say if he likes it; there’s nane here will think it worth their while
to listen to him or you either. But neither for laird or loon, gentle or
semple, will I leave my ain house to pleasure onybody on the very day my
poor”--

Here his voice choked, and he could proceed no farther; but as he had
risen when Lord Glenallan came in, and had since remained standing,
he now threw himself doggedly upon a seat, and remained in the sullen
posture of one who was determined to keep his word. But the old woman, whom this crisis seemed to repossess in all those
powers of mental superiority with which she had once been eminently
gifted, arose, and advancing towards him, said, with a solemn voice,
“My son, as ye wad shun hearing of your mother’s shame--as ye wad not
willingly be a witness of her guilt--as ye wad deserve her blessing and
avoid her curse, I charge ye, by the body that bore and that nursed ye,
to leave me at freedom to speak with Lord Geraldin, what nae mortal ears
but his ain maun listen to. Obey my words, that when ye lay the moulds
on my head--and, oh that the day were come!--ye may remember this hour
without the reproach of having disobeyed the last earthly command that
ever your mother wared on you.”

The terms of this solemn charge revived in the fisherman’s heart the
habit of instinctive obedience in which his mother had trained him up,
and to which he had submitted implicitly while her powers of exacting
it remained entire. The recollection mingled also with the prevailing
passion of the moment; for, glancing his eye at the bed on which the
dead body had been laid, he muttered to himself, “He never disobeyed me,
in reason or out o’ reason, and what for should I vex her?” Then, taking
his reluctant spouse by the arm, he led her gently out of the cottage,
and latched the door behind them as he left it. As the unhappy parents withdrew, Lord Glenallan, to prevent the old
woman from relapsing into her lethargy, again pressed her on the subject
of the communication which she proposed to make to him. “Ye will have it sune eneugh,” she replied;--“my mind’s clear eneugh now,
and there is not--I think there is not--a chance of my forgetting what I
have to say. My dwelling at Craigburnfoot is before my een, as it were
present in reality:--the green bank, with its selvidge, just where the
burn met wi’ the sea--the twa little barks, wi’ their sails furled, lying
in the natural cove which it formed--the high cliff that joined it with
the pleasure-grounds of the house of Glenallan, and hung right ower the
stream--Ah! yes--I may forget that I had a husband and have lost him--
that I hae but ane alive of our four fair sons--that misfortune upon
misfortune has devoured our ill-gotten wealth--that they carried the
corpse of my son’s eldest-born frae the house this morning--But I never
can forget the days I spent at bonny Craigburnfoot!”

“You were a favourite of my mother,” said Lord Glenallan, desirous to
bring her back to the point, from which she was wandering. “I was, I was,--ye needna mind me o’ that. She brought me up abune my
station, and wi’ knowledge mair than my fellows--but, like the tempter of
auld, wi’ the knowledge of gude she taught me the knowledge of evil.”

“For God’s sake, Elspeth,” said the astonished Earl, “proceed, if you
can, to explain the dreadful hints you have thrown out! I well know you
are confidant to one dreadful secret, which should split this roof even
to hear it named--but speak on farther.”

“I will,” she said--“I will!--just bear wi’ me for a little;”--and again
she seemed lost in recollection, but it was no longer tinged with
imbecility or apathy. She was now entering upon the topic which had long
loaded her mind, and which doubtless often occupied her whole soul
at times when she seemed dead to all around her. And I may add, as a
remarkable fact, that such was the intense operation of mental energy
upon her physical powers and nervous system, that, notwithstanding her
infirmity of deafness, each word that Lord Glenallan spoke during this
remarkable conference, although in the lowest tone of horror or agony,
fell as full and distinct upon Elspeth’s ear as it could have done at
any period of her life. She spoke also herself clearly, distinctly, and
slowly, as if anxious that the intelligence she communicated should
be fully understood; concisely at the same time, and with none of the
verbiage or circumlocutory additions natural to those of her sex and
condition. In short, her language bespoke a better education, as well as
an uncommonly firm and resolved mind, and a character of that sort from
which great virtues or great crimes may be naturally expected. The tenor
of her communication is disclosed in the following CHAPTER. Remorse--she neer forsakes us--
            A bloodhound staunch--she tracks our rapid step
            Through the wild labyrinth of youthful frenzy,
            Unheard, perchance, until old age hath tamed us
         Then in our lair, when Time hath chilled our joints,
             And maimed our hope of combat, or of flight,
             We hear her deep-mouthed bay, announcing all
             Of wrath, and wo, and punishment that bides us. Old Play. “I need not tell you,” said the old woman, addressing the Earl of
Glenallan, “that I was the favourite and confidential attendant of
Joscelind, Countess of Glenallan, whom God assoilzie!”--(here she crossed
herself)--“and I think farther, ye may not have forgotten that I
shared her regard for mony years. I returned it by the maist
sincere attachment, but I fell into disgrace frae a trifling act of
disobedience, reported to your mother by ane that thought, and she wasna
wrang, that I was a spy upon her actions and yours.”

“I charge thee, woman,” said the Earl, in a voice trembling with
passion, “name not her name in my hearing!”

“I must,” returned the penitent firmly and calmly, “or how can you
understand me?”

The Earl leaned upon one of the wooden chairs of the hut, drew his hat
over his face, clenched his hands together, set his teeth like one who
summons up courage to undergo a painful operation, and made a signal to
her to proceed. “I say, then,” she resumed, “that my disgrace with my mistress was
chiefly owing to Miss Eveline Neville, then bred up in Glenallan House
as the daughter of a cousin-german and intimate friend of your father
that was gane. There was muckle mystery in her history,--but wha dared to
inquire farther than the Countess liked to tell?--All in Glenallan House
loved Miss Neville--all but twa, your mother and mysell--we baith hated
her.”

“God! for what reason, since a creature so mild, so gentle, so formed to
inspire affection, never walked on this wretched world?”

“It may hae been sae,” rejoined Elspeth, “but your mother hated a’
that cam of your father’s family--a’ but himsell. Her reasons related to
strife which fell between them soon after her marriage; the particulars
are naething to this purpose. But oh! doubly did she hate Eveline
Neville when she perceived that there was a growing kindness atween
you and that unfortunate young leddy! Ye may mind that the Countess’s
dislike didna gang farther at first than just showing o’ the cauld
shouther--at least it wasna seen farther; but at the lang run it brak
out into such downright violence that Miss Neville was even fain to seek
refuge at Knockwinnock Castle with Sir Arthur’s leddy, wha (God sain
her!) was then wi’ the living.”

“You rend my heart by recalling these particulars--But go on,--and may
my present agony be accepted as additional penance for the involuntary
crime!”

“She had been absent some months,” continued Elspeth, “when I was ae
night watching in my hut the return of my husband from fishing, and
shedding in private those bitter tears that my proud spirit wrung frae
me whenever I thought on my disgrace. The sneck was drawn, and the
Countess your mother entered my dwelling. I thought I had seen a
spectre, for even in the height of my favour, this was an honour she had
never done me, and she looked as pale and ghastly as if she had risen
from the grave. She sat down, and wrung the draps from her hair and
cloak,--for the night was drizzling, and her walk had been through the
plantations, that were a’ loaded with dew. I only mention these things
that you may understand how weel that night lives in my memory,--and weel
it may. I was surprised to see her, but I durstna speak first, mair than
if I had seen a phantom-- Na, I durst not, my lord, I that hae seen mony
sights of terror, and never shook at them. Sae, after a silence, she
said, Elspeth Cheyne (for she always gave me my maiden name), are not ye
the daughter of that Reginald Cheyne who died to save his master, Lord
Glenallan, on the field of Sheriffmuir?’ And I answered her as proudly
as hersell nearly--As sure as you are the daughter of that Earl of
Glenallan whom my father saved that day by his own death.’”

Here she made a deep pause. “And what followed?--what followed?--For Heaven’s sake, good woman--But why
should I use that word?--Yet, good or bad, I command you to tell me.”

“And little I should value earthly command,” answered Elspeth, “were
there not a voice that has spoken to me sleeping and waking, that drives
me forward to tell this sad tale. Aweel, my Lord--the Countess said to
me, My son loves Eveline Neville--they are agreed--they are plighted:
should they have a son, my right over Glenallan merges--I sink from
that moment from a Countess into a miserable stipendiary dowager, I
who brought lands and vassals, and high blood and ancient fame, to my
husband, I must cease to be mistress when my son has an heir-male. But
I care not for that--had he married any but one of the hated Nevilles,
I had been patient. But for them--that they and their descendants should
enjoy the right and honours of my ancestors, goes through my heart like
a two-edged dirk. And this girl--I detest her!’--And I answered, for my
heart kindled at her words, that her hate was equalled by mine.”

“Wretch!” exclaimed the Earl, in spite of his determination to preserve
silence--“wretched woman! what cause of hate could have arisen from a
being so innocent and gentle?”

“I hated what my mistress hated, as was the use with the liege vassals
of the house of Glenallan; for though, my Lord, I married under my
degree, yet an ancestor of yours never went to the field of battle, but
an ancestor of the frail, demented, auld, useless wretch wha now speaks
with you, carried his shield before him. But that was not a’,” continued
the beldam, her earthly and evil passions rekindling as she became
heated in her narration--“that was not a’; I hated Miss Eveline Neville
for her ain sake, I brought her frae England, and, during our whole
journey, she gecked and scorned at my northern speech and habit, as her
southland leddies and kimmers had done at the boarding-school, as they
cald it”--(and, strange as it may seem, she spoke of an affront offered
by a heedless school-girl without intention, with a degree of inveteracy
which, at such a distance of time, a mortal offence would neither have
authorized or excited in any well-constituted mind)--“Yes, she scorned
and jested at me--but let them that scorn the tartan fear the dirk!”

She paused, and then went on--“But I deny not that I hated her mair than
she deserved. My mistress, the Countess, persevered and said, Elspeth
Cheyne, this unruly boy will marry with the false English blood. Were days as they have been, I could throw her into the Massymore of
Glenallan, and fetter him in the Keep of Strathbonnel. Massa-mora, an ancient name for a dungeon, derived from the Moorish
language, perhaps as far back as the time of the Crusades. But these times are past, and the authority which the nobles of the
land should exercise is delegated to quibbling lawyers and their baser
dependants. Hear me, Elspeth Cheyne! if you are your father’s daughter
as I am mine, I will find means that they shall not marry. She walks
often to that cliff that overhangs your dwelling to look for her
lover’s boat--(ye may remember the pleasure ye then took on the sea, my
Lord)--let him find her forty fathom lower than he expects!’--Yes! ye may
stare and frown and clench your hand; but, as sure as I am to face the
only Being I ever feared--and, oh that I had feared him mair!--these were
your mother’s words. What avails it to me to lie to you?--But I wadna
consent to stain my hand with blood.--Then she said, By the religion of
our holy Church they are ower sibb thegither. But I expect nothing but
that both will become heretics as well as disobedient reprobates;’--that
was her addition to that argument. And then, as the fiend is ever ower
busy wi’ brains like mine, that are subtle beyond their use and station,
I was unhappily permitted to add--But they might be brought to think
themselves sae sibb as no Christian law will permit their wedlock.’”

Here the Earl of Glenallan echoed her words, with a shriek so piercing
as almost to rend the roof of the cottage.--“Ah! then Eveline Neville was
not the--the”--

“The daughter, ye would say, of your father?” continued Elspeth. “No--be
it a torment or be it a comfort to you--ken the truth, she was nae mair a
daughter of your father’s house than I am.”

“Woman, deceive me not!--make me not curse the memory of the parent I
have so lately laid in the grave, for sharing in a plot the most cruel,
the most infernal”--

“Bethink ye, my Lord Geraldin, ere ye curse the memory of a parent
that’s gane, is there none of the blood of Glenallan living, whose
faults have led to this dreadfu’ catastrophe?”

“Mean you my brother?--he, too, is gone,” said the Earl. “No,” replied the sibyl, “I mean yoursell, Lord Geraldin. Had you not
transgressed the obedience of a son by wedding Eveline Neville in secret
while a guest at Knockwinnock, our plot might have separated you for
a time, but would have left at least your sorrows without remorse to
canker them. But your ain conduct had put poison in the weapon that we
threw, and it pierced you with the mair force because ye cam rushing to
meet it. Had your marriage been a proclaimed and acknowledged action,
our stratagem to throw an obstacle into your way that couldna be got
ower, neither wad nor could hae been practised against ye.”

“Great Heaven!” said the unfortunate nobleman--“it is as if a film fell
from my obscured eyes! Yes, I now well understand the doubtful hints
of consolation thrown out by my wretched mother, tending indirectly
to impeach the evidence of the horrors of which her arts had led me to
believe myself guilty.”

“She could not speak mair plainly,” answered Elspeth, “without
confessing her ain fraud,--and she would have submitted to be torn by
wild horses, rather than unfold what she had done; and if she had still
lived, so would I for her sake. They were stout hearts the race of
Glenallan, male and female, and sae were a’ that in auld times cried
their gathering-word of Clochnaben--they stood shouther to shouther--nae
man parted frae his chief for love of gold or of gain, or of right or of
wrang. The times are changed, I hear, now.”

The unfortunate nobleman was too much wrapped up in his own confused
and distracted reflections, to notice the rude expressions of savage
fidelity, in which, even in the latest ebb of life, the unhappy author
of his misfortunes seemed to find a stern and stubborn source of
consolation. “Great Heaven!” he exclaimed, “I am then free from a guilt the most
horrible with which man can be stained, and the sense of which, however
involuntary, has wrecked my peace, destroyed my health, and bowed me
down to an untimely grave. Accept,” he fervently uttered, lifting his
eyes upwards, “accept my humble thanks! If I live miserable, at least
I shall not die stained with that unnatural guilt!--And thou--proceed if
thou hast more to tell--proceed, while thou hast voice to speak it, and I
have powers to listen.”

“Yes,” answered the beldam, “the hour when you shall hear, and I shall
speak, is indeed passing rapidly away. Death has crossed your brow with
his finger, and I find his grasp turning every day coulder at my heart. Interrupt me nae mair with exclamations and groans and accusations, but
hear my tale to an end! And then--if ye be indeed sic a Lord of Glenallan
as I hae heard of in my day--make your merrymen gather the thorn, and
the brier, and the green hollin, till they heap them as high as the
house-riggin’, and burn! burn! burn! the auld witch Elspeth, and a’ that
can put ye in mind that sic a creature ever crawled upon the land!”

“Go on,” said the Earl, “go on--I will not again interrupt you.”

He spoke in a half-suffocated yet determined voice, resolved that no
irritability on his part should deprive him of this opportunity of
acquiring proofs of the wonderful tale he then heard. But Elspeth had
become exhausted by a continuous narration of such unusual length;
the subsequent part of her story was more broken, and though still
distinctly intelligible in most parts, had no longer the lucid
conciseness which the first part of her narrative had displayed to such
an astonishing degree. Lord Glenallan found it necessary, when she had
made some attempts to continue her narrative without success, to prompt
her memory by demanding--“What proofs she could propose to bring of the
truth of a narrative so different from that which she had originally
told?”

“The evidence,” she replied, “of Eveline Neville’s real birth was in
the Countess’s possession, with reasons for its being for some time kept
private;--they may yet be found, if she has not destroyed them, in the
left hand drawer of the ebony cabinet that stood in the dressing-room. These she meant to suppress for the time, until you went abroad again,
when she trusted, before your return, to send Miss Neville back to her
ain country, or to get her settled in marriage.”

“But did you not show me letters of my father’s, which seemed to me,
unless my senses altogether failed me in that horrible moment, to avow
his relationship to--to the unhappy”--

“We did; and, with my testimony, how could you doubt the fact, or her
either? But we suppressed the true explanation of these letters, and
that was, that your father thought it right the young leddy should pass
for his daughter for a while, on account o’some family reasons that were
amang them.”

“But wherefore, when you learned our union, was this dreadful artifice
persisted in?”

“It wasna,” she replied, “till Lady Glenallan had communicated this
fause tale, that she suspected ye had actually made a marriage--nor even
then did you avow it sae as to satisfy her whether the ceremony had in
verity passed atween ye or no--But ye remember, O ye canna but remember
weel, what passed in that awfu’ meeting!”

“Woman! you swore upon the gospels to the fact which you now disavow.”

“I did,--and I wad hae taen a yet mair holy pledge on it, if there had
been ane--I wad not hae spared the blood of my body, or the guilt of my
soul, to serve the house of Glenallan.”

“Wretch! do you call that horrid perjury, attended with consequences
yet more dreadful--do you esteem that a service to the house of your
benefactors?”

“I served her, wha was then the head of Glenallan, as she required me
to serve her. The cause was between God and her conscience--the manner
between God and mine--She is gane to her account, and I maun follow. Have
I taulds you a’?”

“No,” answered Lord Glenallan--“you have yet more to tell--you have to
tell me of the death of the angel whom your perjury drove to despair,
stained, as she thought herself, with a crime so horrible. Speak
truth--was that dreadful--was that horrible incident”--he could scarcely
articulate the words--“was it as reported? or was it an act of yet
further, though not more atrocious cruelty, inflicted by others?”

“I understand you,” said Elspeth. “But report spoke truth;--our false
witness was indeed the cause, but the deed was her ain distracted act. On that fearfu’ disclosure, when ye rushed frae the Countess’s presence
and saddled your horse, and left the castle like a fire-flaught, the
Countess hadna yet discovered your private marriage; she hadna fund out
that the union, which she had framed this awfu’ tale to prevent, had
e’en taen place. Ye fled from the house as if the fire o’ Heaven was
about to fa’ upon it, and Miss Neville, atween reason and the want
o’t, was put under sure ward. But the ward sleep’t, and the prisoner
waked--the window was open--the way was before her--there was the cliff,
and there was the sea!--O, when will I forget that!”

“And thus died,” said the Earl, “even so as was reported?”

“No, my lord. I had gane out to the cove--the tide was in, and it flowed,
as ye’ll remember, to the foot o’ that cliff--it was a great convenience
that for my husband’s trade--Where am I wandering?--I saw a white object
dart frae the tap o’ the cliff like a sea-maw through the mist, and
then a heavy flash and sparkle of the waters showed me it was a human
creature that had fa’en into the waves. I was bold and strong, and
familiar with the tide. I rushed in and grasped her gown, and drew
her out and carried her on my shouthers--I could hae carried twa sic
then--carried her to my hut, and laid her on my bed. Neighbours cam and
brought help; but the words she uttered in her ravings, when she got
back the use of speech, were such, that I was fain to send them awa,
and get up word to Glenallan House. The Countess sent down her Spanish
servant Teresa--if ever there was a fiend on earth in human form, that
woman was ane. She and I were to watch the unhappy leddy, and let no
other person approach.--God knows what Teresa’s part was to hae been--she
tauld it not to me--but Heaven took the conclusion in its ain hand. The
poor leddy! she took the pangs of travail before her time, bore a
male child, and died in the arms of me--of her mortal enemy! Ay, ye may
weep--she was a sightly creature to see to--but think ye, if I didna mourn
her then, that I can mourn her now? Na, na, I left Teresa wi’ the dead
corpse and new-born babe, till I gaed up to take the Countess’s commands
what was to be done. Late as it was, I ca’d her up, and she gar’d me ca’
up your brother”--

“My brother?”

“Yes, Lord Geraldin, e’en your brother, that some said she aye wished
to be her heir. At ony rate, he was the person maist concerned in the
succession and heritance of the house of Glenallan.”

“And is it possible to believe, then, that my brother, out of avarice to
grasp at my inheritance, would lend himself to such a base and dreadful
stratagem?”

“Your mother believed it,” said the old beldam with a fiendish laugh--“it
was nae plot of my making; but what they did or said I will not say,
because I did not hear. Lang and sair they consulted in the black
wainscot dressing-room; and when your brother passed through the room
where I was waiting, it seemed to me (and I have often thought sae since
syne) that the fire of hell was in his cheek and een. But he had left
some of it with his mother, at ony rate. She entered the room like a
woman demented, and the first words she spoke were, Elspeth Cheyne, did
you ever pull a new-budded flower?’ I answered, as ye may believe, that
I often had. Then,’ said she, ye will ken the better how to blight
the spurious and heretical blossom that has sprung forth this night to
disgrace my father’s noble house--See here;’--(and she gave me a golden
bodkin)--nothing but gold must shed the blood of Glenallan. This child is
already as one of the dead, and since thou and Teresa alone ken that
it lives, let it be dealt upon as ye will answer to me!’ and she turned
away in her fury, and left me with the bodkin in my hand.--Here it
is; that and the ring of Miss Neville, are a’ I hae preserved of my
ill-gotten gear--for muckle was the gear I got. And weel hae I keepit the
secret, but no for the gowd or gear either.”

Her long and bony hand held out to Lord Glenallan a gold bodkin, down
which in fancy he saw the blood of his infant trickling. “Wretch! had you the heart?”

“I kenna if I could hae had it or no. I returned to my cottage without
feeling the ground that I trode on; but Teresa and the child were gane--
a’ that was alive was gane--naething left but the lifeless corpse.”

“And did you never learn my infant’s fate?”

“I could but guess. I have tauld ye your mother’s purpose, and I ken
Teresa was a fiend. She was never mair seen in Scotland, and I have
heard that she returned to her ain land. A dark curtain has fa’en ower
the past, and the few that witnessed ony part of it could only surmise
something of seduction and suicide. You yourself”--

“I know--I know it all,” answered the Earl. “You indeed know all that I can say--And now, heir of Glenallan, can you
forgive me?”



“Ask forgiveness of God, and not of man,” said the Earl, turning away. “And how shall I ask of the pure and unstained what is denied to me by
a sinner like mysell? If I hae sinned, hae I not suffered?--Hae I had a
day’s peace or an hour’s rest since these lang wet locks of hair first
lay upon my pillow at Craigburnfoot?--Has not my house been burned, wi’
my bairn in the cradle?--Have not my boats been wrecked, when a’ others
weather’d the gale?--Have not a’ that were near and dear to me dree’d
penance for my sin?--Has not the fire had its share o’ them--the winds had
their part--the sea had her part?--And oh!” she added, with a lengthened
groan, looking first upwards towards Heaven, and then bending her eyes
on the floor--“O that the earth would take her part, that’s been lang
lang wearying to be joined to it!”

Lord Glenallan had reached the door of the cottage, but the generosity
of his nature did not permit him to leave the unhappy woman in this
state of desperate reprobation. “May God forgive thee, wretched woman,”
 he said, “as sincerely as I do!--Turn for mercy to Him who can alone
grant mercy, and may your prayers be heard as if they were mine own!--I
will send a religious man.”

“Na, na--nae priest! nae priest!” she ejaculated; and the door of the
cottage opening as she spoke, prevented her from proceeding. Still in his dead hand clenched remain the strings
              That thrill his father’s heart--e’en as the limb,
          Lopped off and laid in grave, retains, they tell us,
              Strange commerce with the mutilated stump,
          Whose nerves are twinging still in maimed existence. Old Play. The Antiquary, as we informed the reader in the end of the thirty-first
CHAPTER,  had shaken off the company of worthy Mr. Blattergowl,
although he offered to entertain him with an abstract of the ablest
speech he had ever known in the teind court, delivered by the procurator
for the church in the remarkable case of the parish of Gatherem. Resisting this temptation, our senior preferred a solitary path, which
again conducted him to the cottage of Mucklebackit. When he came in
front of the fisherman’s hut, he observed a man working intently, as if
to repair a shattered boat which lay upon the beach, and going up to him
was surprised to find it was Mucklebackit himself. “I am glad,” he said
in a tone of sympathy--“I am glad, Saunders, that you feel yourself able
to make this exertion.”

“And what would ye have me to do,” answered the fisher gruffly, “unless
I wanted to see four children starve, because ane is drowned? It’s weel
wi’ you gentles, that can sit in the house wi’ handkerchers at your een
when ye lose a friend; but the like o’ us maun to our wark again, if our
hearts were beating as hard as my hammer.”

Without taking more notice of Oldbuck, he proceeded in his labour; and
the Antiquary, to whom the display of human nature under the influence
of agitating passions was never indifferent, stood beside him, in silent
attention, as if watching the progress of the work. He observed more
than once the man’s hard features, as if by the force of association,
prepare to accompany the sound of the saw and hammer with his usual
symphony of a rude tune, hummed or whistled,--and as often a slight
twitch of convulsive expression showed, that ere the sound was uttered,
a cause for suppressing it rushed upon his mind. At length, when he
had patched a considerable rent, and was beginning to mend another, his
feelings appeared altogether to derange the power of attention necessary
for his work. The piece of wood which he was about to nail on was at
first too long; then he sawed it off too short, then chose another
equally ill adapted for the purpose. At length, throwing it down in
anger, after wiping his dim eye with his quivering hand, he exclaimed,
“There is a curse either on me or on this auld black bitch of a boat,
that I have hauled up high and dry, and patched and clouted sae mony
years, that she might drown my poor Steenie at the end of them, an’ be
d--d to her!” and he flung his hammer against the boat, as if she had
been the intentional cause of his misfortune. Then recollecting himself,
he added, “Yet what needs ane be angry at her, that has neither soul nor
sense?--though I am no that muckle better mysell. She’s but a rickle
o’ auld rotten deals nailed thegither, and warped wi’ the wind and the
sea--and I am a dour carle, battered by foul weather at sea and land till
I am maist as senseless as hersell. She maun be mended though again the
morning tide--that’s a thing o’ necessity.”

Thus speaking, he went to gather together his instruments, and attempt
to resume his labour,--but Oldbuck took him kindly by the arm. “Come,
come,” he said, “Saunders, there is no work for you this day--I’ll send
down Shavings the carpenter to mend the boat, and he may put the day’s
work into my account--and you had better not come out to-morrow, but stay
to comfort your family under this dispensation, and the gardener will
bring you some vegetables and meal from Monkbarns.”

“I thank ye, Monkbarns,” answered the poor fisher; “I am a plain-spoken
man, and hae little to say for mysell; I might hae learned fairer
fashions frae my mither lang syne, but I never saw muckle gude they did
her; however, I thank ye. Ye were aye kind and neighbourly, whatever
folk says o’ your being near and close; and I hae often said, in thae
times when they were ganging to raise up the puir folk against the
gentles--I hae often said, neer a man should steer a hair touching to
Monkbarns while Steenie and I could wag a finger--and so said Steenie
too. And, Monkbarns, when ye laid his head in the grave (and mony thanks
for the respect), ye, saw the mouls laid on an honest lad that likit you
weel, though he made little phrase about it.”

Oldbuck, beaten from the pride of his affected cynicism, would not
willingly have had any one by on that occasion to quote to him his
favourite maxims of the Stoic philosophy. The large drops fell fast
from his own eyes, as he begged the father, who was now melted at
recollecting the bravery and generous sentiments of his son, to forbear
useless sorrow, and led him by the arm towards his own home, where
another scene awaited our Antiquary. As he entered, the first person whom he beheld was Lord Glenallan. Mutual surprise was in their countenances as they saluted each
other--with haughty reserve on the part of Mr. Oldbuck, and embarrassment
on that of the Earl. “My Lord Glenallan, I think?” said Mr. Oldbuck. “Yes--much changed from what he was when he knew Mr. Oldbuck.”

“I do not mean,” said the Antiquary, “to intrude upon your lordship--I
only came to see this distressed family.”

“And you have found one, sir, who has still greater claims on your
compassion.”

“My compassion? Lord Glenallan cannot need my compassion. If Lord
Glenallan could need it, I think he would hardly ask it.”

“Our former acquaintance,” said the Earl--

“Is of such ancient date, my lord--was of such short duration, and was
connected with circumstances so exquisitely painful, that I think we may
dispense with renewing it.”

So saying, the Antiquary turned away, and left the hut; but Lord
Glenallan followed him into the open air, and, in spite of a hasty “Good
morning, my lord,” requested a few minutes’ conversation, and the favour
of his advice in an important matter. “Your lordship will find many more capable to advise you, my lord, and
by whom your intercourse will be deemed an honour. For me, I am a man
retired from business and the world, and not very fond of raking up
the past events of my useless life;--and forgive me if I say, I have
particular pain in reverting to that period of it when I acted like a
fool, and your lordship like”--He stopped short. “Like a villain, you would say,” said Lord Glenallan--“for such I must
have appeared to you.”

“My lord--my lord, I have no desire to hear your shrift,” said the
Antiquary. “But, sir, if I can show you that I am more sinned against than sinning--
that I have been a man miserable beyond the power of description, and
who looks forward at this moment to an untimely grave as to a haven
of rest, you will not refuse the confidence which, accepting your
appearance at this critical moment as a hint from Heaven, I venture thus
to press on you.”

“Assuredly, my lord, I shall shun no longer the continuation of this
extraordinary interview.”

“I must then recall to you our occasional meetings upwards of twenty
years since at Knockwinnock Castle,--and I need not remind you of a lady
who was then a member of that family.”

“The unfortunate Miss Eveline Neville, my lord; I remember it well.”

“Towards whom you entertained sentiments”--

“Very different from those with which I before and since have regarded
her sex. Her gentleness, her docility, her pleasure in the studies which
I pointed out to her, attached my affections more than became my age
though that was not then much advanced--or the solidity of my character. But I need not remind your lordship of the various modes in which you
indulged your gaiety at the expense of an awkward and retired student,
embarrassed by the expression of feelings so new to him, and I have no
doubt that the young lady joined you in the well-deserved ridicule--it is
the way of womankind. I have spoken at once to the painful circumstances
of my addresses and their rejection, that your lordship may be satisfied
everything is full in my memory, and may, so far as I am concerned, tell
your story without scruple or needless delicacy.”

“I will,” said Lord Glenallan. “But first let me say, you do injustice
to the memory of the gentlest and kindest, as well as to the most
unhappy of women, to suppose she could make a jest of the honest
affection of a man like you. Frequently did she blame me, Mr. Oldbuck,
for indulging my levity at your expense--may I now presume you will
excuse the gay freedoms which then offended you?--my state of mind
has never since laid me under the necessity of apologizing for the
inadvertencies of a light and happy temper.”

“My lord, you are fully pardoned,” said Mr. Oldbuck. “You should be
aware, that, like all others, I was ignorant at the time that I placed
myself in competition with your lordship, and understood that Miss
Neville was in a state of dependence which might make her prefer a
competent independence and the hand of an honest man--But I am wasting
time--I would I could believe that the views entertained towards her by
others were as fair and honest as mine!”

“Mr. Oldbuck, you judge harshly.”

“Not without cause, my lord. When I only, of all the magistrates of this
county--having neither, like some of them, the honour to be connected
with your powerful family--nor, like others, the meanness to fear it,--
when I made some inquiry into the manner of Miss Neville’s death--I shake
you, my lord, but I must be plain--I do own I had every reason to believe
that she had met most unfair dealing, and had either been imposed upon
by a counterfeit marriage, or that very strong measures had been adopted
to stifle and destroy the evidence of a real union. And I cannot doubt
in my own mind, that this cruelty on your lordship’s part, whether
coming of your own free will, or proceeding from the influence of the
late Countess, hurried the unfortunate young lady to the desperate act
by which her life was terminated.”

“You are deceived, Mr. Oldbuck, into conclusions which are not just,
however naturally they flow from the circumstances. Believe me, I
respected you even when I was most embarrassed by your active attempts
to investigate our family misfortunes. You showed yourself more worthy
of Miss Neville than I, by the spirit with which you persisted in
vindicating her reputation even after her death. But the firm belief
that your well-meant efforts could only serve to bring to light a story
too horrible to be detailed, induced me to join my unhappy mother in
schemes to remove or destroy all evidence of the legal union which had
taken place between Eveline and myself. And now let us sit down on
this bank,--for I feel unable to remain longer standing,--and have the
goodness to listen to the extraordinary discovery which I have this day
made.”

They sate down accordingly; and Lord Glenallan briefly narrated his
unhappy family history--his concealed marriage--the horrible invention by
which his mother had designed to render impossible that union which had
already taken place. He detailed the arts by which the Countess, having
all the documents relative to Miss Neville’s birth in her hands, had
produced those only relating to a period during which, for family
reasons, his father had consented to own that young lady as his natural
daughter, and showed how impossible it was that he could either suspect
or detect the fraud put upon him by his mother, and vouched by the oaths
of her attendants, Teresa and Elspeth. “I left my paternal mansion,” he
concluded, “as if the furies of hell had driven me forth, and travelled
with frantic velocity I knew not whither. Nor have I the slightest
recollection of what I did or whither I went, until I was discovered by
my brother. I will not trouble you with an account of my sick-bed and
recovery, or how, long afterwards, I ventured to inquire after the
sharer of my misfortunes, and heard that her despair had found a
dreadful remedy for all the ills of life. The first thing that roused me
to thought was hearing of your inquiries into this cruel business; and
you will hardly wonder, that, believing what I did believe, I should
join in those expedients to stop your investigation, which my brother
and mother had actively commenced. The information which I gave them
concerning the circumstances and witnesses of our private marriage
enabled them to baffle your zeal. The clergyman, therefore, and
witnesses, as persons who had acted in the matter only to please the
powerful heir of Glenallan, were accessible to his promises and threats,
and were so provided for, that they had no objections to leave this
country for another. For myself, Mr. Oldbuck,” pursued this unhappy man,
“from that moment I considered myself as blotted out of the book of
the living, and as having nothing left to do with this world. My mother
tried to reconcile me to life by every art--even by intimations which I
can now interpret as calculated to produce a doubt of the horrible tale
she herself had fabricated. But I construed all she said as the fictions
of maternal affection. I will forbear all reproach. She is no more--and,
as her wretched associate said, she knew not how the dart was poisoned,
or how deep it must sink, when she threw it from her hand. But, Mr.
Oldbuck, if ever, during these twenty years, there crawled upon earth a
living being deserving of your pity, I have been that man. My food has
not nourished me--my sleep has not refreshed me--my devotions have not
comforted me--all that is cheering and necessary to man has been to me
converted into poison. The rare and limited intercourse which I have
held with others has been most odious to me. I felt as if I were
bringing the contamination of unnatural and inexpressible guilt among
the gay and the innocent. There have been moments when I had thoughts
of another description--to plunge into the adventures of war, or to brave
the dangers of the traveller in foreign and barbarous climates--to
mingle in political intrigue, or to retire to the stern seclusion of
the anchorites of our religion;--all these are thoughts which have
alternately passed through my mind, but each required an energy,
which was mine no longer, after the withering stroke I had received. I
vegetated on as I could in the same spot--fancy, feeling, judgment,
and health, gradually decaying, like a tree whose bark has been
destroyed,--when first the blossoms fade, then the boughs, until its
state resembles the decayed and dying trunk that is now before you. Do
you now pity and forgive me?”

“My lord,” answered the Antiquary, much affected, “my pity--my
forgiveness, you have not to ask, for your dismal story is of itself not
only an ample excuse for whatever appeared mysterious in your conduct,
but a narrative that might move your worst enemies (and I, my lord, was
never of the number) to tears and to sympathy. But permit me to ask what
you now mean to do, and why you have honoured me, whose opinion can be
of little consequence, with your confidence on this occasion?”

“Mr. Oldbuck,” answered the Earl, “as I could never have foreseen the
nature of that confession which I have heard this day, I need not say
that I had no formed plan of consulting you, or any one, upon affairs
the tendency of which I could not even have suspected. But I am without
friends, unused to business, and, by long retirement, unacquainted alike
with the laws of the land and the habits of the living generation; and
when, most unexpectedly, I find myself immersed in the matters of which
I know least, I catch, like a drowning man, at the first support that
offers. You are that support, Mr. Oldbuck. I have always heard you
mentioned as a man of wisdom and intelligence--I have known you myself
as a man of a resolute and independent spirit;--and there is one
circumstance,” said he, “which ought to combine us in some degree--our
having paid tribute to the same excellence of character in poor Eveline. You offered yourself to me in my need, and you were already acquainted
with the beginning of my misfortunes. To you, therefore, I have recourse
for advice, for sympathy, for support.”

“You shall seek none of them in vain, my lord,” said Oldbuck, “so far as
my slender ability extends;--and I am honoured by the preference, whether
it arises from choice, or is prompted by chance. But this is a matter
to be ripely considered. May I ask what are your principal views at
present?”

“To ascertain the fate of my child,” said the Earl, “be the consequences
what they may, and to do justice to the honour of Eveline, which I
have only permitted to be suspected to avoid discovery of the yet more
horrible taint to which I was made to believe it liable.”

“And the memory of your mother?”

“Must bear its own burden,” answered the Earl with a sigh: “better that
she were justly convicted of deceit, should that be found necessary,
than that others should be unjustly accused of crimes so much more
dreadful.”

“Then, my lord,” said Oldbuck, “our first business must be to put the
information of the old woman, Elspeth, into a regular and authenticated
form.”

“That,” said Lord Glenallan, “will be at present, I fear, impossible. She is exhausted herself, and surrounded by her distressed family.