The Gallic sovereign is of all kings the favourite of the people of
Switzerland. I had listened to the songs and popular tales concerning Francis I and Henry IV; and a king of France appeared in my eyes the most gallant and
generous of mortals. I did not know exactly how much I proposed to tell the king; I scrupled the secret my uncle had so severely enjoined me to preserve;
yet,
if he should insist upon knowing the whole, surely he was able to protect me against the resentment of a burgher of Uri! However this

point might be disposed of, I felt in myself a destination superior to that of a handicraft in the silk-mills of Lyons; I believed that I was capable of
extraordinary things; what boy from the swifts but myself, would have had the boldness to think of applying for redress to the king of France? I was
persuaded
that I could interest his majesty in my case, that I could induce him to judge me deserving of his protection. I would say to him, Sire, dispose of me as you

please; make me one of your pages; you shall find me the most zealous and faithful of your servants! Louis XIV was at this time in the height of his glory. Among the little topics, by my excellence in which I had distinguished myself in the halcyon days of my
childhood, was history. It will easily be supposed that my knowledge amounted to scarcely more than a few names and dates. But I had heard certain

familiar anecdotes of Henry IV, pleasing to my boyish imagination, and had long since made him my hero; I was told that Louis XIV was the worthy grandson of
this free-hearted prince. In one of my Sundays' excursions I fell in with an old French soldier; the military private is usually of a loquacious and
communicative temper. I was eager to be acquainted with the character of his master; he was no less prompt to tell me all he knew. He spoke of the beauty of

his figure, and the affability of his demeanour. He related the victories he had won, and described the palaces and public edifices which he had founded or
adorned. He swore that he was the most generous, condescending and tender-hearted of mankind; and he happened to have two or three instances, which he
affirmed
to have occurred under his own eye, not unhappily illustrative of this character. Every thing, as I

thought, seemed to concur for the success of my design. The magnificence of Louis XIV fascinated my imagination; the examples of his gentleness and humanity
were so many omens assuring my good fortune. I bought a portrait of this monarch; it was almost the only extravagance of which I had been guilty, since my
last
degradation. I carried it in my pocket: on Sundays, when I had wandered into the most obscure retreat I could find, I held it in my hand, I set it before me,
I
talked to it, and endeavoured to win the goodwill of the king. Sometimes I worked myself into such a degree of fervour and enthusiasm, that I could scarcely

believe but that the portrait smiled upon me, and with a look of peculiar benignity seemed to say, Come to Versailles, and I will make your fortune! While I attended the lessons of the regents of the free-school of Lyons, I

received the weekly stipend usually allotted to boys of my age. I had before, as I have mentioned, received a louis d'or and a three livres piece from my uncle
and cousin at parting. Like a boy, I sometimes spent my money upon toys and confitures ; but for the most part I reserved it, and suffered it to grow into a

little stock. Young as I was, from the moment of parting with my uncle I could not conceal from myself that I was in an extraordinary situation. The secrecy

that had been enjoined me weighed upon my mind. Compelled to deny my family, my friends and my country, and suddenly dropped in a city where I was
unacquainted
with a single creature, I incessantly said, "What is next to befal me? It is necessary for me to provide myself, and not to be wholly unprepared for events
which it is not in my power to foresee." Youth is in some respects the age of suspicion; at least it

was so with me. Whenever a child of the age at which I was arrived, feels that he is thwarted and rigorously used, he half-suspects some motive, obscure and
unavowed, in the individual from whom his mortification is derived. The period I ultimately fixed for my flight was the week of Easter. At this time we were allowed at the mill two holidays in addition to that of Sunday. I was
perhaps partly influenced in chusing this season by the idea that when I was not wanted at work, my presence or absence would be little taken notice of. The

people with whom I lived were too wretched, and too anxious about their own children, to feel much kindness for me; and I should not be reported to the
overseer till Wednesday. But the principal consideration that guided me was the cheerfulness of the season; liberty was to the whole lower class of the
people
the order of

the day; I had three days of freedom, why should I not make this the starting-post of my eternal liberty? I will not trouble you with a detail of my smaller adventures on the road. Full of the anticipation of my grand undertaking, I had repeatedly turned my steps
on my days of relaxation toward Paris, and made many enquiries respecting the way. I had learned the names of the principal towns. I set out with a beating
heart, and, having walked gravely till I was out of the city, I then began to run. I did not however run far; my thoughts were too full of agitation to admit

any regularity of motion. Sometimes I slackened my pace, because I feared I should be taken for a fugitive, and sometimes, because I said to myself, I must
manage my strength, if I expect it to carry me far. Two hundred and fifty miles was a great undertaking for a boy under nine

years of age. One advantage I possessed; I had money, more than I could prudently spend on the passage. My mind was too intently fixed upon the end of my
journey, to be capable of much calculation respecting the obstacles I had to encounter. One resolution however I fixed, firm as the basis of my native
mountains, "No consideration on earth, no difficulties, no discouragements shall ever carry me back!" A mechanic becomes a sort of machine; his limbs and
articulations are converted, as it were, into wood and wires. Tamed, lowered, torpified into this character, he may be said perhaps to be content. It is
well! it seems necessary that there should be such a class of animated natures in the world! It is probable, if I had continued much longer in the silk-mills of
Lyons, I should have become such a being myself. But, with the conceptions and recollections which continually

beset my imagination, it appeared the most horrible of all destinies. I, that dared at nine years of age, launch myself in the world, that dared to a certain
degree to revolve the various chances of human affairs, and defy the worst, that purposed to challenge the attention, the equity and the compassion of the
king
of France, should I be thus neutralised! ---Why did I feel thus? Because my early education had not prepared me for my present lot. I understood why my
companions of my own age were put into the silk-mill: their parents were engaged in employments equally deadening; their parents were unable by their labour
to
obtain bread for themselves and their offspring: but I did not understand why I was there. I felt such a loathing at this moment to the occupation which had

engrossed me for months, that, if I could have been assured that such should be my occupation

for as many months to come, I believe, child as I was, I should sooner have taken a knife, and thrust it into my heart, than submit to it. In thinking over my situation as I passed along, I felt that the thing most immediately pressing upon me was to avoid exciting the curiosity and suspicion of
the persons whose assistance might be necessary to me on the road. The production of a louis d'or for example might be fatal to a boy of my childish
appearance
and coarseness of attire. In my journey from Urseren to Lyons I had learned something of the nature of inns, and I retained all these things as perfectly as
if
they had occurred only yesterday. I resolved to go only to the meanest inns, and ask for the plainest accommodations. On the second day I joined a waggoner
who
was conducting his commodities to Dijon, and this considerably facilitated the first part

of my journey. I began with asking him of my road to Macon, the first considerable place through which I was to pass. He was going through Macon. How much
further? To Dijon. The meanness of my attire encouraged him to question me in his turn: What had I to do at Macon? I was going to see the world, I replied. I perceive, my spark, cried the waggoner, what you are. You belong to the silk-mills; you are a runaway, and I have a great mind to take you up, and send you
back to your master. I was surprised at his so instantly fixing on my true character; though, on reflection, it was by no means extraordinary that a person just come from Lyons
should have made the conjecture; the costume was sufficiently peculiar. I will never stay at the silk-mill, said I; nobody has a right to confine me there. Nobody has a right, youngster? Not your parents? Your wildness, I dare say, will break their hearts. I have no parents.---I confessed to him that I was determined to go to Paris. And what will you do at Paris? You will be starved to death. Better be starved, than undergo such misery as I have suffered. But I will not starve! The waggoner began to reflect, that, if I had no parents or kindred; nobody would be greatly injured by my elopement. He contented himself therefore with
seriously expostulating with me on the folly of my project, and advising me to return. Finding his remonstrances of no avail, he agreed to take me under his

protection, as far as he was going on my way. Thus I conquered more than one-third of the road. Dijon was so capital a city, that I thought I might venture here to change my piece of gold, the parting present of my treacherous uncle. But I was mistaken. I
hated the clothes I wore, since they had led the waggoner to discover the situation to which I belonged. I went into a clothier's shop with a determination
to
change them. Unfortunately I plunged headlong into the house of a man of rugged temper and a hard-favoured countenance. The moment I looked at him, I
trembled. But it was too late to draw back. What is your pleasure, my lad? said he. I want some clothes. Where do you live? Who is to pay for them? Where shall I send them? I am a stranger in Dijon. Why does not your father or somebody come with you? How can such a child as you chuse a suit of clothes? I am all alone. Alone! And how are you to pay for clothes? Perhaps you would allow me something for the clothes I have got on. And I have a louis d'or,---showing it. A louis d'or! said he, coming from the other side of the counter. Tell me, sirrah, where you got that louis d'or? My uncle gave it me. Who is your uncle? I shall send for him immediately, and find out the truth of this. I tell you, sir, he does not live here; I am a stranger in Dijon, never saw the city till last night. But you need not frighten me; if you do not chuse to sell
me any clothes, I will go away without

them. I assure you, I am an honest boy, and my money is my own. We shall see that presently. You do not like to be frightened! But I shall frighten you, and most confoundedly too, before I have done with you. You must go
with me to the mayor. I will go with you, where you please, said I; believing it was impossible that any body should be more frightful to me, than the honest slopman before me. But
I had rather go back to my inn. The trader conducted me to the magistrate. I found myself right in my conjecture, that I should be better off in his hands, than in those of the Argus who had
first seized me. The mayor was a sober, creditable man, middle-aged, and inclined to corpulence, who made a point of faithfully discharging his duty, but who

took no particular pleasure in frightening little boys. He was too much accustomed to office, to

feel any high gratification in its swagger and insolence. His passions were dead; he could scarcely be said to love or hate, to be gentle or furious; he was
the law, and nothing but the law. As I and my conductor passed along the streets to this man's house, I fixed the plan of action that I would observe. I determined to take refuge in silence and
reserve. I said to myself, They cannot find out that I have stolen my money, because I have not stolen it; and therefore, after having examined and tried me
as
much as they please, they must dismiss me. I will not betray my family-story, and I will not furnish them with a clue by which they may send me back to
Lyons. The slopman led me into the justice-room and told his story. The magistrate listened, and made his observations. My adversary endeavoured in vain to inspire
his own passions into the

mayor; the clothier was earnest, abusive and eloquent; the mayor was considerate and inquisitive. He asked me who I was, and I refused to tell. Did I know what it was to be brought before a magistrate? Not very well, I replied. It would be worse for me, if I did not give a proper account of myself. I answered that I could not satisfy his curiosity. I had been ill-used by cruel relations, but did not dare to complain. I had had a father, who was kind and
rich; but my father was dead, and I was driven out from my country and friends. The magistrate employed every artifice to extort my story from me. He said, My secret should be safe with him, and my cruel relations should never know that I
had disclosed it. He said, He would take me under his protection, and oblige them by the interposition of the law to do me justice. He then

changed his tone, put on an angry brow, and told me, that he perceived that all I had related was a fiction, but that he would send me to prison, and have me
punished, till I told the truth. He put a variety of subtle and artfully contrived questions to wrest my secret from me. I stuck to the same point, made two
or
three answers which I hoped would move him to favour me, and repeated them again and again in return to every interrogatory he uttered. He sent for the
people
of the inn, where I confessed to have slept the night before: luckily it was not the same inn the waggoner used, and they could discover nothing. The magistrate was as good as his word, and sent me to prison. At entering, it struck me, that the scene was not new to me, but that it was very like a
silk-mill; the same meanness in the building, the same squalidness in the inhabitants, the same dejection in every

countenance. Presently however I perceived a difference; the people there were employed, and here were idle; there were vacant and incurious, and here eagerly
crowded about a new tenant of their wretched mansion. Thus I had twice in one day been introduced into situations calculated to impress a youthful mind with inexpressible horror. To be taken before a magistrate,
to be thrust into a jail, would to most children of my tender years have appeared no less terrible than death itself. But I had entered upon an extraordinary

undertaking, and had worked myself up to an uncommon pitch of resolution. I knew that for such an urchin as I was, to undertake his own establishment in life

was no holiday project. I knew that no small degree of courage and perseverance would be necessary to introduce me to the presence and speech of Louis XIV. It
is inconceivable, at

least judging from my own instance, of what an extent of exaltation and enthusiasm nine years of age are capable. Enthusiasm is often indebted for much of its
fervour to a complete ignorance, and want of practice, in the ways of the world; and, as far as that constitutes a qualification, this immature period of
life
is of course admirably endowed. In this state of mind, I felt a contempt of difficulties, under which at any other time I should have sunk. I seemed to
myself
as if I were made of iron, and nothing hostile appeared to make any impression upon me. It was my business to proceed upon my high destination and my choice
of
life, and to suffer none of these things to interrupt me. The prisoners crowded about me, and were eager to learn for what crime such a child as I was, was brought into their society. It was presently rumoured,
that

it was upon suspicion of having stolen some money, that I had obstinately refused to tell the mayor how I came by it, and that I was committed for
re-examination. The moment the word money was mentioned, two or three came about me at once, and told me that it was the universal practice, for every
new-comer to pay a certain sum by way of entrance-money, at the same time vociferously demanding from me the established fee. It fortunately happened that
the
magistrate had taken from me my whole stock, to be returned the next day, if no discoveries were made; otherwise it is highly probable these obliging
comrades
of mine would have stripped me of all that I had. After the first bustle of my introduction was over, a very grave-looking man of the set drew me into a
corner, and told me I was the most promising boy of my age he ever saw. He said, he had conceived a particular

liking to me; and greatly commended my firmness in refusing to tell the magistrate how I came by my money. That showed I was true game! He observed that he
would, if I pleased, put me into a way by which I might make a man of myself for ever, and offered to become my instructor. He swore, that it would be a
thousand pities that such talents as I had showed, should be lost for want of encouragement. I made little answer to these compliments, though the person from whom they flowed certainly succeeded in exciting my curiosity, and I was desirous of hearing
to what so extraordinary a preface would lead. Having intimated this, he entered into a very animated and earnest dissertation upon the different modes of
committing theft without danger of detection. Observing however that I did not exactly enter into his feelings, he stopped short, and complained

of my timidity. He soothed me in the gentlest, and, as he believed, the most flattering manner, and employed a hundred arts of rhetoric, worthy of a better
cause. I told him, that he had mistaken my character, that I had stolen no money, and that what I had was honestly my own. On this he assumed a smile,
expressive of grave and gentle derision, and replied, that that was all very well, but that it was not worth while to persist in declarations of innocence
among friends.---My mind was full of other projects, and therefore the representations of my sage Mentor had no effect upon me. This however was the sort of

exhortation to which I was exposed; and, if I had been the kind of person the magistrate conceived me to be, this night's lodging would too probably have
completed my character for ever. The next day I was brought again

before the mayor, and persisted in my resolution to discover nothing. The interval which had passed during the silence of the night, enabled me to collect more
firmness, and to express myself with greater coherence. I said, Sir, I am a friendless little boy, and you may do with me whatever you please. But I am not
so
much afraid of any body, as of my hard-hearted uncle. I am afraid, if I tell you who I am, you would send me back to him, or write a letter to him about me. You tell me you would not; but rich men think it a good action to deceive little boys, I am sure I have reason to know that. Oh, sir, do you think it was a
small thing that determined me to run away, and go among strangers? I would sooner die than return! You will easily imagine that what I said, did not in the smallest degree move the man to whom it was addressed, to compassion; the magistrate, who could

consign such a child as I was, for one night to the horrors and dangers of a prison, could be little accessible to the relentings of nature. This reflection is
obvious enough to me now; but it was not so then. The actions of their elders are always mysteries to children; they do not see the springs of the machine;
they wait with a sort of superstitious anticipation, to observe how their seniors will act upon every new event, and are surprised at nothing. But, though the magistrate was guilty of no meltings of compassion toward me, he was not inflexible. He saw not what he could do further with me; he had
exhausted upon me every expedient he could devise to render me frank and communicative. At length he calculated within himself, as I suppose, the
fruitlessness
of detaining me: perhaps he was inclined to think me innocent, and to believe the story I told. If

he detained me longer, it might be a trouble to him, and ultimately produce a burthen to the corporation in which he presided. He dismissed me with a moderate
portion of good advice, recommended to me not to become a vagrant, in consequence of which I should finally be made a scoundrel and a thief, if I was not so

already, and, above all, warned me of the stubbornness of my temper. He had never seen so stiff-necked a little villain, and he augured an untimely and a
shameful death from such beginnings. I listened to his advice with passive attention; but, what I prized much beyond his advice, before he sent me from his
presence he returned to me my money. I left Dijon with a beating heart. I was full of exultation at the thought of my liberty, once more restored to me. I foresaw every thing that was fortunate
from the issue of my first adventures. The discovery of my class of life by the waggoner had been productive of no mischievous effects to me. The adventure of the slopman and the louis d'or had
seemed to threaten the greatest dangers; but by my prudence and perseverance (for I was willing to take the whole praise to myself) I had been extricated
from
them all. All difficulties would vanish before my courage and abilities. I should infallibly become a page to the king of France.---From this goal my
impetuous
imagination took its flight. The marshal's truncheon and the ducal coronet danced before my charmed sight: I sighed for princesses, and the blood-royal was
mixed in my offspring. Alnaschar in the Arabian Nights was but a driveller to me. Nothing further of material importance occurred, till I arrived at Fontainebleau. It is difficult to express the rapture I felt at entering this celebrated
scene. Fontainebleau had been to the kings of France, what Versailles has become since. It had been particularly honoured by the residence of Henry IV; and
Louis XIII, his successor, was born here. But, independently of this, here was a royal palace belonging to my intended patron, the first I had ever seen. Having refreshed myself, and rested a short time, I found my way into the gardens, and viewed with enthusiasm the immenseness of the edifice. The fountains
from which the place derives its name, the large and deep forests which on every side met my eye in the distance,

all struck me with an idea of unbounded magnificence. I wish the king was here! exclaimed I. Presently however I thought again, Do I wish it? I must think a great deal of what I have to do, and what I have to say,
before I meet him. No, I am not sorry I have a little further to go! The idea of a king at a distance, is very different from what we feel when we come near

him. The imagination never fences him round with so many obstacles, and enchanted circles, within which unhallowed feet may scarcely tread, as the reality
presents. The very dinner which is set before him (to instance in a trite circumstance) no untutored fancy ever paints. We shape to ourselves what we have
not
seen, after the fashion of what we are accustomed to; and experience does not fail to surprise us with the immeasurable distance which refinement and art
have
placed between man

and man. It would be an amusing picture, to set me on my wooden stool with my little dinner in an earthen pan as I ate it at the silk-mill, beside even apetit
souper of the king of France. I own that I felt certain qualms about my heart, when I thought of my adventure, and looked round upon the splendours of
Fontainebleau. As I was wandering about, full of these reflections, a grave-looking man came up and accosted me. He said, he saw I was a stranger, and offered to point out to
me the curiosities of the place. It is singular, but I was struck with a certain resemblance between him and the man who had undertaken to be my tutor in the

press-yard of Dijon. I was however now in a very different temper, from that which inspired me then. Then I was under the pressure of a very dangerous
embarrassment, and had determined to find my safety in the most inflexible reserve. Now my heart was

open, and my spirits light; beside which, I was anxious for communication, and had an hundred enquiries which I wished to have resolved. I therefore willingly entered into conversation with this stranger. I asked him whether the king of France ever now came to Fontainebleau; I enquired of him
concerning the structure and site of the palace of Versailles, how the king was attended, and where and in what manner he spent the different hours of the
day. My communicative friend seemed to be well informed in all these particulars, and his intelligence was copious and interesting. In the mean time he observed
me
closely, and drew more sound and perfect conclusions respecting me and my fortunes, than I was aware. At length he told me that he was going to set out the
next morning for Versailles, and offered to become my guide. I willingly accepted his kind proposal. We went together to Paris, and arrived about the close of the evening. Our conversation had been eager and animated, and my companion proposed our taking up
our lodging at the same inn. I was a total stranger in this great metropolis, and willingly accepted his suggestion. The streets by which we entered the
capital were by no means so sumptuous as the idea of so celebrated a city had given me to expect; but I presently observed that my conductor led me away from

the principal streets, and

that his route lay through many a dark passage and many an alley. The house of reception to which we repaired, corresponded to the road by which we reached it. My fellow-traveller however appeared to me to be well known to its inhabitants, and I observed various significant winks and gestures that passed between him

and the hostess. After a brief supper, we were shown to a room where there were two beds. The equivocal character of the inn in which I took up my night's repose, did not disturb me. I sought for no present splendours, and my plan through my journey
had been simplicity and economy. When the candle was put out, then the train of my splendours began. My heart bounded with joy, when I thought that I was
thus
far toward the end of my labours. I folded my arms about me with wanton triumph, as if I would bestow upon myself an embrace

of congratulation. The turrets and the spires of Paris, I regarded as the emblems of my independence. In the midst of this mighty scene, the conviction came
home to me with pleasure, that I belonged to no one; for, alas! said I to myself, since the death of my father, I have not seen one human creature to whom I

could wish to belong! I am set loose from all compulsory connections; but I will not long be alone! This short meditation was to me the precursor of sleep; and my slumbers were sweet and balmy. I was fatigued with my long peregrinations, and the sun was high
before I roused myself from repose. When I awoke, the first thing I observed was that my companion was gone. I wonder, said I to myself, whether I shall see

him again. I thought that it would full as well content me that I should not. I determined to arrange

the particulars of my plan in my own way, and the having such a companion as this would but have interrupted and embarrassed me. I began to dress myself. Through my whole journey, I had had the precaution to take my breeches, containing my little stock of cash, into my bed, and to place
them near, or rather under, some part of my body. At first, I did not remark any difference from the morning before, and the usual appearance of things. Presently however a suspicion flashed across my mind; I passed my hand along the pocket; it went over smooth and without interruption. I felt within---there

was nothing! I went to the other pocket; all was vacancy. I threw back the clothes of the bed, with a faint hope that my money was to be found there. I
turned
over and shook every thing: I felt in all my pockets a thousand times: I examined

in the same manner the bed-clothes of my fellow-traveller: I searched impossible places. Pity me, my dear Fleetwood, pity me! Distant as is the period I am describing from the present, I can never think of this horrible event, without a twinge at
the heart which I cannot describe. I was then a little, uninstructed boy, and now I am an old man, and my hairs are white; yet I cannot mention this
adventure
without feeling my throat dry, and my voice suffocated. Common robberies are committed upon a man, who goes home, opens his escritoire, and puts into his
purse
the exact sum of which he had been deprived. I had lost every thing I possessed in the world. I had just travelled two hundred and fifty miles, and was
distant
four hundred from the seat of my birth and my relations. All my visions, my golden dreams, my castles in the air, were demolished in a

moment. What was I to do? My visions were not luxuries, were not changes of a worse state for a better; they stood between me and annihilation. I saw nothing
that remained for me, but to be starved. For God's sake, turn to your �sop; open at the fable of the Dairy-maid and her Milking-pail; blot it out, and put my

adventure in its stead! But this was not the principal aggravation of my case. Many men at many times have, no doubt, lost all that they had. But perhaps such an event never happened
before to a child, entering for the first time a great metropolis, without a single friend, and four hundred miles removed from his home. Men have arms to
work, and a head to contrive; they have experience, enabling them to foresee and calculate the results of a thousand schemes, and a tongue, to make good
their
story, to propose things which it shall be for the interest of the

hearer to accept, to parley, and to demand through that species of equality which no refinement can destroy, a fair hearing. I had nothing! I sat down, and found relief in a gush of tears. I wept, till I could weep no more, and felt myself stupified. By and by, a thought occurred, which roused me. If a man were in my place, what would he do? He would not sit still, and do nothing. I am alone in Paris; I must be my own man! I went down stairs, and saw my hostess. Where is the person, said I, who came with me last night? Gone---he has been gone these two hours. Where is he gone? I do not know. When will he come back? I cannot tell. I never saw him in my life before. To ask these questions I was obliged to follow the landlady from side to side in the great kitchen of the inn. She seemed to be exceedingly busy, and never
stood still for a moment. Madam, said I, I have been robbed; this man has taken away all my money. These words stopped her perpetual motion, and fixed her to the place where she stood. Robbed, said she; this is a fine story! No such word was ever heard in my house. What business, you little rascal, had you to come with a robber to my house? Robbed! He is a highway-man, and you are his jackal. A pretty story, quotha, that you have been robbed! Such little villains as you always outwit themselves. Betty, look up the silver tea-spoons! Observe the brat! See what fine linsey-wolsey clothes he has got on! And pray, my little master,

of what have you been robbed? Of a crooked copper, I warrant! Yes, I see, there are two of my silver tea-spoons gone. Step for an officer this moment! Search
him! But that is in vain. The boy seizes the goods, and his companion neatly carries them off. You shall breakfast, my lad, in the conciergerie , upon a salt

eel! Why are not you gone, Betty? I own I was now terrified, in a very different style from any thing I had felt in the presence of the mayor of Dijon. I believed that the house I was in, was
appropriated to the consultations of robbers. I had observed the signals of intelligence which had passed on the preceding evening between my
fellow-traveller
and the hostess, and now she denied that she had ever before seen him in her life. I did not doubt that the story of the tea-spoons was a concerted
fabrication, chosen as the most effectual means of quashing my complaint

respecting the loss of my property. But what chance had I, an unprotected child, without a friend, and without a name, of being able to make good my own cause,
and defeat the malicious accusation which was threatened against me! This was an intolerable addition to the shock I had just felt in finding myself
unexpectedly left without a penny. The whole recurred to my mind at once, and, though already exhausted with weeping, I burst afresh into a flood of tears. Betty, a plump and fresh-coloured girl of nineteen, felt her bowels yearn with compassion for my case. Pray, madam, said she, do not be too hard upon this
little boy. I dare say he knows nothing of the tea-spoons. I dare say no such thing! replied the mistress fiercely.