“When I am gone,” she exclaimed, bitterly weeping, “tranquillity at least may visit the haunts, where felicity once loved to dwell; the Earl will become more resigned to the death of his son, when his wretched widow shall no longer remind him of it. My parents shall never know the misery to which their daughter is reduced. I may not live long; ah! how willingly would I resign the burthen of existence, could I bequeath it in a happier form, to the dear child of my Henry, too precious treasure, who may still console its grandfather for the loss of its parent, of which I have deprived it before its birth.” Only Claudina had been entrusted with this interesting secret, which Lady Courtney had concealed even from her husband; induced to do so, partly by recollecting the restraints to which she had been subjected when she was before in a similar situation, and to which she had attributed the disappointment of her wishes; but more from the desire of surprising her friends, with the pleasing intelligence at a more advanced period, when there would be less probability of a second defeat of their hopes. It was a circumstance, which she knew would fill Lord Courtney’s heart with delight; and though she every moment longed to see him sympathize in the pleasure that she felt, yet she valued the power of making him happy so highly, that she reserved with a miser’s care the means of doing it, until she should be thoroughly satisfied there was no danger of disappointing the expectations she might inspire. During the melancholy interval of her husband’s illness, her thoughts were too much engrossed by his situation, to dwell for one moment on her own; but the tender Claudina recollected it, and trembled, and afterwards it was only by her exhortations, that Everilda endeavoured to conquer the violence of her emotions, which threatened to irreparably destroy the hopes, on which her only desire to live, now rested. What then was the sorrow of this faithful

friend when Lady Courtney in the wildest agonies of grief, after extorting a promise of secresy from her, entrusted her with the plan she had formed, of withdrawing privately from the Earl’s roof, and retiring to some secluded spot, “where,” as she expressed herself in the first effusions of despair, “she might live unknown, and die unpitied. I have already, “ she added, “spoken to Bianca and Giuseppe; they will not leave me; this very night I will depart; Giuseppe will take my trunks; I shall want but little, nor perhaps that little long. I have money enough about me to carry me to any part of the kingdom, and to support me when I arrive at a place of security; I can take leave of no one, not even by letter. My heart is too full to think of framing expressions of describe its feelings; but I would not leave thee, my Claudina, without telling thee my designs, thou wilt say when I am gone, how well I loved the friends from whom I fled; for Edmund and Emma, I leave every tender wish, and daily will I pray that their lot may be more happy and permanent than mine has been. Nay, weep not, my Claudina; our hearts will still be united, though distance may prohibit the exchange of our sentiments; think not that I am going to be more wretched; perhaps I may be less so in solitude, and grief, I shall still take a pleasure in thinking of my Claudina, my first, my only friend; nor shall I fear that she may forget me, in the variety of gayer life.”
“And do you think then that I would suffer you to go alone?” exclaimed the weeping Claudina, “shall I forsake you in affliction, when your most prosperous days were devoted to me? Oh! no; Everilda, you should know me better. The friendship of our youth shall never be forgotten; I would go through the World with you, and think myself happy amidst distress and danger, if I could bind up the wounds of my Everilda’s heart, and cheer her drooping spirits on our rugged way.” They wept together, as Claudina concluded her animated declaration; but soon recovering from, though not repenting, her enthusiasm, she endeavoured to dissuade Everilda from a scheme, which appeared replete with inconvenience to themselves and with uneasiness to their friends. But she was not to be reasoned with, her agitation became so violent on opposition, that Claudina, distressed and irresolute, knew not what plan to pursue, and at last yielded entirely to Lady Courtney’s persuasions; consoling herself with the hope, that the Earl’s temporary anxiety or displeasure, would be amply repaid by the happy effects which tranquillity and indulgence might have on her friend, when an opposite mode of treatment might endanger her health, and the very being of the infant, whose birth was so anxiously desired. Drowned in tears, the fair fugitives wrote the few lines meant to inform the family of their departure; and then leaving the house unperceived, were conducted by Bianca to the place, where Giuseppe was already waiting with a chaise and four horses, which conveyed them from town, with a velocity that considerably allayed Everilda’s fears of pursuit. During her residence near Bristol, she had frequently expressed a desire to visit Wales; the day had been fixed to gratify this desire when she was taken ill it was no more mentioned. But her thoughts now dwelt on that country, of whose mountainous aspect, and wild romantic situations she had heard much; there she thought it most probable that she should find some sequestered spot, which scarcely human feet had ever trodden, and, with the vague idea of a foreigner, particularly of one who had been accustomed to a variety of small states, all independant of each other, she thought that being out of England, she should be also out of the power of the Earl, should he attempt to insist upon her return; for already she had become so enamoured of her plan of solitary liberty, that she would not bear to think of any occurrence that might oblige her to relinquish it. They had left London at seven o’clock in the evening, that being the hour when they could most easily elude suspicion, as they knew that no enquiries would be made for them before the hours of two or three in the afternoon of the following day, at which time they had crossed at the New Passage and landed on welch ground. Lady Courtney’s impatience was such that she would scarcely allow time to take some refreshment before she proceeded on her search for an abode. She now wished for a situation near the sea coast, under the idea, that it would be more secure, and less liable to intrusion. By the assistance of a map, a book of roads, and various enquiries, they on the fourth day from their leaving London, met with a place in Cardiganshire, which seemed as if intended for a safe retreat from the busy world; and if it appeared that the comforts and luxuries of more artificial modes of living, must be procured with difficulty, it also promised that the rumours of terror, and lamentation of evils, would be there unheard. Nor would a place so sequestered ever have been perceived by our fair travellers, had not the discovery been made by accident. One of the horses having lost a shoe, a little welch lad on the road offered to bring a blacksmith from the village of Llewenmawr, where he lived. Giuseppe proposed, as the shorter way, to take the horse to the village; but the boy informed him that the road was almost inaccessible as the houses were quite at the bottom of the huge mountains they saw all around. This account roused Lady Courtney’s curiosity, and leaving the carriage, she and Claudina, ascended with great fatigue wearisome height, whence looking down a narrow pass, they espied what might be a village, but what at that distance appeared to them merely a few white stones collected together in the green and narrow valley; such was the lofty eminence from which it was beheld. The very sight of a retreat so humble and secure, was sufficient to inspire feelings of tranquillity in the bosom of affliction long agitated by all the agonies of passion. “Ah! exclaimed Everilda, let us seek no further; there will I wear out the remainder of my days; the sun that now strikes his slanting beams on the mountain’s green and sloping side, will shine sweetly on my grave, and I shall find repose near the little church whose spire peeps from that cluster of trees.” She then turned to survey the prospect on the other side of the mountains. They commanded an extensive view of the sea, and of a bold and wild country; she was pleased with the contrast these grand features afforded to the mild serenity of the sheltered vale. “You will like this, my Claudina,” said she, “for you can scale these heights, and wander among these rocky cliffs on the sea shore. Ah! I shall feel grateful if we can be accommodated in that peaceful valley; we will immediately make enquiries. But how shall we descend? Nature seems to have protected the inhabitants from intrusion by making their humble residences inaccessible.” “How then,” said Claudina, with a faint though pensive smile, “shall I be enabled to wander among the cliffs as you promised me. I fear my walks must be confined to the narrow green below, whilst I may raise my eyes in wonder to the mountain’s top, and think what sights I might behold, could I but gain their towering heights. It will teach me however to be humble, nor can any place appear confined to me, if I see my Everilda smile in it.” Lady Courtney pressed her hand, and said with more cheerfulness than she had ever shewn since her husband’s death, “You forget, my Claudina, the invegorating quality of this pure atmosphere; you will soon be as strong as one of the welch peasant girls, of whom we have already seen many, whose labours might make a pampered steed ashamed of his idleness; and you will become as active as one of the goats, that skip from crag to crag, and look down on the world which lies in minature beneath them, as animals less innocent,

regard from the eminence of power, the unexalted, whom they consider as born only to be subservient to their interests.” Giuseppe now returned, with information that the horse was ready to proceed; Lady Courtney enquired the road into the village, he answered, that it was safe to venture in the carriage, but that there was a foot path, which afforded a pleasant, and easy descent. They therefore took the way he pointed out to them, and soon arrived in the vale. If the grand view from the mountains excited sublime ideas, the placid serenity below, inspired the gentlest and most pleasing sensations. The eye could discern nothing but the clear blue sky, and the steep green ascent, on which a few goats were browsing, and trees scattered here and there, relieved without destroying its uniformity. The village was in itself, every thing that could be desired; sheltered, warm, and clean; through it a stream hastily ran over a pebbled bed; the cottages had an air of comfort, and were not contrasted by any edifice much more important. A small church peeped from a cluster of trees, and very near it, a modest mansion belonging to the clergyman, was distinguished from the rest, more by the taste of its owner, than by any real superiority that it possessed. A little higher indeed, there was
“A gothic mansion venerably gray, The faint memorial of a better day.”
Which had once been dignified with the name of a seat, and had in former times, been the residence of a large and ancient family, but,
“The lizard and the lazy lurking bat,
Had long inhabited the painted room, Where the sage matron and her maiden sat, Sweet singing at the silver working loom.”
The enlightened heir of modern days, had chosen rather to encrease his scanty income, by a mean and painful dependance on the great, than to limit his wishes, to his power of gratifying them. He had therefore long bade adieu to his native mountains and valleys, leaving the seat of his ancestors, to moulder in ruin and neglect, a fit emblem of his own broken fortune, and disappointed hope. Ah me, full sorely is my heart forlorn,
To think how modest worth neglected lies; Whilst partial fame doth with her blast adorn, Such deeds alone as pride and pomp disguise; Deeds of ill sort, and mishievous emprize, Lend me thy clarion goddess! let me try,
To sound the praise of merit ere it dies,
Such as I oft have chanced to espy;
Lost in the dreary shades of dull obscurity. SHENSTONE. WE should not have detained our readers with the history of this deserted hall, as its fate was not much harder than that of many of its brethren; but it happened to be the only place, in the village, that afforded any prospect of accommodation for the strangers whose arrival had filled the inhabitants with a degree of amazement, which seemed to have deprived them of the power of speech, as Lady Courtney could procure no answer to any of her enquiries. The women curtsied and pulled their children out of the way, the children peeped from behind their mammies, and all the men were out at work, excepting the blacksmith, whose attitude and figure were precisely that of the knight of the anvil, described in Shakspear’s King John. However when he had recovered from the first effects of surprise, and his mouth had gradually closed until it came within proper limits for utterance, he directed them to the clergyman, who was a good man, he said and a shentleman porn and pred, and her would tell hur every thing hur wanted to know. To this shentleman they accordingly went and apologizing for their intrusion, explained the reason of it, requesting to know if they could procure lodging in a retirement with which they were already charmed. The clergyman was indeed by birth a gentleman, but was unfortunately born a century too late to be so by any thing more profitable than genealogy. In the days when his ancestors were in their zenith of power, they called themselves Ap Rice; but when their descendants found themselves obliged to retrench their appearances and expences, they carried the spirit of economy even into their name, and striking from it the superfluous A, contented themselves with calling it Price, justly imagining that the Ap, signifying the son of, would be very unnecessarily retained in an age when if the son were poor, the father was never enquired after. We shall therefore introduce the worthy clergyman to our readers as Mr. Price. This gentleman was the youngest of fourteen children: by means of a good capacity and studious inclination, he had been enabled to take orders, and was fortunate enough to procure the living of Llewenmawr, which was worth fifteen pounds perannum; and his success created envy in the breasts of many in his calling whose income was only two thirds of that value. For himself he would have been contented, as his wishes were moderate, and it was not wealth that could constitute his felicity; but alas! the want of the former eventually deprived him of the latter. He had been attached from his earliest youth to the daughter of a neighbouring gentleman. She

returned his passion, and would gladly have shared with him the inconveniences of a narrow income, thinking, and with some reason, whatever selfish prudence or cautious avarice may urge to the contrary, that mutual affection would supply the place of many luxuries. Unfortunately the parents were not in love, and what was more unfortunate still, they were too compassionate to forbid the intercourse between the young people, tho’ they were also too worldly-minded to consent to their wishes. Thus, year after year rolled on, marked only by the agitation of hope, or listlessness of disappointment. Time endeared them to each other, but the health of the young lady sank under the trial, to which her parents exposed her. Naturally gentle and susceptible, the conflict between affection and duty was too powerful for her delicate frame. At length her parents seeing her ready to fall a victim to avarice, relented, and implored her to live and to make them happy by being so herself. They fixed an early day for her faithful lover to receive her hand, and at length the long-looked for hour arrived. But his rapture was checked by apprehension; for scarcely could her faultering steps conduct her to the altar, scarcely could her feeble accents pronounce the vow that made him happy; she did however pronounce it, she became his wife, he pressed her in rapture to his bosom. “Now Maria thou art mine indeed,” he exclaimed, “I am my Owen,” she replied, “let me be ever thine.” Overcome by her emotions she struggled in vain against their force; in her weak state agitation was fatal; she pressed her hand to her head overpowered by the violence of its throbbings; alas! it was the flutter of departing life, and sinking into her husband’s arms she expired, almost immediately after the ceremony that had united them. Thus in an instant was destroyed the fabric of bliss which slow and painful years had erected, and which fidelity and perseverance had finally completed. The anguish and remorse of the parents exceeded description. The grief of the widowered lover was silent but deep. The prime of his youth had been consumed in anxiety, the meridian of his life was devoted to sorrow, but in his sorrow, there was none of the harshness and misanthropy, which render the indulgence of it a crime. He mourned not as ‘they without hope,’ he considered his separation from his Maria as temporary, and looked with calm resignation to the period when he might be permitted to rejoin her. Withdrawing himself entirely from society he wept over her grave, which he could see from the window of the little parsonage, that he had fondly hoped would be one day adorned by her presence; he gazed on it unceasingly, and was almost tempted to envy her innocent and undisturbed repose. At other times he was employed in the management of a few acres of ground, and amused himself with some birds which had belonged to his Maria, or with cultivating the flowers with which she had ornamented his garden having planted many of them herself in her occasional visits with her parents. Over these remembrances he watched with the utmost care; as their blossoms expanded, his heart became sensible of pleasure, and when the chilling blasts of approaching winter robbed them of their charms, he sighed and remembered that her’s were blighted in their prime. But these objects claimed not all his attention, he wished not to live only to indulge in fruitless grief; he forgot his own sorrows, to assuage those of his parishioners; and relieved their wants from his own frugal stores: he saw himself revered by the few children of unsophisticated nature, with whom he was surrounded, and his earthly wishes strayed not beyond the narrow limits of the vale of Llewenmawr, and its humble inhabitants. “To them his heart, his love, his griefs, were giv’n, But all his serious thoughts had rest in heav’n;

As some tall cliff that lifts its awful form,
Swells from the vale and midway leaves the storm; Tho’ round its breast the rolling clouds are spread, Eternal sunshine settles on its head.”
Mr. Price was walking in his garden, when he was informed of the arrival of the ladies, and he immediately left it to receive them with that native politeness which is the offspring of benevolence and good sense, and wants not the superficial ornaments of courtly expression or fashionable modes to recommend it. He told the ladies that he should be happy in gaining them for neighbours, if it should be in his power to be serviceable to them; and informed them of the mansion that we have already mentioned, one part of which was occupied by a farmer and his wife; but the principal apartments were at liberty. He added that a lady had fitted up two or three rooms in a simple style, the preceding summer; that she had made it her residence for some months on account of her health, but her disorder was hopeless when she came, and she died in the autumn. This account did not discourage Lady Courtney, which the good man was glad to observe, for he had related the fact without disguise, lest she should hear it with additions from any other person, and be made uneasy by it; for he well knew that in solitude and sickness, the mind is ingenious to torment itself, and he thought he could perceive that his new acquintance had not been accustomed to either, though she at present sought the former, and appeared evidently afflicted with the latter. After some further conversation, he offered to accompany the ladies to view their destined habitation, and they were well pleased with the prospect of comfort which it afforded. The rooms were commodious, and neatly furnished. A garden behind the house was carried to some extent on the slope of the mountain, which defended it from every inclement gale, and a winding path conducted the passenger with ease to the highest ascents. The good women of the house engaged to have every thing in order by the evening, and in the interim the clergyman invited the ladies to partake of his humble fare. The luggage was therefore taken off, the chaise dismissed, and the wanderers rejoiced that their search of an asylum, was so successfully ended. And yet e’en here amid these secret shades, These simple scenes of unreproved delight, Affliction’s iron hand my breast invades, And death’s dread dart is ever in my sight. SCOTT. IT is not in the least surprising, that in this retired spot, the fugitives eluded all enquiry. Our readers must therefore now contemplate Lady Courtney no longer as the
“—————————giddy fluttering thing, Who shone in the park, and sparkled in the ring:”
but as a penitent recluse, hiding her charms, and wearing away the uniform day, in the solitary retirement of Llewenmawr; attended only by her Claudina, who “pined in thought,” but still wore on her placid countenance, the smile of content, to cheat her friend into the cheerfulness, which she feared had for ever fled her own bosom. Accustomed to restraint from her early youth, it was not now that Claudina found it irksome. She regretted the world, only as it contained the man, of whom she thought incessantly, and whom she every moment resolved to forget. To her, the vale of Llewenmawr, never appeared too narrow in its limits, but when she considered that it deprived her of the society, which when possessed, caused her pain, and yet of which the remembrance was now her only pleasure. Sometimes she felt her spirits sink into despondency, when she beheld the fleeting days of her youth, consuming in hopeless disappointment; the past marked only by the cruelty of her relations, the future promising only mournful remembrances, and fruitless regrets. But Claudina’s mind, was not more ornamented by every bewitching trait of female delicacy, and sensibility, than it was armed with the more masculine endowments of firmness and resolution; and no sooner was she sensible of the lethargy into which her mental faculties were falling, then she made every laudable effort to rouse them from it; not more on her own account than that of her friend, whose spirits, too prone to droop, needed not the contagious influence of example. To effect this, she resolved to divert her thoughts, by giving them new subjects for employment. She took daily exercise, knowing how much the mind is influenced by the body; and that the sensations excited in the one, by the health-inspiring breeze, and the contemplation of the beauties of nature, ever new and delightful, must preclude in the other, at least for a time, the indulgence of dispiriting and unpleasing ideas. The tender and elegant Leonard, justly says, “Rural air is balsamic to a wounded mind, and the charms of nature, communicate a secret calm to the soul, which stills the stormy voice of the passions.” She wandered among the cliffs on the sea shore, and was soothed by the monotonous murmer of the waves, or amused by the varied sounds of the different birds, which built amongst the rocks, and sought their prey upon the

waters. Sometimes she saw the distant vessel gliding in gentle safety on the smooth waste, at others the treacherous element changing its aspect, threatening destruction to the hardy adventurers, whom it lifted as if to the clouds, and then sunk as though in its fury it would bury them, and their dearly-earned treasures in its fathomless abyss. Often would she return laden with curious shells, or the most beautiful flowers, either the wild produce of the mountains, or those indigenous to the sea shore: she would delineate them with the most delicate exactness, until the shades of evening interfered with her employment, when she would take her guitar, and play to Everilda all the favourite tunes of their early youth, from the lively airs of the Venetian Gondoliers, to the pensive strains of Metastasio; and her sweet and flexible voice, would for a time charm to rest, in Everilda’s bosom, the remembrance of her sorrows. Thus with the few authors that they were enabled to bring with them, and the few that they could borrow from Mr. Price, whose pleasing and rational society, was a valuable acquisition to them, the days passed in tranquil uniformity, and Claudina began to reap by returning health and peace, the reward of her perseverance in what she rightly deemed a branch of duty. But with Everilda it was very different; whoever has known the approving smile, the partial praise, the lively participation in pleasure, the soothing consolation in sorrow, and the thousand nameless attentions of conjugal affection, will know also, that the kindest offices of the most unwearied friends, must inevitably fall far, far short of the supporting love of an indulgent husband. The loneliness of Everilda’s heart then may be easily conceived; her mind accustomed from infancy to the powerful stimulus of constant and extravagant praise from all around her, seemed to sink under mere debility, now that it was no longer supported even by her own approbation. She had lost the wish to please, and none more worthy filled the large space that it had once occupied. The constant remembrance of her husband was never unaccompanied by the reproach, of having been indirectly accessary to his death; the ghost of her departed happiness incessantly hovered before her mental view, and accused her as its murderess. With whatever intention we are tried by afflictions, it certainly was never designed
for them to inspire unreasonable, or as it may be justly termed, irrational grief. The consequences ever attendant on the excessive indulgence of unavailing sorrow, by depriving the mind of benevolence, and the body of health, ought to teach us, that it is no less offensive to the great Creator, who has permitted us to be afflicted, than it is prejudicial to ourselves, and painful to those, by whom we are surrounded. He cannot be said to be resigned, who mourns incessantly, and who in obstinately contemplating his sorrows, betrays a stubbornness of mind, which will not be subdued by them. The attentions of friendship are never more valuable or more praiseworthy then when worn out by suffering, a sense of them can scarcely be expressed by their object. From Claudina they were paid with an assiduity which increased in proportion as the unhappy Everilda appeared unconscious of it, and sacrificing all her own plans, just as she began to reap the benefit of them, she confined herself entirely to the house, never for a moment leaving Lady Courtney, who from the acute agonies of grief, gradually sunk into a state of silent dejection, much more prejudicial to her health, and infinitely more dangerous to her mental faculties: in this sad state, her mind dwelt with foreboding melancholy on her condition; she looked forward to the hour, when she should

bring forth the fatherless child of her Henry, and all her spirits sank, in the idea that she might not live to become a mother. She had heard the little history of her predecessor, to whose death she often reverted, always concluding her sympathizing reflections on it, with predictions that her own was not far distant. The lady’s name was Leeson, she had married a young officer of genteel family, but no fortune, against the consent of her father, who was the owner of the mansion, in which she had died. He renounced her on her marriage, and persisted in his resentment, with the firmness that too often sustains us in error, whilst it is not equally powerful, in encouraging us in virtue. Mrs. Leeson had accompanied her husband in the expedition, under the Duke of York, which deprived England of too many of her sons; unfortunately Captain Leeson was amongst the number. His wife bathed his wounds in her tears, and had the melancholy satisfaction, of hearing him declare, that death in her arms lost its terrors, though parting with her, added to its bitterness. The young widow returned to England with a broken heart, impaired constitution, and destitute of a single friend. But her distresses melted not the heart of her father, he piqued himself on the observance of his resolution, and almost feared lest the permission he gave her, to die in the deserted mansion of his ancestors, might be construed into a recantation. She was not long however his debtor even for shelter; she soon sunk under sorrow and illness, and fled from the severity of an earthly father, to that heavenly one, whose boundless mercies and incessant forgiveness, should teach his creatures to show each other the forbearance and compassion which they continually require and receive from his inexhaustible goodness. Lady Courtney delighted to dwell on the untimely fate of this unfortunate female, and Mr. Price, with the most benevolent intentions, often enlarged on the piety and resignation, that she had displayed during her illness. But no arguments could erase from Everilda’s mind, the idea which self-love naturally inspires, that she was the most unfortunate of human beings. “Say not so, my dear madam,” replied the patient teacher of the holy precepts which his practice beautifully exemplified; “say not so; certainly there are many who are more unfortunate than you can consider yourself, and I hope you will never be convinced by the pressure of calamities still more intolerable, that those under which you at present suffer, were not only more bearable than the afflictions of many others, but also than you were destined to endure. We should think it highly presumptuous in any one to declare that his happiness exceeded that of any other created being; nor could we deem the correction severe which might dash his cup of boasted bliss with the alloy of temporary sorrow.