This is the gentleman, said my uncle, who is so obliging as to provide an apartment for you in his house. I had never seen him before. He
was
a little man, with black, straight hair; his countenance clear and sensible, but with muscles that had not often been moulded into the expression of pity or

tenderness. His dress was exceedingly plain, not without some appearances of negligence and dirt. My uncle and he talked a great deal about

the silk-manufactures of Lyons; my guardian seeming to be desirous of information under this head, and the stranger well qualified to afford it. Neither of
them took much notice of me, and at an early hour I was directed to go to bed. My little man, said the Lyonnese, taking me by the hand, but with no
expression
of kindness, you will be very comfortable at my house; I have two little boys just about your age, and you will be nice playmates together. Good night! I
shall
come for you in the morning. I conceived no flattering augury in behalf of my new landlord. What had pleased me in Lyons was the squares, the public gardens, and the theatres. These were
exactly calculated to soothe my youthful curiosity. The plainness of the appearance of M. Vaublanc, and the dryness of his manners, were in perfect contrast

with these. There was

something in them which tended to chill the imagination, and inspire a dreary presentiment of the future. Yet I was willing to launch on this untried sea. I said, No, I will not go back with my uncle!---The morning of our separation was heavy, and presently began
to pour down torrents of rain. My uncle at parting put a louis d'or into my hand; I thought I never felt any thing so cold as his hand, when I touched it for

the last time. My cousin presented me with a three livres piece. You wonder perhaps at my recollecting so minutely a scene which passed at so early an age. But you will presently perceive what reasons there were that
compelled me to recollect it. Accustoming myself to contain my recollections and ruminations in my own bosom, they took so much the deeper root. M. Vaublanc was punctual in meeting and receiving me, at the very instant

that my uncle was stepping into the carriage which was to convey him to the foot of the mountains. I never saw or heard of my guardian from this moment. The wheels of the coach slowly rolled away, and my new landlord led me down another street. Our walk was not short, and we arrived at the meanest part of the
city. M. Vaublanc led me up a narrow and silent alley. When we had passed through two-thirds of it, This, said he, is my house. We entered, and were received by his wife, a woman plain and neat in her dress, and of a notable appearance. Presently came in the two boys he mentioned to me. They were clothed in remarkably coarse attire, and the rudeness of their countenances, and ungainliness of their carriage, well corresponded to their dress. All together, the alley, the darkness of the apartments, the

appearance of the family, exceedingly displeased me. And this, thought I, is my residence in the magnificent city of Lyons! My youthful senses had been idly
dazzled with the gaudiness of artificial life as I had here first seen it. But I could not help saying to myself, How preferable are the mountains, and
cascades, and cheerful cottages, of the Swiss to this miserable alley! In one respect however my situation was better than I began to expect it would be. After two or three days I was conducted to one of the most respectable
seminaries of education in the city of Lyons, such as young persons of the rank of the little Vaublancs never entered; where, under masters of great
knowledge
and humanity, I began to be initiated in every species of learning suitable to my age. What was my uncle's motive for taking this step, so little in
consistency with those which afterward

followed, I could never exactly conjecture. Perhaps he was desirous of letting me down by degrees, and had not the courage to drive me to despair at once, and
risk the consequences which that state of mind might produce. Perhaps, wicked as he was, he could not himself form his resolutions immediately, and only by
degrees worked up his mind to the plan which was intended to terminate in my ruin. Be this as it will, the studies and accomplishments in the pursuit of which I was now engaged, afforded me much gratification. Though I had at first been
dazzled with the splendours of Lyons, I knew that pleasure was not considered as the business of life; and, regarding the acquisition of liberal knowledge as
a
badge of honour, I was willing to cultivate those improvements which might fit me to discharge with respectability the offices of a man. I recollected

that in my native province I had always appeared to advantage in the field of emulation, and this naturally inspired me with an appetite for similar
experiments. My parts were quick; my apprehension was clear; and I almost constantly obtained the praise and encouragement of the regents. The only
mortification I suffered, during this period, was in going home every evening to M. Vaublanc's. There was such a contrast between his manners, and those of
my
instructors! His children were so sordid and groveling in their habits, compared with the generous minds and spirited tempers of my school-fellows with whom
I
associated in the course of the day! I had for about three months frequented the lessons of my instructors, when one morning the elder of Vaublanc's sons came to my bed-side at about six o'clock,
and bade me rise immediately, for his father wanted to speak to me. I obeyed. My little lad, said Vaublanc, you are not to go to school to-day. No, sir? What, is it a red-letter day? Your uncle has written to me to put you into a different birth. Ah, I am very sorry! Ours is a sweet school, and I like the masters and every body that belongs to it. William Mouchard, said my host, I know very little of you or your uncle either. But that is nothing to me. While he requires of me nothing that it is contrary to my notions, or out of my way, to do, I intend to be his fair and punctual correspondent. All that he
said to me while he was at Lyons, was like an honest man. He said, he had a numerous family of his own, and that he could not do much for you, an orphan cast

upon his charity. I stared. I remembered the severe injunctions of my guardian, and was silent. It appears that he has had repeated misfortunes in the world, and that he can just make shift to bring up his children in a humble way. It cannot therefore be
expected that he should do much for you. I can make his case my own, and I am sure I should look to my own flesh and blood. He has resolved to keep you from

starving, and that is very generous of him. There is only one thing I cannot understand: Why he sent you

to this school at all. I think he was out in his judgment there. This was the first time in my life, that the ideas of subsistence and property had been plainly stated to me. My notions, like a child's, were very confused on
the subject. But, I suppose, proceeding by a sort of implicit conclusion from the visible circumstances of my father, I had always considered myself as
entitled to a full participation of those benefits and blessings which a child can enjoy. What Vaublanc said however, convinced me that my uncle was
deceiving
him. I understood little of the descent of property, and whether, upon my father's death, it ought to devolve to his son or his brother; but I understood
still
less of the equity of just preserving from death by hunger the only son of a man, who had possessed every luxury and indulgence that were in use in his
country. In a word, the views

now stated to me, enlightened my understanding at once; and, when I found myself thus thrown upon the world, I apprehended, as it were by necessity, the laws
and constitutions of human life. What is to be done with me, sir? said I. You must do as I do, replied Vaublanc. People who have nobody else to maintain them, maintain themselves. You have seen shoemakers, and smiths, and joiners at
their work? They get money by their work, and with that money they buy meat and drink? Does my uncle wish me to learn to be a smith or a joiner? No, no. Any body that taught you to be these trades would require to be paid for the trouble of teaching you, and you would get nothing by it these seven
years. We have a trade in Lyons that we teach to younkers for nothing. And shall I get money by my work immediately? No, not for a month. What shall I get then? Twelve sous a week 3 . Will that be enough to save every body else the trouble of paying any thing for my food, and my lodging, and my clothes? That it will not. A sprig, like you, cannot do that; he must do what he can. And my uncle will pay the rest? He cannot help himself.---You are willing then to do what I have been telling you? I must not say much about my willingness, M. Vaublanc. I never did any work in my life. The more is the pity! In Lyons we find work for children from four years old: sometimes sooner. And in---in---the country I come from, the children never do any work, till they are almost as tall as their fathers. They do little offices indeed to be
useful sometimes, but nothing like what you call working for their living. I do not know which way is right; but I know which is agreeable. I should not so
much matter a little hardship; but you say, I must go no more to school.---I cannot think why, M. Vaublanc, you asked any thing about my willingness! And, saying this, a flood of tears burst from my eyes. When a school-boy, continued I, is to be punished, the master never asks him whether he chooses it.---M. Vaublanc, I cannot help myself. I am in a strange
country, and have neither father, nor mother, nor any body to care for me. Take me, and dispose of me, as you please, and as you tell me my uncle directs. I

dare say, you are a just man, and

will do me no harm. Wherever you put me, I will endeavour to be a good boy, and that nobody shall be angry with me. I will be attentive, and learn as well as I
can, and work as hard as I can. But, pray, pray, M. Vaublanc, do not ask me another time, whether I am willing? That will do, boy, said he, nodding his head. You will get better satisfied with your situation, as you grow used to it. Saying this, he put on his hat, and bid me follow him. As we passed along:
You know, I believe, what I am? I have heard: a manufacturer of silk. One part of this business is to prepare the silk, as it comes from the worm, for the sempstress and the weaver. This is done by means of mills: I have two or
three large ones, and employ a great number of work-people in them.---You

had rather work for me, than for a master you did not know? That I had! The thing is frightful to me, because it is a thing I never thought of. But I should fear it more, if it placed me altogether among strangers. You cannot think, pursued M. Vaublanc, what an advantage these mills are to the city of Lyons. In other places children are a burthen to their poor parents;
they have to support them, till they are twelve or fourteen years of age, before they can do the least thing for their own maintenance: here the case is
entirely otherwise. In other places they run ragged and wild about the streets: no such thing is to be seen at Lyons. In short, our town is a perfect
paradise. We are able to take them at four years of age, and in some cases sooner. Their little fingers, as soon as they have well learned the use of them, are
employed
for the relief of their parents, who have

brought them up from the breast. They learn no bad habits; but are quiet, and orderly, and attentive, and industrious. What a prospect for their future lives! God himself must approve and bless a race who are thus early prepared to be of use to themselves and others. Among us it is scarcely possible there should be

such a thing as poverty. We have no such thing as idleness, or lewdness, or riot, or drunkenness, or debauchery of any sort. Let the day of judgment come
when
it will, it will never surprise us in a situation in which we should be ashamed to be found. I never heard M. Vaublanc so eloquent. Eloquence was not his characteristic; but he was now on his favourite topic, a topic intimately connected with his fame,
his country, and the patriotic services which he rendered her. He did not completely recollect, while he talked on so interesting

a subject, that he was addressing himself to a child, scarcely more than eight years of age. Some things that he said, were not exactly in accord with the
vivacity of my temper, and the present state of my feelings. But on the whole I was fixed and penetrated by the warm colouring he bestowed on his picture; I

checked the rebelliousness of my heart, and said, Probably it is better for me that I should be admitted into so pure and exemplary a society; I longed to
set
my foot upon the threshold of the terrestrial paradise he described. My impatience was speedily gratified. We entered a very spacious building, which was divided however no otherwise than into four rooms, floor above floor. The
lower or under-ground apartment was occupied by the horse that gave motion to the mill, and that was relieved every hour. Two horses were the stock to each
mill. Above-stairs the walls

were lined on three sides, with the reels, or, as the English manufacturers call them, swifts, which received the silk, as it was devolved from certain
bobbins. Of these there were about eleven hundred in the first floor, as many in the second, and as many in the third; in all between three and four
thousand. It was curious to recollect that all these, by means of wheels and other contrivances in the machine, were kept in perpetual motion by a single quadruped. In

each apartment I saw several men, more women, and a greater number of children, busily employed. M. Vaublanc was so obliging as to take me over the whole,
before he assigned me my task. You will not suppose there was any thing very cheerful or exhilarating in the paradise we had entered. The idea of a mill is the antipathy of this. One
perpetual, dull, flagging sound pervaded the whole. The walls were bare; the

inhabitants were poor. The children in general earned little more than twelve sous in a week; most of the women, and even several of the men, but about one
French crown 4 . We must correct our ideas, and imagine a very sober paradise, before we can think of applying the name to this mansion. I was most attentive to the employment of the children, who were a pretty equal number of both sexes. There were about twenty on each floor, sixty in all. Their chief business was to attend to the swifts; the usual number being fifty-six which was assigned to the care of each child. The threads, while the
operation of winding was going on, were of course liable to break; and, the moment a thread was broken, the benefit of the swift to which it belonged was at
a
stand. The affair of the child was, by

turning round the swift, to find the end, and then to join it to the corresponding end attached to the bobbin. The child was to superintend the progress of
these fifty-six threads, to move backward and forward in his little tether of about ten feet, and, the moment any accident happened, to repair it. I need not

tell you that I saw no great expressions of cheerfulness in either the elder or the younger inhabitants of these walls: their occupations were too anxious
and
monotonous ---the poor should not be too much elevated, and incited to forget themselves. There was a kind of stupid and hopeless vacancy in every face: this

proceeded from the same causes. Not one of the persons before me exhibited any signs of vigour and robust health. They were all sallow; their muscles flaccid, and their form emaciated. Several of the children appeared to me, judging from their size,

to be under four years of age---I never saw such children. Some were not tall enough with their little arms to reach the swift; these had stools, which they
carried in their hands, and mounted as occasion offered. A few, I observed, had a sort of iron buskins on which they were elevated; and, as the iron was
worked
thin, they were not extremely unwieldy. Children, before they had learned that firm step with the sole of the natural foot, without which it is impossible
ever
to be a man, were thus disciplined to totter upon stilts. But this was a new invention, and not yet fully established. This, or nearly all this, I observed upon my first survey of M. Vaublanc's manufactory. In addition to this I afterward found, what you will easily conceive,
that it was not without much severity that the children were trained to the regularity I saw. Figure to yourself a

child of three or four years of age. The mind of a child is essentially independent; he does not, till he has been formed to it by hard experience, frame to
himself the ideas of authority and subjection. When he is rated by his nurse, he expresses his mutinous spirit by piercing cries; when he is first struck by

her in anger, he is ready to fall into convulsions of rage: it almost never happens otherwise. It is a long while (unless he is unmercifully treated indeed)

before a rebuke or a blow produces in him immediate symptoms of submission. Whether with the philosopher we chuse to regard this as an evidence of our high
destination, or with the theologian cite it as an indication of our universal depravity, and a brand we bear of Adam's transgression, the fact is
indisputable. Almost all that any parent requires of a child of three or four years of age consists in negatives: stand still: do not

go there: do not touch that. He scarcely expects or desires to obtain from him any mechanical attention. Contrast this with the situation of the children I
saw: brought to the mill at six in the morning; detained till six at night; and, with the exception of half-an-hour for breakfast, and an hour at dinner,
kept
incessantly watchful over the safety and regularity of fifty-six threads continually turning. By my soul, I am ashamed to tell you by what expedients they
are
brought to this unintermitted vigilance, this dead life, this inactive and torpid industry! Consider the subject in another light. Liberty is the school of understanding. This is not enough adverted to. Every boy learns more in his hours of play, than
in his hours of labour. In school he lays in the materials of thinking; but in his sports he actually thinks: he whets his faculties, and he opens his eyes. The

child from the moment of his birth is an experimental philosopher: he essays his organs and his limbs, and learns the use of his muscles. Every one who will
attentively observe him, will find that this is his perpetual employment. But the whole process depends upon liberty. Put him into a mill, and his
understanding will improve no more than that of the horse which turns it. I know that it is said that the lower orders of the people have nothing to do with

the cultivation of the understanding; though for my part I cannot see how they would be the worse for that growth of practical intellect, which should enable

them to plan and provide, each one for himself, the increase of his conveniences and competence. But be it so! I know that the earth is the great Bridewel of

the universe, where spirits, descended from heaven, are committed to drudgery and hard labour. Yet I should be glad that

our children, up to a certain age, were exempt; sufficient is the hardship and subjection of their whole future life; methinks, even Egyptian taskmasters would
consent that they should grow up in peace, till they had acquired the strength necessary for substantial service. Liberty is the parent of strength. Nature teaches the child, by the play of the muscles, and pushing out his limbs in every direction, to give them scope to
develop themselves. Hence it is that he is so fond of sports and tricks in the open air, and that these sports and tricks are so beneficial to him. He runs,
he
vaults, he climbs, he practises exactness of eye, and sureness of aim. His limbs grow straight and taper, and his joints well-knit and flexible. The mind of
a
child is no less vagrant than his steps; it pursues the gossamer, and flies from object to object, lawless and unconfined:

and it is equally necessary to the development of his frame, that his thoughts and his body should be free from fetters. But then he cannot earn twelve sous a
week. These children were uncouth and ill-grown in every limb, and were stiff and decrepid in their carriage, so as to seem like old men. At four years of
age
they could earn salt to their bread; but at forty, if it were possible they should live so long, they could not earn bread to their salt. They were made
sacrifices, while yet tender; and, like the kid, spoken of by Moses, were seethed and prepared for the destroyer in their mother's milk. This is the case in
no
state of society, but in manufacturing towns. The children of gipsies and savages have ruddy cheeks and a sturdy form, can run like lapwings, and climb trees

with the squirrel. You will readily imagine what a thunder-stroke it was to me, to be entered as one of the members in this vast machine. Up to the period of eight years of age I
had been accustomed to walk upon the level plain of human society; I had submitted to my parents and instructors; but I had no idea that there was any class
or
cast of my fellow-creatures, superior to that in which I was destined to move. This persuasion inspires into the heart, particularly the heart of the young,

such gaiety of temper, and graceful confidence in action! Now I was cast down at once, to be the associate of the lowest class of mechanics, paupers,
brutified
in intellect, and squalid in attire. I had however the courage to make up

my resolution at once to the calamities of my station. I saw what it was to which it would be necessary for me to submit; and I felt too proud, to allow myself
to be driven by blows and hard usage to that from which I could not escape. I discharged with diligence the task assigned me, and wasted in torpid and
melancholy labour the hours of the day. What may appear strange, this terrible reverse of fate by no means operated to stupefy my intellect. I was like those victims of Circe that we read of in
Homer, who, though they had lost the external symbols of a superior nature, retained the recollection of what they had been, and disgust at what they were. You
will perhaps scarcely suppose that my age was ripe enough for this. If I had been removed to a pleasing scene, if I had continued a pupil in the schools of
liberal education, the impressions of

my early years would probably have faded by degrees from my mind. But in the dreary situation in which I was now placed, they were my favourite contemplation;
I thought of them for ever. It was by remembering them only, that I felt the difference between myself and the squalid beings around me. When Adam and Eve
were
driven out of Paradise, and turned loose upon the dreary and inhospitable plains, how fondly did they recollect the bowers and lawns they had quitted, the
luxuriant flowers and blushing fruits, and the light and soothing employments which had there been their pursuit! It was naturally to have been expected, that I should look back to my native country, and, finding myself thus cruelly and iniquitously treated, should seek
among the scenes and the acquaintances of my infant years the redress of my grievances. If I had returned

to the vale of Urseren and the foot of the St. Gothard, nay, if I had whispered the particulars of my story in the ears of one man of eminence and respect
within the circuit of Switzerland, it cannot be but that I should have found a friend, a protector and a champion. But I dared not do this. The mysterious
threatenings of my uncle still sounded in my ears. He had given me a new name; he had left me among new faces; he had entered me upon a new species of
existence. He had expressly prohibited all reference and connection between my former and my present state. What did this mean? I had too little knowledge of

the modes of human life to be able to appreciate his menaces. This was the second revolution in my fortune. By the death of my father I found myself placed
in
absolute dependence upon an uncle, who had before had no power over me. A child has no standard within

himself for these things; he is sensible of his own weakness; he watches the carriage and demeanour of the persons about him, and from thence judges what he
is, and what he can be. The injustice practised toward me by my uncle rendered me from the period of my removal to Lyons a creature of soliloquy and reverie. Children at the early age
at which I then was, are usually all frankness and communication; they tell to their companions and play-mates every thing they know, and every thing they
conjecture. I had a secret that must never be uttered. Once or twice in the few months in which I frequented the school I have mentioned (for afterward my
temptations grew less), I was on the point of disclosing my history to a youthful favourite. But, when I had half resolved to unload my bosom, such
apprehension suddenly seized me, that my tongue faltered, and my heart

beat with violence, as if it would choke me. At one time, walking with my youngster-friend on a narrow bank, just as I had prepared myself to speak, my foot
slipped, and I sprained my ancle, so as to occasion a considerable swelling. At another, by a strange coincidence, a terrible clap of thunder burst upon me,

succeeded by uncommon lightning and rain, which of necessity forced the thoughts both of my companion and myself into a new channel. These accidents took a
superstitious hold of my fancy, and made me more reluctant than before to break the injunctions which had been laid upon me. Had I dared to attempt to deliver myself from the cruel bondage into which I had been kidnapped, it would have been a very arduous task for a child of little
more than eight years of age. I might have chosen for my confident and preserver some creature of my uncle,

and have thus rendered my situation more desperate. No indifferent man would have undertaken my cause and my rescue; he would have looked on my distress with a
sense of momentary compassion, and then, like the Levite in the parable, have passed by on the other side. It could be only a man of warm humanity, animated

with a strong love of justice and hatred of oppression, that, for the sake of me, a friendless outcast and an exile, would have strung himself to the
encounter
of prosperous and successful vice. It would naturally have required on my part, that I should have digested a resolute plan, and have persisted in the
execution in spite of every obstacle that might arise. But I had by no means the courage adequate to such an exploit. I felt like one of those unhappy beings we read of in books of supernatural adventures, who are
placed in the hands of some powerful

genius invisible to mortal sight, who dare not move lest they should meet with his hand, nor speak lest they should offend an unknown and never-absent auditor. It was thus I feared the ascendancy of my uncle. If men of powerful and vigorous minds, a Rousseau and others, have surrendered themselves up to the chimeras

of a disturbed imagination, and have believed that they were every where at the disposal of some formidable and secret confederacy, what wonder that I, a boy

of eight years old, should be subject to a similar alarm? Childhood is the age of superstition. The more I indulged this fear, the more my terror grew; and,
in
a short time, I believe I could sooner have died, than have brought myself to divulge a secret, the publication of which so obviously led to my benefit. Thus,
by the machinations of my cruel guardian, I was involved in a state of slavery, body and soul, such as has

seldom been the lot of a human creature. I remained for a considerable time an inmate of my prison-house. M. Vaublanc found that a person, so mean in his destination as I was, was not entitled to the
luxuries and refinements of his mansion and board, and placed me as a lodger with one of the labourers in his mill. At the same time he took from me the
clothes which I had hitherto worn, and assigned me a garb similar to that of my fellow-slaves. Thus I became in all external respects like the companions
with
whom I was now associated; and, whatever I might feel within, could in no point be distinguished by the common observer from the miserable beings around me. I
became familiar with objects of distress. The sort of training and drilling, necessary at first to preserve an infant during twelve hours together from the
guilt of a distracted attention,

was continually before my sight. The supervisor of the machine contracted from necessity a part of the rugged and ferocious character, which belongs to a
slave-driver in the West Indies. There was one phenomenon among us that might have surprised and misled an ordinary spectator. Our house of confinement often

echoed with songs, and frequently an hundred voices from different parts of the machine joined in the same tune. Was not this a clear indication of gaiety
and
tranquillity of heart? I remember one day when I was in England, I had occasion to spend two hours in your prison of Newgate. The window of the apartment
where
I sat overlooked the press-yard, where a number of convicts were assembled, waiting the occasion of being transported to the other side of the globe. They
were
employed in the manner I have mentioned, singing out in chorus some of the popular songs

of their country. But, alas! there, as in the silk-mills of Lyons, it was a melancholy ditty. The tone was heavy, monotonous and flat. There was the key and
the note of gaiety, but the heart was wanting. It was like the spectacle of a fresh and well-grown human body placed erect against a wall, satisfactory in
other respects,---but it was dead. They sung, bold and audacious in the face of despair, just as the fear-struck peasant sings along the church-yard at
midnight, expecting every moment to see a ghost start up at his feet. On each returning Sunday the chains which confined my footsteps were suspended. This day I regularly devoted to solitude and reverie. It is not to be described
what pleasure I derived from this resource. It was a new being that descended upon me. In the room of dead, naked and discoloured walls, I beheld

the canopy of heaven. In the room of the ever-turning swifts, which in multitudes surrounded me on every side, I beheld the trees and the fields, the fruits of
rural industry, and the grand features of all-powerful nature. Ch, Switzerland! I would have said, if I had dared trust my lips even in soliloquy with the
enchanting sound,---nurse of my cheerful infancy, in these beauteous retreats, methinks I see thee still! I scented the fragrant air, and I exchanged the
flagging songs of my brother-slaves, for the joyous warbling of the vocal woods. The poorest slave that lives, when withdrawn into a solitude like this, is
upon a level with the greatest lord. If he does not tread upon floors of porphyry, and is not canopied with roofs of granite, he however possesses himself in

the midst of a palace more glorious than human fingers ever formed. You may think perhaps that my Sunday

enjoyments, such as I describe, were of too grave and contemplative a character, to belong to such early years. I assure you however I do not describe them up
to the height of what I then felt, and now remember them. In answer to your objection I can only remark, that adversity, or rather the contrast between
present
adversity and past good fortune, tends beyond all other things to sharpen the apprehension. These scenes would have produced no such effect upon the other
boys
of the mill, because they had known no such contrast. They would not have afforded me the delight I describe, had I not been so much restrained from them,
and
restrained in so hateful a confinement. My heart felt no less unchained and free at these periods, than is the river, which had been locked up in frost, and
at
length by the influence of genial zephyrs is restored

to her beloved murmurings and meanders. I firmly believe that, if there had been no Sundays and holidays, I should have remained many years the prisoner of M. Vaublanc. My days of labour were days of
oblivion. It is impossible to describe to you the state of mind of a human creature, whose incessant office it is from morning to night to watch the
evolution
of fifty-six threads. The sensorium in man has in it something of the nature of a mill, but it is moved by very different laws from those of a mill contrived

for the manufacture of silk-threads. The wheels move in swifter rotation than those I was appointed to watch, and to keep this rotation constantly up to a
certain pace is one of the great desiderata of human happiness. When the succession of ideas flags, or is violently restrained in its circumvolutions,

this produces by degrees weariness, ennui , imbecility and idiotism. Conceive how this progress is impeded by the task of continually watching fifty-six
threads! The quantity of thought required in this office is nothing, and yet it shuts out, and embroils, and snaps in pieces all other thoughts. Another law which governs the sensorium in man is the law of association. In contemplation and reverie, one thought introduces another perpetually, and it is
by similarity, or the hooking of one upon the other, that the process of thinking is carried on. In books and in living discourse the case is the same; there

is a constant connection and transition, leading on the chain of the argument. Try the experiment of reading for half an hour a parcel of words thrown
together
at random, which reflect no light on each other, and produce no combined meaning; and you will have

some, though an inadequate, image of the sort of industry to which I was condemned. Numbness and vacancy of mind are the fruits of such an employment. It
ultimately transforms the being who is subjected to it, into quite a different class or species of animal. My Sundays, as I have said, restored me to the sort of creature I had been. At first, the feeling of this was enough for me; I was too happy to be capable of
much reflection. I leaped, and skipped, and ran, and played a thousand ridiculous antics, that I might convince myself that I was not wholly an automation. In
a few weeks however, when the novelty of these periodical seasons of rest was somewhat worn off, I began to feel my pleasure tarnished by the recollection
that, when Sunday was gone, Monday, and after that five other mortal days, would inevitably follow. The day of rest was so short! By degrees I became more serious and meditating. I said to myself, "What am I, and wherefore am I here?" The years of nonage in the human creature are many,
partly because he is surrounded with parents and kindred and acquaintances, whose habit it is to take care of him, and to direct his steps. Perhaps the
majority of human beings never think of standing by themselves, and chusing their own employments, till the sentence has been regularly promulgated to them,
It
is time for you to take care of yourself. For my part, I found myself cast upon a new world, without relations, acquaintances or friends, and this urged me
on
prematurely to acts of discretion. I could scarcely persuade

myself that the life to which I was devoted, deserved the name of taking care of me, and therefore began to cast about in my own thoughts what I should do. I need not tell you that I detested the condition in which I found myself placed, and longed to escape from it, and seek my fortune. But whither direct my
steps? I dared not think of Switzerland. There resided my uncle, that malignant demon, the recollection of whom haunted my thoughts, waking and sleeping. In

all the rest of the world I knew not even the private and proper name of a human creature. I had listened however to the old songs of Switzerland, and had
some
acquaintance with the romances of the middle ages. Mine were the years of romance. Without knowledge enough of what was actually passing in the scenes of the

universe, yet with a restless imagination, and a powerful motive urging me to consult it, I

patched up as I could, from narratives of humble life, and tales of chivalry, what it was that I should have to encounter. I knew I must have bread, and that
bread did not grow in every hedge. I concluded that I must find or make a friend, by whose assistance to support life, and, if possible, attain to something

beyond bare subsistence. At first I was somewhat terrified with the project I had conceived. Again and again I sat down in despair, and said, I am too young; I must wait yet some
years, before I can launch upon so great an undertaking. But my tasks would not wait: they beset me from morning till night, and, when I had once conceived
the
idea of flight, became continually more insupportable. From the extreme of despair I passed to the extreme of sanguine expectation. I brooded over my plans,

till all difficulties seemed to vanish before me; the scenes

I anticipated at length became as familiar to me, as any thing which had absolutely passed in any former period of my life. You will smile when I tell you that my favourite scheme was to go to Versailles, and throw myself at the feet of the king of France. It was the project of a
child, and will show you how ripe and unripe at once was the state of my intellect.