In this state, Christmas was spent in the elegant and hospitable abode, where Lord Drelincourt always celebrated it, according to his ideas of feudal magnificence, and English liberality. He thought that every nobleman should devote half of the year to the services of his country; and to the other half, he believed that his tenantry and the abode of his forefathers had a claim. He abhorred watering-places, and all the public rendezvous of vice and dissipation; justly thinking, that the money lavished in them, was wasted on the most worthless part of society, whose extortion and imposition were systematic; and that, whilst a crowd of hair-dressers, valets, perfumers, cooks, gamblers, and fortune- hunters, were enriched by the prodigal hand of luxury, worthy tradesmen found their industry unavailing, and their respectable families brought to ruin, from three-fourths of their capital being detained for years in right honourable imprisonment, whilst the humblest remonstrance produced no other effect than contemptuous silence, haughty

surprise at plebian insolence, or threats, to which the sufferer would willingly submit, of withdrawing favors, that generally carried ruin when they were conferred. Our fashionable readers will doubtless exclaim, These ideas may be extremely fine, and perfectly correct, but they are certainly rather singular, and not very reducible to practice; whilst, if we could suppose for a moment, an industrious tradesman wasting his time in the perusal of these volumes, we could likewise imagine him eagerly enquiring, if this Lord Drelincourt were meant to represent a character from real life? and, on receiving an answer in the negative, we can see him shake his head, and hear him say, “No, I might have known that it was a fiction.”
But Lord Drelincourt was not only singular in paying his bills, though that circumstance alone, might have ranked him amongst the oddities of the day, he had likewise many other remarkable sentiments and customs. He actually thought that the fashionable phrase of liberal opinions, meaned laxity of morals; and he could not content himself with the wisdom of philosophy, and religion of nature; but did verily go every sunday to church, requesting his family to do the same; and this, not merely from a conviction of the importance of example to those less exalted, and less enlightened than himself, for then he might have been excused by policy, but he openly acknowledged, that he believed public worship to be a devout and reasonable service, due from man, and acceptable to God. After thus unwarrantably betraying opinions, long since obsolete, we will give our readers time to recover from their surprise, and leaving the family at Drelincourt, to the enjoyment of their rational amusements, and antiquated ideas, we will attend upon the proceedings of Captain Clayton, for we must not deprive him of the title, to obtain which, many a young man has devoted himself to the service of Mars, however destitute of real military ardour. We will therefore continue to call this gentleman Captain Clayton, particularly as we do not mean to keep him for the remainder of this sublime history in Italy; but, before we recount his adventures there, we will conclude this chapter, and introduce him with all proper respect in another. At once my soul from bright ambition won,
I hugg’d the dart I wish’d to be undone;
No more pale science durst my thoughts engage, Insipid dullness hung on every page;
The midnight lamp no more enjoy’d its blaze, No more my spirit flew from maze to maze; Thy glances made philosophy resign
Her throne to thee, and every sense was thine. CA WTHORNE. WE do not mean to enter upon a recital of Clayton’s ecstasies, as he viewed with enraptured eyes the master-pieces of art, which every where met his astonished sight. The language of admiration is unfortunately not sufficiently new to afford our readers much gratification; and we wish rather to treat them with the beauties of nature, and of a more modern date, than these famed subjects, which make us feel, that, however enlightened, and accomplished the present age may be, it has much to attain before it equal the perfection of some by which it has been preceeded. Know then, gentle readers, that after Clayton had filled many letters to England, with more animated accounts, and chearful descriptions, than it was becoming in a discarded lover to have been able to send; instead of flying altogether from the haunts of men, he even carried his perfidy so far, as to think that the society of the Marchese di Rodalvi would be an addition to his pleasures, and formed the resolution of presenting his introductory letters, the first day that he could abstract his ideas from the splendid collection of every gratification to a lover of the fine arts, which Florence at the time afforded. Chance, however, spared him the trouble of a formal introduction, and gave him one infinitely more agreeable to himself, and more interesting to the family
Returning one evening from a delightful day’s excursion into the country, he was riding by the side of a beautiful shrubbery, in that indolent humour, which is sometimes felt, when the sensations of tranquility are so pleasing, that their cause is not enquired into, through the fear of destroying their charm; suddenly however the shrieks of females put all his serene sensations to flight, and clapping spurs into his horse’s sides, he darted forward with a rapidity of lightening, and was followed by two servants, who emulated their master’s speed. Directed by the piercing sound which still continued, he soon reached the spot whence they proceeded, and saw three men masked, two of whom were forcibly dragging a lady towards a carriage. Fear had deprived her of power to resist, she was insensible, and the opposition proceeded from another female, whom the third man restrained from going to the assistance of her friend, though he could not prevent her shrieks, which rent the air. At this instant Clayton appeared, “Cowards!” he exclaimed “base unmanly cowards, instantly relinquish the object of your insulting violence, or expect the punishment that you deserve.” One of the men who seemed to be the principal, answered with a voice almost choaked by passion, and in a language unknown to Clayton,

who in the hurry had spoken in English; but the stranger’s gestures were translatable into every language, for he drew his sword, and his attendants followed his example; Clayotn’s would have done the same, but they unfortunately had no other weapons than one pistol, which their master seized, and held to his opponent’s breast, whilst the squires engaged very valiantly in the cause of their respective principals. The Englishman cracked their whips, the strangers flourished their swords, and talked in the unknown language, whilst their opponents wondered who they were, and what they were talking about. At last for the honour of old England, they resolved to come to closer combat, and accordingly ran suddenly on the enemy, regardless of the glittering steel, whilst the masks not relishing the biting arguments of English whips, which came with all the advantage of novelty, and severe application, were soon thrown off their guard, submitting to have their swords beaten out their hands, and at last taking refuge in flight, notwithstanding the imprecations, which the stranger poured forth in various languages, with a fluency that astonished Clayton, who could not but be entertained by the inexhaustible variety of his epithets. Finding however that the could be understood, he began to parley with him in Italian, whilst the lady who was set at liberty by the flight of her guard, gave to one of Clayton’s servants, a direction in English to the chateau, from which she had unfortunately wandered out of hearing. When the assaulter found that there was a probability of an addition to the enemy’s forces, he thought it prudent to make peace on any terms, he therefore condescended to say that the young lady, whose terrified senses were only just returning, was his sister, and had escaped from a convent in Portugal, that he was her guardian, and as she had refused to return willingly to his protection; he had thought himself authorized to employ stratagem and force. “Speak, wretch!” exclaimed the fraternal protector in a voice of thunder, “speak to confirm my word, and thine own dishonour.” His accents might have almost awakened the dead, but not trusting to words only, he accompanied them by an herculean grasp, that seemed powerful enough to destroy the delicate frame, which he still supported. “Ah, my God,” exclaimed the unfortunate female, in a voice that thrilled through Clayton’s soul, “suffer me to die in peace, oh! my brother, persecute me not in the grave.” She closed her eyes and seemed actually departing to seek refuge in death; her inhuman brother seeing domestics approaching, would have flung her to the ground, but Clayton caught her in his arms, and the ferocious tyrant darting a look of ire upon him, sprang into his carriage, and was in a moment carried out of sight, by four fleet horses. It was now nearly dark, the lady, who appeared to belong to the chateau, leaned against a tree in silence, which Clayton was too much absorbed in thought to break; all the tenderest sympathies of his heart were awakened, and he could not refrain from repeatedly pressing to it, the injured object, who still remained as he thought, lifeless in his arms. We say as he thought, but though he might be deceived, that is no reason why our readers should, and we will candidly acknowledge to them, the agitated girl was not quite so inanimate, as to be wholly unconscious of the interest she had inspired, but not knowing exactly how to behave, she suffered her timidity to seek shelter under the appearance of insensibility, and was rejoiced, when the arrival of the domestics relieved her from her embarrassing situation. Clayton resigned his charge reluctantly to the care of two servants, who had brought a chair for her, and would then have taken his leave, but the other young lady advancing towards him, with an air of nobleness, tempered with softness, said in the most pleasing

accents, “No, sir, that I must not allow, add another favour to the signal one, which you have already conferred on us, and permit me to give my father the Marches di Rodalvi, the pleasure of thanking the deliverer of his daughter’s friend.” Could Clayton resist? Impossible!—He went, and whilst the young ladies had retired, to calm their spirits after so alarming a rencontre, he made the Marchese acquainted with his name, and intimacy with the Count Rodalvi, by that means increasing the prepossession already felt in his favour. Whilst they are talking over affairs foreign and domestic, asking, and answering, a thousand anxious questions concerning Edmund, Lord Drelincourt, and the rest of the Marchese’s friends, we will attend a few minutes to the female branches of the family. “Heavens, my dear Claudina!” exclaimed the beautiful Everilda, “what a wretch is that vile Don Lopez, he deserves to be put into the inquisition, for his shocking oaths, I wish I were one of the officers, he should see it in all its terrors, and I daresay he would then never mention the name of convent, or bear with that of priest, again.” “How unfortunate I am,” exclaimed Claudina, tears stealing down her pale cheeks, from a pair of fine black eyes, “alas! I never knew the transports of affection in my own family, my heart overflows with sensibility, and had it not been for your friendship, and the kindness of the Marchesa, it must have broken.” “Do not distress yourself, my love,” said the amiable Marchesa, “your society, makes us happy, and I trust that in time we shall be able to enjoy it without interruption. Do not weep, my dear Claudina, you are yet agitated, but adjust your dress, and come into the saloon, you ought to thank this valiant stranger, surely he equals Orlando, or Rinaldo, or any other hero however renowned, and we have now an admirable opportunity of displaying our genius, by celebrating his exploits in an epic poem.” Claudina smiled, and a faint blush passed across her cheek; she however begged to decline seeing him again, and Everilda kindly offered to stay with her. Now Claudina, like many others of her sex, when her request was complied with, became less anxious to abide by it, she hesitated, begged that she might not detain Everilda, and at last owned that perhaps company might amuse her spirits, and that if she found it over-powered them, she would retire. With Clayton’s ardent and romantic disposition, it was natural that he should be very anxious to see the fair objects, whom he had rescued from violence. The tones of their voices were extremely pleasing, but with their features he was entirely unacquainted, as they were both veiled, and the evening was too far advanced, to permit him to make any observations. In this uncertainty it is not to be wondered at, if the time of their absence appeared tedious, his eyes wandered frequently to the door, which at length opened, and three ladies entered; the first was introduced as the Marchesa, the second, whose paleness, langour, and dejection, proclaimed that she it was, whom he had rescued from fraternal tyranny, as Donna Claudina, Louisa, Elvira, de Gomez, and the third beautiful as one of Mahomet’s fabled houries, as Signora di Rodalvi. Now by all the laws of romance, we ought to make the valiant knight vow everlasting fidelity to the fair one, for whom his conquering arm had put a host to flight; and this was certainly what he had already intended, but unfortunately, he intended also to find her, “All that painting could express, or youthful poets fancy when they love.” Such was one of the ladies, but not the one whom he had expected to find so. The delicate languor, the interesting sensibility, the melting tenderness, of Donna Claudina, could not be seen without being felt, but the brightness of Everilda’s beauty made every other fade in the comparison; she was now in

her twentieth year, and in the meridian of her attractions; her height rose to the majestic, her eyes were of a dark hazle, and expressed most eloquently, every emotion of a noble, ardent, and generous, though uncontrollable soul, her complexion was not very fair, but it was clear, and heightened by a bloom of nature’s deepest and richest dyes; her bright brown hair curled in a profusion of natural ringlets, and her animated expressive countenance, received a thousand additional charms, from the harmonious tones of her voice, and the enchanting natural graces of her figure. She was one who could inspire only violent passions, if admired it must be with enthusiasm, if loved, to distraction. If Clayton had been struck with Lady Rosamond, in whom dignity supplied the place of female softness, how was his admiration now excited by one, in whom dignity and sensibility were joined? If Lady Rosamond’s talents had gained his homage, notwithstanding the repulsive manner in which she often displayed them; what was not due to Everilda, who combined every varied power to please, with an unwearied desire to exert them? The ardent Clayton soon devoted his glowing heart, entirely to one, who appeared so worthy of it, he no longer complained of the insipidity of life, but of its shortness; his whole soul was filled with the ardour of his passion, he lived only to love, but with the unconquering timidity of a real lover, silence closed his lips, though the dictates of his heart continually hovered on them; in the presence of his mistress he gazed on her in mute admiration, but in absence he delighted his imagination by talking to her. Ye cruel maids! When first ye ‘gan to weave my woof of fate Ye dy’d it with the roseate hues of spring. —
At length the raven croak’d, with joy ye snatch’d The cords of woe, and dipp’d th’ unfinish’d web Deep in the pitchy waters of despair. SAYERS. NOW, Cupid being one of the most mischievous urchins, that ever existed, not contented with making such havoc in the hitherto stoical heart of the philosophical Clayton, did likewise most wilfully and maliciously wound, and disturb the peace of the gentle and unfortunate Claudina. This young lady’s destiny had been singularly pitiable; with a heart cast in nature’s softest mould, a disposition peculiarly amiable, and manners the most interesting and affectionate, she had been the victim of unkindness, chilled by neglect, and discouraged by insult. It was her misfortune to be born too soon. The first three years of her life were the only happy ones that she had ever known. She was then the darling of her parents, and undoubted heiress of a large fortune, left by an uncle to her father’s eldest child, unless he, or she, embraced a religious life, in which case it was to devolve to the next; or if there were none other, it was to endow an hospital for thirty decayed noble Castilians. In the fourth year of Claudina’s age her parents were made happy by the birth of a son, and from that moment, all her wretchedness commenced. This darling son, who was to transmit the family-name to a hundred generations, was unfortunately likely to succeed to more titles than estates, but the parents lamenting the untoward circumstance, luckily recollected, that if they could not enrich him, Claudina might; and from that instant it was decreed that she should. But to effect a change of prospects, a change of inclination was also necessary, and the little lively Claudina, was to be metamorphosed into the devout and pensive nun. Now this was far from an impossibility, and might have been easily effected by kind and docile means, for even at that early age the child gave strong proofs of the tenderness and sensibility which were afterwards matured in the woman. But her parents wisely took her, at six years of age, from an elegant nursery, where she had always had a crowd of playfellows, deprived her of her toys and sweetmeats, and sent her to board in a convent, seldom going to see her, and then only to reprove her, and repress by sternness the emotions of her affectionate heart, which not all their cruelty could teach her to stifle. In this convent her acquaintance commenced with Everilda, who was sent to it for education, on account of the Marchese having a sister who resided in its vicinity. Their intimacy soon grew into a lively friendship, and her attachment to Everilda, was one great source of the firmness with which the timid novice resisted the stern mandates of her parents; the severity of the rigid nuns, and the caresses of the artful ones. She looked with horror on vows, which would separate her from the only friend that she had ever known; and that friend possessing, at all times, a soul impatient of controul, disdained it in the

form of tyranny, and fortified with her spirited advice, and independent opinions, the drooping spirits and wavering resolutions of the distressed Claudina. Even her timidity was worked on by Everilda, who drew in lively colours, the offence given to God, and the mockery made of religion by those who professed a sacred call to a life which they loathed, and who claimed merit for offering to heaven a heart, polluted with worldly desires, and the repinings of discontent. The death of Claudina’s parents made no change in her situation, but that of giving her, if possible, a still harsher guardian, in the person of her brother, whose remonstrances were so unceasing, and accompanied with such cruelties, that the gentle object of them, sunk under their force, and seemed ready to resign a life, made wretched by unkindness. Everilda’s warm and generous heart bled to see the ravages made by grief in the lovely frame and delicate constitution of her friend, for whom she earnestly requested an asylum with her parents. Her wishes were no sooner mentioned, than compliance prevented their repetition. In this case there were additional motives for their gratification. The Marchesa was one of the most compassionate and tender of her sex; she sympathized in Claudina’s trials, and wished to alleviate her sorrows; Everilda’s petition was likewise made a few days after Edmund’s departure, when her spirits were yet saddened, and her parents were anxious to see them restored by the society of one whom she loved so well, and who was so deserving of esteem. Stratagem was opposed to force; permission was given to Claudina to spend the day with Everilda’s aunt, whom she frequently visited, and the moment she was beyond the walls of the convent, a light carriage with four horses offered freedom to her, and never stopped till she was out of her brother’s jurisdiction. She was received with raptures by her friend, and in the elegant society of the Rodalvi family, began to taste of happiness, though she led a retired life, from fear of her brother, who left no art untried to bring her once more within his power: and indeed every day that she was out of it, was of consequence, as his office of guardian was limited to a certain number of years, which was now nearly expired; for his father, either repenting on his death-bed, the cruelty that he had shewn his daughter, or not being so charmed with his son’s disposition, as to think proper to trust entirely to it, did not wish to extend the power he should give him over his sister too far. We have already related the consequences of the young ladies having imprudently lengthened their walk much further than usual; and we have now to relate other trials, as severe, and almost as fatal, which befel this unfortunate fair one, though arising from a very different source. —————See
The bitter fruits of thine unhappy love! It blossomed sweetly, and thy cheated hopes
Were promis’d, that its bloom should last for ever; What can’st thou wish? What state of life become thee? Go from the world, which has no corner in it
That will receive thee kindly, but that cloister,
Whence had’st thou ne’er been drawn thou had’st been
happy. VICTOR. CLAUDINA’s heart, naturally tender, lavished its sensibilities on those to whom she was indebted, with a warmth, proportioned to their paucity. She revered the Marchese; she regarded the Marchesa as a mother, and was attached to the interesting Everilda, by every tie of friendship and gratitude, but she was soon convinced, that yet stronger sentiments could exist in her heart; she found with mingled fear and pleasure, that she loved, and for sometime engrossed by the delights of a new and secret passion, she felt not even the necessity of participation. Every day her attachment gained strength, for every day she gazed on her preserver, and his speaking countenance, his facinating manners, his animated smile, and cultivated mind, were not to be attended to with indifference. One day he was unusually brilliant; intelligence flashed in his eyes, transport smiled on his lips, and as though common language could not express his sentiments, he breathed on his flute the most captivating melody. The susceptible Claudina was overpowered by her emotions, she left the room, and wandered through a grove, where every gale wafted fragrance, and seemed to inspire happiness. “Yes,” she exclaimed, clasping her hands, and raising her tearful eyes to heaven, “yes I love! oh delightful passion, till I knew thee, I knew not the value of existence. Ah heavens! who can renounce the world, whilst in it can be experienced feelings such as mine? And what would they have been in the convent of Sainte Frances! I love, and surely I love not alone, no, I feel also that I am loved.” And now, lest our readers should think that they have caught us napping, as has been the case with greater authors than we are; or lest Clayton may be accused of inconsistancy, or Claudina of vanity, we think it incumbent on us to declare, that though she was mistaken, her mistake was very excusable.Clayton’s soul overflowed with love, and the tenderness of his accents, the sensibility of his glances, might have misled those more versed in the language of passion than Claudina was, particularly if their wish was “father to the thought.” It was natural for her to imagine when in Everilda’s absence, his voice trembled in addressing her, and his eyes were fixed on her with the most expressive softness, that she inspired his emotions, and though it was possible, it was certainly very improbable she should divine, that his thoughts of the absent, influenced his behaviour to the present, that his love for one, prompted his attentions to another, that his softness was involuntary, his accents tender as his thoughts, and yet these thoughts fixed upon another. Surely Claudina could not be expected to imagine any thing so cruel, and happy in the idea of being loved, she wished

not to be told that she was so. The delusion however was not to last long, and on the very day that it was at its height, the charm was broken, she had returned to the apartment where she had left the family, and advanced into it, before she perceived that Clayton was there alone. She was hastily retreating with that excess of caution, by which even the wisest sometimes betray themselves; Clayton however prevented her design, and taking her hand, enquired in the softest accents, though mingled with evident perturbation, if she had seen her friend? She answered in the negative. He then asked, if she had seen the Marchese, or Marchesa? and received the same answer. “Well,” he exclaimed, leading her to a seat, “they have left me here quite solitary, but you will not desert me also?” Claudina answered only by the liveliest blushes, and a sweetness of expression in her countenance, which could scarcely be equalled by Everilda’s beauty. Perhaps the moment in a female’s existence, which conveys the purest rapture to a susceptible heart, is that, when the declaration of his passion, hovers upon the lips of her lover, when she witnesses her own triumph in his anxiety, and anticipates the delight of consoling him. Such, at that moment, were Claudina’s feelings, she feared to breathe, lest she should dissolve the enchantment with which she seemed surrounded; and dreaded even the tones which vibrated to her heart, lest they should break the spell. “Shall I hesitate,” said Clayton, “to speak to you on a subject which has long occupied my mind? Knowing your sensibility, am I presumptuous in hoping to interest it in my favor? Ah! Claudina, excuse my freedom; my heart disdains forms, tell me, if with so much softness you have never loved.” He paused, and Claudina blushing yet more deeply, essayed to speak, but her eyes met his, and her unfinished words expired on her lips. “Speak, Claudina,” he continued, “my dear friend, friend of those whom I love, answer my question, or suffer me to conjecture the cause of your silence.” Claudina, conscious of it, was easily alarmed, and hastily replied, “Alas! I have never known any who wished for my love; never any who deserved it, till fortune atoned for the unkindness of nature, in giving me invaluable friends among strangers.” The contrast afforded by her present situation, to that which memory recalled, filled her eyes with tears; she paused, and Clayton continued, “May your love be propitious on whomsoever you bestow it; he must be happy; but my fair friend,” continued he in a livelier tone, and taking her hand with a smile, “as you hope for success yourself, plead for me with one, over whom your influence is great, let me implore you to exert it in my behalf; you tell me that you are my debtor; procure me a favor greater than life; procure me Everilda’s consent to make me happy, and you will bind me to you for ever in the chains of gratitude.” He felt the hand that he held become cold and inanimate; he looked up, and beheld Claudina, who seemed in a moment “transformed by grief to marble, and appeared her own pale monument.” Surprised and shocked, he one minute suspected the truth, and the next condemned himself for the vanity of the romantic thought. However, delicacy restrained him from calling for assistance, and he was happy to perceive that it was not long necessary; Claudina revived to anguish, disappointment, confusion and despair. Clayton cast his eyes to the ground in silence; and Claudina, bursting into tears, exclaimed, “Wretched that I am, when shall I know peace? why did I refuse a safe asylum from unhappiness? why did I expose myself to the attacks of fortune, who has already so cruelly persecuted me?” She wrung her hands, and seemed utterly unconscious of any person being near her, till suddenly recollecting herself, she instantly turned to the astonished spectator of her grief, and with

admirable presence of mind, and an unembarrassed air, which could not fail to impress conviction, said, “How weak, how very weak, sir, I must have appeared to you: excuse the little command that I have shewn over my feelings. I have no friend but my Everilda, and the dreadful idea of being deprived of her, quite overpowered me. I feel ashamed of my selfishness, and must beg of you to forget that I displayed it so strongly.” She smiled through her tears as she concluded, and extended her hand to Clayton, who pressed it to his lips, and reluctantly resigned an idea which had considerably exalted him in his own opinion, and had made Claudina appear very interesting to him. Though Claudina’s wishes had in some measure misled her judgment, yet she was too rational to grieve for what appeared irremediable. She was consoled in the reflection, that her error was known only to herself, and endeavouring to banish even the remembrance of it from her mind; “She never told her love,” but sought to overcome it by constant occupation, her sensibility was however too great for her to be successful in her laudable attempt, she pined in thought, and her health once more drooped under mental sufferings. The enamoured Clayton having gained the consent of the Marchese and Marchesa to address their daughter, was one of the happiest of men, and most attentive of lovers, even the volatile Everilda, seemed touched by his sincerity, and gratified by his excessive homage. He appeared daily to gain ground in her affections, and his frequent letters to England, were filled with the most rapturous praises of her beauty, her accomplishments, her virtues and innumerable graces. We will now leave him to make sonnets on his fair one’s eye-brows, whilst we return to the family at Castle Drelincourt. Disguise, I see thou art a wickedness Wherein the pregnant enemy doth much. SHAKESPEAR. THE season was now rapidly advancing, when London appears in its utmost gaiety and splendor. Lord Drelincourt always went there in February, and he this year rather hastened his return to it, as he remarked, with sorrow, the increasing estrangement of Lord Courtney from home, and the dejection which clouded Lady Rosamond’s fine features, and cast a gloom over all her ideas and remarks. It was not possible that she should feel otherwise than mortified, when every letter from her faithless ci-devaut amant, instead of being filled with complaints of her cruelty, and his misery, teemed with the praises of another, and declarations of his own happiness. She could not avoid hearing of his new attachment, though Edmund was too delicate ever to mention it, but Henry never failed to rally her on the futility of her charms, and the readiness with which Clayton had consoled himself. When the day was fixed for leaving the castle, Lord Courtney mentioned a previous engagement, that he had formed with Lord John Talbot, which obliged him to be in town somewhat sooner than the rest of the family, he therefore took his leave, hoping to meet them at the time appointed. Lord Drelincourt was too indulgent to controul his son, in a matter of no real importance, but he was mortified to observe in him of late, on the most trifling occasions, an air of constraint and mystery, never attendant on actions which will bear scrutiny. He spoke not on the subject, but the expression of gravity in his countenance, was understood by the conscious Henry, who felt hurt to even slightly wound the feelings of a father, to whom, the tenderest affection, the most respectful obedience, and sincerest confidence were due. The day after Lord Courtney’s departure, Lord Drelincourt received letters which made him anxious to be in town, as soon as possible, and as the weather was remarkably fine, he wished his family to accompany him, accordingly they set off a week sooner than they had originally intended. On their way Lord Drelincourt alighted from the carriage, to shew Edmund a point which commanded one of the most extensive views in England. In returning, the Earl unfortunately struck his foot against a stone, and by a sudden twist sprained his ancle.