He accordingly insinuated such remarks as the following into the ear of Kenrick. "Do not think, because you observe our cousin to be of a
serious
temper, that it is necessary you should suppress before him the gay impulses of your own mind. If you do, instead of gaining, you will ruin yourself in his
esteem. He told me the other day, as we were walking together, that he had always been accustomed to prognosticate ill, of a solemn, sober-sided boy. Youth,

said he, is the season of cheerfulness; and it is in this way that

the faculties and force of the mind, if any exist, display themselves in early life. Besides, mr. Fleetwood has the most ungovernable dislike to what he calls
hypocrisy; and he carries this principle so far, that whoever in his sight puts any constraint upon his natural bent, he sets down for a hypocrite. Remember

too, that a grave man is a man devoured with ennui , and however contrary to his temper it may seem, that he feels toward no person so sincere a gratitude,
as
toward him who convulses him with laughter, and distracts his melancholy with sallies of extravagance. I know, my dear Kenrick, that you are too high-souled
a
lad, to do any thing for the express purpose of insinuating yourself into an old man's testament. But that same temper of yours ought to prevent you, from
mortifying yourself, and giving pain to your protector, to no manner of purpose. Show yourself to him

nakedly as you are: he will honour you the more, and like you the better for it. Kenrick, you are a spirited fellow; but you have not the heedlessness and
obstinacy, which makes many young men of your stamp disdain advice. Yours is the season to lay hold of fortune's plough, and turn up her treasures; it would

not be amiss, as graver years advance, to find that you had a comfortable annuity on mr. Fleetwood's estate. He must be an ass, and not a man of spirit, who

never thinks before-hand of a rainy day. For my part, I should have no enjoyment of any legacy our cousin bequeathed to me, if my dear brother, my brother,
whom I received in these arms almost on the day of his birth, whom I have dandled on my knees, and toward whom my affection has grown with added years, were

not at least equally a gainer with myself." The consequence of all this sage and generous advice was, that

I was perpetually tormented with the buffooneries, the boy's tricks, and the unlucky scrapes, of the handsome young soldier. To many men no doubt they would
have been exquisitely delightful; the cheerful and light-hearted tone of voice with which they were accompanied, often spoke to the soul; and the honest
hilarity of countenance that adorned them, a painter would gladly have stolen, when he was delineating the figure of a youthful Apollo. Still they were too
much for the habits of my mind, and the restless anxieties that haunted me. Mary, all lovely and bewitching as she was, frequently vexed me with her
over-much
liveliness and gaiety; and I could ill brook to have this stimulated and doubled upon me, by the presence of a young man of her own temper and age. Gifford speedily discerned the feelings I nourished toward my wife, and planned

his operations accordingly. "Allow me," said he to the young ensign, "to explain to you another feature of our patron's character. He has passed all the better
days of his life a bachelor. Just at the period of existence, when the most uxorious man alive begins to detach himself from the vehemence of passion, he
married. You may easily conceive what a ridiculous blunder he committed. He was not long before he detected his folly. This is the very reason that has led
him
to call his relations about him, and endeavour to relieve his domestic scene by the presence of strangers. He wishes to lead a creditable life with his wife;

but he finds himself disqualified to become her esquire and associate. He is desirous of resuming as far as possible the independence of a single state, and
of
having as little familiarity with his wife as decorum will allow of. It is in your power to amuse him; it is in mine

to beguile his hours with serious discourse; these benefits he expects from us. But the man who would do him the most precious service, is he who would relieve
him from the duty of constant attendance upon the skittish, capricious, kind hearted, excellent creature, to whom he finds himself unfortunately linked." It is no wonder that Kenrick became the dupe of these representations. I was the furthest in the world from a hypocrite; and it was easy to see, ten times a
day, how much I vexed myself at the sight of the �tourderies of Mary. Thus all the weaknesses of the ensign's character were carefully fed and expanded by
his
treacherous adviser. He was lively, restless and turbulent; Gifford stimulated him to become more so. At his age, and in the very dawn of puberty, his eye
was
prompt to the notice of female attraction; there was nothing to which he was more prone, than to those little

frolics and sports in which the young of either sex indulge themselves reciprocally with the utmost innocence of thought and intention: Gifford prompted him to
turn this foible upon my wife, and to ascribe to himself a merit while he obeyed the impulses of his nature. I have already said, that I had no sooner removed my wife to Bath, than she emerged from the melancholy and dejection which had overwhelmed her at the equinox,
and rose to an extravagant degree of vivacity and spirits. She made acquaintances; she resorted to public places; she laughed, and talked, and danced, and
sung, for ever. It will easily be imagined how this disorder was heightened, now that I had an inmate under my roof, no less wild, remiss and rambling than
herself. I did not know my own house. A hurricane would have been a mansion of peace to that in which I lived. Consider then

the grave cast of my spirits, the trembling sensibility of my nerves; and imagine what I must have suffered in a scene so new, where my nerves were not only
shaken, but my ears sometimes deafened, by the obstreperous mirth of Mary, Kenrick, and their train of visitors. Yet I saw occasionally in the countenance of

my beloved wife some of those wild and terrible expressions which had driven us from Merionethshire; and I dared not remonstrate. Frequently I took refuge
from
the tumult in the separate society and conversation of Gifford: this was what the villain intended; he was secure that he should gain more perfect possession

of me, in proportion as our conferences became more repeated. Sometimes I desired him to speak to Kenrick about the excess of his riots: he did speak to him;

and the style in which he spoke has already been detailed. Thus becoming daily more confidential with the elder of my two kinsmen, I could not refrain from sometimes opening my soul to him, on the most sacred of all
subjects, my sentiments respecting my wife. This I did without premeditation or design: it was the genuine overflow of a mind, sometimes irritated, sometimes

stung, sometimes swelled almost to bursting. Gifford was the only person on the face of the earth, with whom I now discoursed familiarly: who, in my place,
could have been uniformly silent upon the subjects always uppermost in his thoughts? No man: at least no man subject to be so deeply impressed and agitated
as
I was. None but the worst of villains could have made an ill use of such disclosures. He saw how my bosom was wrung, how my heart was torn in a thousand
pieces. Was I a husband, indifferent to the affections of his wife? Was I a man, to whom the kindest service

would be to relieve him from the uniformity of attendance upon the partner of his bosom? Did I desire, to have as little familiarity of intercourse with her,
as the laws of decorum would allow ?---No, no, no! Tortured as I was with her instability, I loved her beyond all names of love: to see her happy, was the
utmost aim of my ambition: to be gratified with her compliances, the indirect silent evidences of her regard, elevated me to an enjoyment that kings might
envy.--- But I complained---fool that I was, I complained, and dreamed that I received the retribution of sympathy!---this was enough for Gifford; this he
accepted as the fulcrum of his engines. Enamoured of Mary, I also affected, with a love equally sincere, though not equally ardent, the engaging Kenrick. His countenance was so honest; his manners so
affectionate! Though occasionally boisterous in his demeanour, he

would not intentionally have hurt a fly. Like the elephant, he might have trod down armies in his mood; but, if a blind puppy lay in his path, and he was aware
of it, he would carefully have removed it from harm. His manly heart was subdued, and his eyes suffused with the precious drops of pity, if he heard a tale
of
woe. He was unwearied and unconquerable in his efforts to relieve distress: nor merely that; but every opportunity, however trivial in name, to do an act of

kindness, and give vent to the goodness of heart with which his bosom laboured, was sure to be embraced by him. The accents of generosity which this temper
supplied to him, thrilled through the frame of every hearer. He was active, impetuous and ungovernable; but how unlike was the impetuosity of his character,
to
that of Morrison, Frewen, and the other untamed barbarians, with whom it had been my unhappy lot to be associated

at the university!---One strange thought I could not sometimes defend myself from, when Kenrick and Mary chanced to sit next each other, at the
breakfast-table, or on other occasions: they were the loveliest couple that Europe perhaps could have supplied; both so animated and so accomplished; both
having that uncommon class of countenance, in which, as it appears, the thoughts may be read. A painter, who wished to represent Romeo and Juliet, as they
offered themselves before Friar Lawrence to be joined in bands of holy wedlock, would have been too happy if he could have obtained Kenrick and Mary for his

models. The young ensign, governed, as I have said, by the admonitions of his elder brother, was eager in his attentions and services to my wife. His honest heart,
that witnessed the rectitude of his views, prevented him from suspecting that any one could put a wrong construction on his conduct. One evening, as I
returned
home at about eleven o'clock from a party in which I had been engaged by the importunities of Gifford, who seemed always anxious to invent means for
diverting
my melancholy, I was accosted by a woman, well dressed, and, as far as I could distinguish, of a noble air, in the streets. The night was exceedingly dark;
but
the air was balmy and refreshing. The incident occurred near

the door of the Upper Rooms, and took place just at the time the assembly was breaking up. Gifford had left me for an instant, to speak to an acquaintance who
passed us. Several of the ladies went home in chairs; others, invited perhaps by the softness of the air, and considering the small distance they had to go,

preferred walking. The woman I have mentioned was arm in arm with another lady; but she let go her hold as I approached, and addressed me. Her face was
covered
with a veil; so that, particularly in the glimmer and obscurity of the night, I could make no judgment of her features. Your name, I believe, sir, is Fleetwood. It is. Excuse my speaking to you in this strange manner. I cannot stay a moment. Perhaps I ought not to say a word. But meeting you thus in the instant,

my feelings will not be suppressed. Do not make yourself uneasy; I dare say, there is no cause; I only wish to warn you. For God's sake, what do you mean? What is it has happened? Only, sir, I do not like the behaviour of mrs. Fleetwood and the young ensign, her kinsman, to each other. They were at the Rooms to-night. Really, sir, their
manner of proceeding is quite shocking. I cannot tell you the particulars. I know that the ensign is wholly dependent on your bounty. Upon my word, their
indecorums will become the talk of every mouth. I cannot bear to see so good a man as, I am told, you are, so grossly abused. Look to yourself! And with these words the unknown broke from me, joined her companion, and in a moment was lost in the train of persons that poured out of the Rooms. I was too
much taken by surprise, to have

the thought of following her. Besides, of what use was it that I should know my informer? She was acquainted with nothing but circumstances that might furnish
ground for suspicion, not that afforded foundation for certainty. I might have asked of other persons who were present the same evening. I had no familiar acquaintance there. I could not endure to address such a question to
any living creature. What husband, not lost to feeling as well as decency, could frame his lips to ask, Did you observe any undue levity in the carriage of
my
wife? Did you see any thing that might lead you to suppose she was unfaithful, dishonest to my bed? I ought to have despised the tale of this anonymous informer. I could not drive it from my mind. Kenrick and my wife, thought I, must have gone far indeed, if
they no longer scruple to expose their familiarities before the whole

city. I recollected the scene at Barmouth, and how much I had been tortured by the gallantries of the fluttering Matthews. The idea pursued me to my pillow:
all night in my slumbers I imagined myself in the Rooms, and saw the indecorums and guilty intelligence of Kenrick and Mary. The pulses of my head beat
violently; my whole frame was in the paroxysm of a fever. I exclaimed, Shall all Bath see these things, and I alone be ignorant and secure? As the dawn advanced, my disorder in a great degree subsided. At breakfast I saw the parties against whom these suspicions had been insinuated. I searched for
guilt in their faces. I never saw a more charming and heart-felt serenity. The brightness of heaven was in their features. I looked round the room. I
involuntarily said to myself <it was the contrast only that struck me; I was far from entertaining a suspicion against my
, Under the olivetinctured skin of Gifford, beneath his scowling brow, and among the lines which time and climate have indented there,
hypocrisy might hide herself; but, in the other two, there is no opacity or discoloration to intercept the passage of a thought, there is not a furrow in
their
cheeks for treachery to lurk in. Mary, heaven has moulded its own image in thy features: if thou art false, oh, then heaven mocks itself! To the mind already indisposed to a liberal construction every indifferent circumstance is food for jealousy.---Had Mary left any thing behind, in removing
from one room to another? Kenrick was sure to be on the alert to present it to her. Did Mary prepare for a walk in the Circus, or the adjoining fields? Kenrick's gloves and hat were immediately forth-coming. Kenrick had a fine voice and an admirable taste in singing;

Mary had never, till now, discovered any vehement propensity that way; but now she was for ever requesting him to teach her his songs, and practising them with
him without end. They danced together at every interval of leisure; or rather rehearsed particular movements, in which one or the other did not think they
had
arrived at sufficient ease or grace; while either, as chance directed, hummed the tune to the other's steps. In this system of conduct Gifford was for ever
urging them to persevere. If at any time they observed the deep melancholy that seemed to come over me, he assured them that nothing could operate upon me as
a
restorative, more than the appearance of gaiety and good spirits in my wife. If I left the apartment in displeasure, he warned them against taking the least

notice, or suffering the smallest change in what they did. On the other hand, he was so frequently alone with

me, that they placed the most implicit confidence in his information as to the state of my thoughts and my wishes. In short he appeared to each party the good
genius of the houshold, so benevolent, so attentive, so perpetually on the watch to prevent mistakes, and to provide for the tranquillity and advantage of
all. I had already, previously to the horrible idea which had now been intruded upon me, and which perpetually disturbed my mind, been incautious and wicked enough
to complain to Gifford of the fickle temper of my wife. It is the first word, in cases of this sort, that rends in pieces the veil, as sacred as that which
modesty draws over the female form, by the intervention of which slight misapprehensions are enabled to digest and disperse themselves in silence. Having
proceeded thus far, I could not help naming to him the thoughts that beset

me about Kenrick. Gifford appeared to be astonished at the bare suggestion. He would stake his life upon the integrity of the ensign. Honesty flowed in the very blood of the Kenricks. Could I be so inattentive as not to see, how a
self-acquitting conscience brightened in the countenance of his brother, and gave liberty to all his motions? He must be free enough to put me upon my guard

against the vice of my disposition, and to warn me not, by ill construction, to poison what in itself was as guileless as infancy. Poor Kenrick! was he to be

the victim of my groundless guesses? He was glad I had named the matter to him, as it was of infinite consequence to check a habit of this sort in the
beginning. I had married a beautiful and excellent wife, through whose means he doubted not I should be blessed with a numerous progeny. What infinite
gratifications were in store for

me! But all these would be forfeited, if I did not repose in her the confidence she so justly demanded. The plagues that haunted a suspicious husband, were not
less numerous than the joys which waited upon a generous one; he saw in his wife the instrument of his dishonour, his bosom-serpent. He could not toy with,
and
open the flood-gates of affection to, his children, without fearing that a bystander who saw what passed behind the curtain, should deride him as the most
miserable of gulls. I named to him the woman, who had given me the mysterious hint at the door of the Upper Rooms. On this intelligence he appeared to ruminate. Did I know her? No. Had I the smallest guess who she could be? None upon earth. It was strange! very strange! It was

not easy to imagine what end she could have in view. An unknown could not have planned to begin with a step of this sort, to alienate my affections from my
wife, that she might afterward fix them upon herself? What enemies could mrs. Fleetwood, or could Kenrick have at Bath, where nobody knew them, and where in

every respect their appearance was such as to engage all hearts in their favour? Be silent, Gifford! interposed I. I cannot bear this methodical and cold-blooded reasoning! I am sure my wife is innocent! Are you going to turn the enemy of
her good name, and of my peace, at once? You are right, sir, quite right, in the confidence you thus generously repose. It does my heart good to see you take the thing so wisely! Who was this woman? Her warning voice pursues me for ever. Never mind who she was. There are people in the world, whose grand pleasure is malignity, whose delight it is to disturb the peace of families, who never
witness a scene of happiness, without a wish to crush it. This anonymous accuser is one of them. Let not your noble mind be disturbed by such hateful trash! Oh, Gifford, what a life is mine! Why did I marry? I know---I think, I ought to mistrust nothing between your brother and mrs. Fleetwood. Yet my sick
imagination is for ever busy, shaping the attitudes and gestures which this monitor of mine saw, or pretends to have seen. Was it with hands, with eyes, or
with lips, that they communicated their souls? Was the fire of lust in their glances, or did their smiles betray a conscious guilt? Did he thrust his arm
about
her waist, or with sacrilegious fingers invade the

transparency of her bosom?---Pity me, Gifford! pity me! It is not enough that the act of lewdness has not been perpetrated; if Mary has for one instant wished,
that the tie which makes her mine had never been, the warrant of our divorce is gone forth in the tribunal of souls. Why are she and the ensign so
continually
together, why so familiar, so mutually pleased with each other? It is the proof of their innocence! Guilt is ever on the alarm! Is there no such thing as brazen, unfeeling guilt? Be tranquil, sir! I will speak to my brother. You shall not hereafter be offended in the same way. What will you say to him? Will you bid him pursue a guilty purpose with more prudence and caution? No; let me at least see their proceedings genuine and
unforced! Otherwise I shall never

be able to form a just conclusion, and shall be secretly more tormented than ever. What Gifford did in the affair I know not; but the evil grew worse, as I now perceive was always the case, when this pernicious confident undertook for the
cure. I must however be ingenuous enough to confess, that it would not have been easy for the young people so to have acted, as to have given me
tranquillity. If they were familiar and sportive, I was distracted. Did they at any time appear more grave and less confidential? It was still worse. I believed, they
discerned the state of my mind, and were only playing a more treacherous game. About a week after, the question again arose of their going to the Rooms. As soon as I was aware of this, my mind was distracted by a variety of plans. Should I forbid the scheme? Should I go myself, and watch their behaviour? How should I act? I had recourse to my oracle. Gifford said, By all means give way to their purpose. If you interpose, you will occasion much disturbance, and a discovery of your jealous thoughts. If you
cannot yet dismiss these thoughts, go yourself, and watch their actions. If on the other hand you can adopt the generous confidence you so lately professed,

this is the favourable moment to resume yourself, and discard such pernicious cares. I will go myself! There is however a difficulty in that. How can you be sure that their conduct will not be quite different, when they see that your eye is upon them? Gifford, you are my friend. Undertake this office for me. You may even

witness their behaviour, at the same time that they shall not be aware of your presence. I, sir! I be a spy upon them! I play the eaves-dropper, and watch for intelligence from eyes! I enter into a plot against my brother! Where did you ever
perceive in me the qualifications, fitting me for so base a part? I thank you, Gifford! You have now told me all. I perceive plain enough that you know a great deal more than you have confessed.---It is very well! I have no
friend! I am the veriest wretch on earth!---If you did not believe them guilty, would you not eagerly embrace this opportunity for their vindication, which
would afford you a prospect, if your opinion corresponded with your professions, of becoming the ambassador of peace to all? By my soul, I believe them innocent! ---I never will harbour a thought to the

contrary.---And, to convince you of my sincerity, I will undertake the office you propose! The party took place in the manner which was thus previously settled. I waited with impatience for the breaking up of the assembly. When they came home, I
hurried Gifford to my private apartment. This was a thing that happened so frequently, as to have no tendency to excite notice. We drew near to the table, and I looked in his face. I never saw dejection so powerfully expressed. His visage was colourless; his eyes averted with a mournful
air; his hands hung down, as languid and incapable of motion. What have you seen? What have you observed? He spoke not. I need not ask you; I read it all in your countenance. No, nothing. Let us talk of it tomorrow morning. This hour! this instant! This is the moment of my fate. Gifford, by your eternal salvation I adjure you do not trifle with me! He then proceeded to relate a most artful tale. It contained most of those particulars, which my diseased imagination had before presented to my thoughts. It
contained every thing of impropriety that could be supposed to pass before a public assembly. When Kenrick and Mary caught his eye, and perceived for the
first
time that he was in the Rooms, he owned that their faces were immediately overspread with the deepest crimson. Yet every circumstance seemed to come from the

relater with unwillingness, and to be softened and qualified by the guardedness of his manner. From time to time he interposed, that this was nothing, that
it
was mere giddiness and

want of reflection, that all was meant in innocence. He concluded in a more earnest and impassioned tone:
And now I have discharged the most painful office of my life. Your character, my dear sir, engages all my partialities; I feel the warmest gratitude to you as
my benefactor. But never, never will I be put upon such a task again. What had I to do, to turn spy and accuser upon my brother? For God's sake, sir, let my

name never be mentioned in this business! I shall never forgive myself for this act of undue complaisance. By all these expressions he contrived to fix upon my mind the serious nature of the discoveries he had made. He proceeded:
Forget for ever the conversation of this evening! It ought never to have existed. You have obliged me to repeat trifles the most frivolous and contemptible. I
have sacrificed every thing

to the faithful performance of my task. Yet, in spite of all the pains I have taken to bring these trifles down to their true level, I can see that you
misconstrue every thing. Things make so different a figure, when brought regularly together in a narrative, from what they made as they actually passed. If
you
had yourself been present, you would have thought nothing of them.---You are greatly moved. Do nothing rashly! Give the whole a dispassionate examination! If

you make any conclusions to the disadvantage of my brother or mrs. Fleetwood, it is your own fault! Such conclusions have no support from me! I will stake my

soul on their innocence! Ten times during the narrative of Gifford, I felt impelled to seek the criminals, believing that such impudent neglect of all decorum, could lead to nothing
less than the immediate perpetration

of guilt. Once he withheld me by force, and succeeded in soothing my tumultuous passions. A second time, when I had almost reached the parlour-door, I was
called back by my own reflections, and said to myself, Whatever is done in a case of this sort, must be done with deliberation and solemnity. Afterward, I
met
mrs. Fleetwood's woman in the gallery, who appeased my passions, by informing me, in answer to my enquiries, that her lady was gone up to her chamber, and
that
the ensign was alone in the supper-room. I saw Mary no more that night. When I came to the chamber in which we rested, she was already asleep. I went softly, and drew back her curtains. There was a
sweet tranquillity in her countenance; her head reposed gracefully upon her snow-white arm. She looked, as one might conceive the archctype of her sex to
have
looked, before

guilt or fear found entrance into the world. I threw myself into an easy chair, and sat for some time in horrible musings. My mind vibrated between discordant and opposite judgments. Sometimes I said, No,
Mary, thou canst not be guilty! Guilt cannot incorporate with a demeanour like thine. Was ever any thing so artless, so simple, so heart-felt, as all thy
accents? The very playfulness of thy temper is the pledge of thy integrity. Can guilt be so sweetly frolic? Can guilt smile so like an angel? Again, my ideas took an opposite bent. Yes, said I, this is the very character of the world in which I live. Storms, and tempests, and volcanoes are all
beautiful or majestic. Destruction smiles on us from every side. Nature herself is the great parent-hypocrite, deluding us onward from the cradle to the
grave. Her daughters do but inherit

the same treacherous smiles, and tempt us to damnation!---Furious with these imaginations, I burst away from the bedchamber, and returned to the apartment
where I had listened to the conversation of Gifford. I will not injure, thought I, the ill-starred daughter of Macneil, unless I had proofs that rose to demonstration.--- Why do I inherit the guardianship of this
desolate orphan?---Yes, Mary, I feel that my fate is for ever involved with thine! The sacred rite that joined us at the altar, was a decree upon my life. Without thee, without thy affection, I must cease to be.---Then I am dead already! One thing however I can do. I can separate thee, and this youth, the disturber of my peace. It is madness to keep him here. As long as he remains, his most
innocent actions---God grant they indeed be innocent!---will fill my

brain with images of frenzy. Would he were removed to the furthest island of the Indian sea! Would he were merged in the caverns of the ocean!--- When he is
gone, my respiration will no longer be choaked. My judgment will be sound and free; and I will make a true estimate of the past. I invented an errand for the ensign to the estate of Macneil in Westmorland. I had received proposals for the purchase of it; and, not being myself inclined to
the journey, I requested Kenrick to take the business on himself. I further stated it as my pleasure, that he should set out by one or two o'clock of this
very
day. I communicated my plan to the ensign, as soon as he rose. He listened to it with that deference and desire to oblige, which characterised all his actions; but
I could see that he was not delighted with the expedition. And shall I return to Bath, my dear sir, when I have finished the business in Westmorland? No; after that, I have some employment

for you in Merionethshire. By that time your leave of absence will have expired. I watched the countenances of Mary and Kenrick at the breakfast-table. I could see that he had informed her of my plan. All parties were unusually blank. And so, my love, said she, after some minutes' general silence, we are going to lose my cousin? It is necessary, my dear. A business has occurred in which he can be of great use to me. I am sorry, methinks, resumed Mary, that it is so sudden. I had counted upon a visit of two months. Edward, (that was his name) I hope you will not forget
us! Never will I forget the pleasure I have experienced at Bath, or this dear fireside, while I have life! In conversation like this, frankly demonstrating

the sincere regard they entertained for each other, passed the time of breakfast. I withdrew early, and desired Kenrick to hold himself in readiness. When I
called him in, and had given him the necessary directions, I held out my hand to him (though with an ill grace) because nothing had passed between us that
entitled me to part with him in anger. He took it with both his. My dear uncle,---thus he delighted to call me: in his playful and familiar moments he gave my wife the appellation of aunt; a circumstance, trifling in itself,
yet strongly indicative of the innocence of his thoughts,---
My dear uncle, it breaks my heart to leave you thus. I can see I have offended you; all your motions prove it. What a foolish, hair-brained fellow am I! I
wonder when I shall grow discreet and sober like my brother. I have done

something heedless and disrespectful, or I have said something that I ought to cut out my tongue for. I am always getting into scrapes, and displeasing my best
friends. If you could see my heart, I am sure you would not be angry with me. That has always acknowledged you for the best of men; nothing disobedient or
unfaithful has ever harboured there.---Dear uncle, forgive me! Now I am going away, I cannot offend you. I only wish to carry your love with me. I only wish

you to say one word, to enable me to forgive myself. My heart melted over the boy.