Sacred, pure, and heaven-descended affection, female friendship! why art thou so seldom
found? Yet this celestial plant, though scarce, always, when of genuine growth, flourishes
fairest amidst the chilling storms of adversity; then bright it blooms, and twines its finest
tendrils with healing succour around the suffering and bursting heart! "Such to me, when expelled a parent's roof, and compelled to buffet against all
the horrors of indigence (for I had solemnly vowed never to behold your father more),
was Ellen Bradbury. How often has her fine form knelt before my unrelenting father, how
often has she clung to him, kissed his feet and bedewed them with her tears; and been as
often spurned from him! Oh! my son, the retrospect of these sorrowful moments, when
the generous Ellen would share with me her last guinea, are too painful to my
recollection-I am becoming incoherent-I must endeavour to preserve some method in
this, the last epistle I shall most probably write to you; which will inform you of some
events you are yet ignorant of; and which, as a fond mother's bequest and dying intreaty,
will be of infinite importance to you. "When I was about the age of seventeen, I was complimented, in the village where
I resided, for possessing much beauty; and my father being a wealthy farmer, and I his
only child, it was rumoured that my fortune would be large: this latter consideration,
more than the former, gained me many suitors in a county remarkable for its expence, and
where fortune is always sought for, as an appendage to personal qualifications, however
bountiful THEY may have been bestowed on the owner. At this time, a gentleman arrived
from London, who had recently lost his father; and a valuable farm being attached to his
patrimony, he came down to my father, through the recommendation of a friend, to
receive from him some instructions in the farming business, of which he was totally
ignorant. "There was nothing ever so repugnant to my frank disposition as any kind of
artifice; and there was a blunt honesty about this young man, united with the character of
the true gentleman, which highly pleased me: never did I behold so much candour in a
human countenance before; and indeed his whole person might then be said to be very
handsome. "The man of education, the innate well-born gentleman, as much surpasses the
rich country farmer which we farmers' daughters are in the habit of seeing, as a finished
courtier about St. James's does an inhabitant of Smithfield or Whitechapel: I, who had
received a boarding-school education in Queen-Square, and passed the vacations with a
rich relation in London, could but too easily, with many a degree of comparison, see the
difference between Mr. Marsham, my father's pupil, and the young men who in general


visited at our house. "Our souls soon looked out" from "their windows, the eyes," and
greeted each other:-alas! too soon, for my peace of mind, they found they were
congenial. Oh! let me not dwell on these scenes, which, though then delightful to my
thoughtless mind, now fill my bosom with shame and remorse! Suffice it to say, one fatal
evening, lost in the enthusiasm of love, your mother, with her honour, forfeited for ever
all her self-esteem. "Marsham had the highest ideas of female delicacy and chastity; I too plainly saw,
that though he had not ceased to love me with ardent fondness, yet he no longer respected
me-how should he? I despised myself. "He prepared to depart; and I really think he could not support the idea of calling
that woman his wife, who had not possessed sufficient command over herself to repel his
persuasions: he appeared to labour to express himself; a weight seemed pressing on his
heart, from which I, with a bosom torn by anguish, relieved him: "We have given way,
Marsham," said I to him, "to the indulgence of our mutual passion, and I well know that I
am despicable in your eyes; so hateful am I in my own, that I should now blush to hail
you by the title of husband-we part, never to meet again! "-"No, no, my beloved girl!" said he, tenderly embracing me; "I know it is true that your father has higher views for
you, for he has made me his confident; but I am willing instantly to carry you off and
marry you privately, if you will risk the possibility of his forgiveness when the deed is
done." There was a coldness in this constrained offer I could not bear, and I said, "No,
Mr. Marsham, as I never will carry deceit to the arms of any other man, so my true
affection for you shall never give indiscretion and female instability to yours-we part-
for ever!-I am fixed-"-"Oh! as to that," said your father, and as I then fancied, with a
kind of contempt, "what has passed between us, my dear Jane, need never be known; and
the gentleman your father has chosen for you is very wealthy, young, and by no means
disagreeable; I think the best you can do is to comply with his wishes, and let us
endeavour to forget each other."-Oh! man! man!-Ah! my son, retrieve the honour of
thy sex! be not like thy father in that one instance; and while thou art cautious of
betraying, never desert the innocence that may chance to trust in thee! "What became of your father at that moment I knew not, I saw no more of him;
the severe agonies of my mind caused me a fainting fit; and on my recovery, I found
myself lying on my bed, and the village apothecary, the very sight of whom I detested,
standing by me: this man was a vulgar, gossiping being, who went tattling from house to
house, and made himself welcome at many, by retailing all the scandal he could pick up. "It seems I had fainted in the parlour, and that Mr. Marsham had ran out, alarmed,
to call assistance; I was laid on my bed, restored by volatiles, and, as I kept my room the
next day, I saw your father no more, who departed in the evening. In a few weeks I
became extremely ill, and though I knew but too well the nature of my complaint, and
made myself appear as well as I could, yet my father would insist upon sending for this
hateful apothecary; poor Ellen, whom on the discovery of my pregnancy I had made my
confidante, was then in the room alone with me. "Ha! ha! Miss Matthews," said he, with
a malicious grin, as he felt my pulse, "why Miss- merciful heaven! why you are with-"
"Oh! sir," said the almost fainting Ellen, interrupting him before he had finished his
sentence, "indeed, sir, you are wrong,"-"Wrong, in what? Miss Bradbury," said he,
"why you would not let me finish what I had to declare; but in plain terms, we will leave


out the with, your friend, Miss Mathews, is about four months advanced in a state of
pregnancy! she best knows by whom." "And here," said I, franticly, as I fell on my knees,
"I solemnly vow, in the face of heaven, no one but the father shall ever know by whom." I
then whispered Ellen to take the same rash oath; then, with equal agitation, I turned to the
doctor, saying, "Oh! sir, spare my reputation; save, oh! save me from the wrath of a
parent;" and taking my purse, containing ten guineas and some loose silver, I put it into
his ready-opening hand, and said, "Oh! dear sir, accept this trifle from a grateful heart,
and I will do much more for you, you shall not find me ungrateful."-"Oh! no," said
Ellen, "spare but my friend, be secret, and here, dear doctor." She then gave him her little
stock, consisting of about three guineas; and as he took the money, he said, "Do you think
I would not perform a good-natured action without fee or reward? however, I will accept
these proofs of your generosity, and be only your banker; you may want this, if your
father is unrelenting." "Surely, thought I, I have been mistaken in this man; he promises to be my friend,
should my transgression reach the ears of my parent. I kissed his hands, I blessed the
wretch who was meditating my instant ruin; for the first thing he did, after he had quitted
me, was to hasten to my father and inform him of the situation I was in; who no sooner
heard it, than, without mercy, without listening for one instant to my cries and intreaties,
turned me immediately out of doors, without money, or any other clothes than those I at
that wretched minute wore. "The Misses Bradbury were without father or mother; but Ellen was under the
charge of a sister near eighteen years older than herself: she was still a very beautiful
woman, and possessed much liberality of mind and sentiment; but, to guard her pretty
young sister, she affected more rigidity of manners than were natural to her real
disposition, which I have been since told was always uncommonly gay and lively; but she
was, at that time, yet of an age not to escape censure, with her very fine person, had she
not been uncommonly prudent and rather reserved. "Ellen was afraid to say much to her on my account, as she happened then not to
be greatly in her sister's good graces, having formed an attachment which Miss Bradbury
thought very imprudent in a girl who had very little fortune of her own. "This predilection of Ellen's was very strong towards a young clergyman of the
name of Ringwood; who had nothing but a small curacy for his support: the ardent love
however that he felt for the lovely Ellen, obscured his reason; and, without reflecting on
the indigence to which he might reduce the object of his affections, he was continually
urging her to a private marriage: to this Ellen would by no means consent, fearful of
giving offence to her amiable sister, whom she tenderly loved. "This sweet pattern of friendship, my dear Ellen, whose small fortune was in the
hands of her sister till she should come of age (and Miss Bradbury had been left a very
handsome independency by her god-mother), affected to stand in want of some trifles for
the approaching winter, and borrowed five guineas of her guardian sister; these she
presented me; and I took an humble lodging, anxiously awaiting the time of my delivery,
while she continually essayed, but all in vain, to melt the obdurate heart of my father in
my favour. My generous friend suffered me not to want the common necessaries of life;
but this was all she could do for me; alas! I had been used to its luxuries. "In the mean time I found it impossible to subsist, and pay my rent with the little
succour my poor friend could afford me; and my inhuman landlady, observing the state of
my finances, told me her character was dear to her, and she could have no young lady's
bastards brought forth, indeed, in her house! while various conjectures sprang up in the
village about the father of my child, whom I was resolved to conceal, and that from the
tenderest concern for his safety: not that my father was a violent man, or one likely to
resort to sword or pistol, as means of vengeance: he was also very infirm; but he might
have recourse to law: he might even compel my seducer, as he would call him, to marry
me: horrid thought! that Marsham, whose love of me and my refined way of thinking,
wishing to be only free and spontaneous, and that his mind and heart should be mine, and
mine alone, should be compelled to do me justice, by marrying me! I should have been
even sorry that my forlorn and abandoned state had caused him, from kind compassion, to
have become my husband; for,
"Could it bring me peace, or heal my shame,
"That pity gave, what love refus'd to share?" "However, this vow of Ellen's and mine caused Miss Bradbury to set her face
against me; for it was confidently reported that the father of my child was one of the
lowest labourers about my father's farm; he was uncommonly handsome for such a sort
of man, but he was vulgarity itself: I had often remarked to several people how handsome
he was, and particularly to Miss Bradbury: and one night, as we were unseen spectators of
an harvest supper amongst the labourers, this unfortunate man was called upon to drink
the health of the prettiest girl in the village that he knew: he immediately swore a great
oath, that there was not such a pretty girl in the whole world as his young mistress, and
added, with all the coarseness natural to such a being, "Ecod! I know she's as dainty a
lass as ever a man would wish to kiss." The apothecary and his wife, with Miss Bradbury,
stood next me, where we were peeping at the jovial crew. "There's a conquest, Miss
Matthews," said they; and I, like a silly girl, blushed and motioned immediately to
withdraw; but it was more from the enraptured and love-darting eyes of your father, who
stood on the other side of me, than from the admiration of the clown. "The apothecary, however, during my pregnancy, threw out his inuendos that
there was little doubt about the father; especially, by my determining to conceal him. "No
doubt," Miss Bradbury said, "but I was ashamed of such a vulgar amour; she did not think
my taste could have been so grovelling; and though she was very willing to grant every
indulgence and forgiveness to those who went astray, yet she could not endure a woman,
who had shewn herself so sensual, and made the first advances; which must have been the
case indeed in the present instance." My father soon took care to get the poor fellow
pressed and sent to sea; without daring to risk the knowledge of so fatal a truth, by asking
the unhappy wretch any questions. "How much ought my sex to take warning from an error like mine! they may
assure themselves that the calumny which attacks an imprudent female increases her fault
to tenfold its imagined enormity, by the malevolence of that sting which her own guilty
conduct has provoked and barbed against her. "Poor Ellen, as a last resource, flew to the apothecary. "You said," urged she,
sobbing, "you said you would only consider yourself as our banker, or rather, as the
banker of Miss Matthews;-the ten guineas, or half of them, will now be of infinite
service to her,-she perishes!-her time draws nigh, and what will become of her? I have
had so much money of my sister lately, that she reproves me for my extravagance, and I
dare not ask her for more." "Me her banker?" said the cruel wretch, "to such a shameless, abandoned, young
woman, who has seduced a poor ignorant fellow, and has now been the cause of
banishing him from his country."-"Oh! indeed," said my faithful Ellen, "he is not the
father of that child which my dearest friend expects every day to usher into this world of
sorrow and misery. Do not deny her a part of what she so generously gave you. "-"I'll
tell you what, Miss Ellen," said he, "if you are sure that Tom Smith is not the father of
that child, you surely know who is; and as perhaps the discovery might do something in
reconciling her father to her, tell me who it is, or go out of my house this instant." "Sir,"
said she, "I will obey you, and leave you to the bitter reproaches of your own sordid mind:
I do not know who is the father; but I know my friend so well, that I am convinced she
never would submit to the embraces of a low, untaught and vulgar man, one from the very
dregs of society." He gave an impudent laugh in her face, and made use of terms that
would only sully my pen to transcribe. She returned to me, with a countenance on which
sat despair, without the smallest illumination of hope. "My dear Jane," said she, "suffer
me to tell your father this dreadful secret."-"Oh! never," replied I, "both my vow and
yours are registered in heaven; never, never must we break it. No, Marsham, no; thou hast
abandoned me to want, shame, and infamy: of all this thou art ignorant; and never will I
endanger thee, or impair thy moderate fortune." "Suffer me," said the charming girl, "to
write to him, and inform him of your situation." I told her, that if she attempted such a
thing, she must forfeit my friendship and esteem for ever: at the same time, I assured her,
that when the time arrived that I could with certainty inform him he was the father of a
living child, I would write to him myself and let him know the event. "What now shocked me most of all was, that the character of my Ellen began to
suffer, from her known and constant attachment to my worthless self: even her Ringwood
began to treat her with some degree of coldness, and requested her one day to break off
her connection with me; she answered him to the following purpose. "My dear Ringwood, you have frequently asked me to wed you privately; I have
as often protested against it; you have told me that you had friends in the commons,
willing and able to grant you a special licence whenever you applied: should I take this
rash step, my amiable sister, much more frank-hearted and good-humoured than she
outwardly appears, would forgive me, notwithstanding the invalidity of our marriage,
from my being not quite of age. Now, Ringwood, I have often refused to grant you your
strenuously urged request; I now, perhaps undergoing the mortification of being refused,
offer myself to you." "The enraptured lover knew not how to express his grateful thanks and
acquiescence: "But hold," said Ellen, "it is on one condition alone I am yours. My
unfortunate friend, Miss Matthews, must become a part of our family; she must share,
equally with us, our scanty fortunes, and find an asylum under the roof of our humble
cottage, for herself and her babe." Ringwood appeared embarrassed: "You hesitate,"


added she; "if you refuse, I never will be yours. "-"Retract that heart-rendering sentence,
my adored Ellen," said he, "I will ever be the friend of your friend; and under our roof she
shall find protection, and every comfort in my power to bestow." This generous scheme,
however, I never would consent to, as it might perhaps injure the young man in his
ecclesiastical promotion; but I acted a deceptive part, and affected to accede to his liberal
offers. During the delays always attendant on these stolen weddings, you, my beloved
son, made your appearance, in a wretched hovel, where a woman who had formerly
worked on our farm, permitted me to lye in: it was there, my child, you first drew your
vital existence. "Had you been of my own sex, it is most probable I should never have given your
father any intimation of your birth; but I wished my son to be educated as a gentleman,
and to feel the protection of a father. I informed him therefore, that though I wished to
have no farther claim upon him myself, yet now a dearer claim called upon him and his
parental feelings. I forbore to say any thing of my indigent state; only told him, as my
father would never see the child or me, whom he could not forgive, I requested him as a
father, and as a man, to attend to his education, and let his boy be placed in some
situation which might not be a discredit either to his parents or himself. He sent me a
handsome remittance; requesting, as I was so young a mother, you might be put out to
nurse: I complied with his request, and repaired to my dear friend, Mrs. Ringwood, who,
with her worthy husband, often accompanied me in my frequent visits to you. "At the age of five years old your father placed you at a boarding-school, not
many miles from where I resided; whither he frequently went down to see you, and, as I
was informed, absolutely doted on you. I was cautious of meeting with this destroyer of
my peace, and frequently intreated of my beloved Mrs. Ringwood to feign that I was
actually dead: she always replied, "Wait till your son may be sent farther from you; for I
have been informed that Mr. Marsham, when he is arrived at a proper age, means to send
him to a public school, or place him as an apprentice to an eminent surgeon, a genteel
profession, and for which he himself had been destined by his late father." "Ah! my son, when you had entered your eighth year, your father sent you to a
respectable academy near London, and for some years I saw you no more! Eventful
epocha of my life! your grandfather then lay on the bed of death; he sent for me,
embraced me, and gave me entire forgiveness. "On opening his will, I found myself the sole heiress to his immense wealth, with
a fortune in the hands of an eminent banker amounting to twenty thousand pounds; but
thus restricted, that by no means should I leave you one shilling of it, until you attained
your twenty-fourth year: that day, that I obtained my parents' forgiveness, was my birthday:
I just became that age; the lawyer sat by his bedside, penning the will; and he said to
me, in a low voice, "Miss Matthews, it is well known, that illegitimate children have no
right to any name but that of their mother: your father is not well pleased, that though you
have had the modesty not to call your son by your own name, yet that you should think of
giving him one of a long-valued friend: cannot you change it, and adopt some other?" My
heart rose to my lips, I was about to break my vow, and tell them of your father; but then,
joy at the assurance that my parent had no suspicion of my Marsham; terror, lest violent
anger on the discovery might not only injure him on his bed of death, but also him I could
never cease to love, and his still more dearly beloved offspring, made me check myself;


and as your father had desired you might bear his name, I said, "Sir, the name pleased me:
old Mr. Marsham was my godfather; I esteem the character of his family though unknown
to me, and I do them no injury by adopting a name which is common in England; nor can
I think of changing it, as my son has been known by it for seven years." He said no more,
but continued his writing. "In this will, I found I was strictly forbade to marry your father, whoever he might
be: this filled my eyes with tears of anguish and indignation, because it convinced me that
my father had died in full belief that you was the child of Thomas Smith. Beware, my
son, oh! beware of making rash vows; they argue a temerity in us wretched children of the
dust, which mars the plan of our creation; poor, helpless, dependent beings in that great
scale; unable of ourselves, to say what shall be the event of the next moment. "Without hesitation, I gave the house, the farm, and all its lands, to my dear
respected friends, the Ringwoods; with liberty, at their deaths, to bequeathe them to
whomsoever they might please to make their heirs. I only requested in return, that Ellen
would write to your father, that I was no more; and you was told the same, until I should
be able to entrust you with the secret. "The health of my dear Mrs. Ringwood had been sadly declining since the birth of
her little girl: she is four years younger than yourself; from an infant, she promised to be a
pattern of female loveliness, and was the perfect resemblance of her angelic mother. "I was informed your father bore the news of my death not without being tenderly
affected for me, but with that resignation and philosophy which shewed his love towards
me had never equalled mine for him: no, it was rather the fugitive impression made on a
man possessing all the ardour of youth, by a young creature in her first bloom, and whose
person had the universal reputation of being beautiful. "But how delightfully was I compensated, in hearing the deep affliction which my
supposed death gave to your yet infantine mind! "At the time you was about nine years old, I lost my inestimable Ellen; and her
husband, whose love for her increased, as each day passed over their heads, expired in
less than a twelvemonth after, leaving their only daughter solely dependent on Miss
Bradbury, to whom they bequeathed all that I had given them. Miss Bradbury adopted the
Mrs. to her maiden name, and with her niece removed into Essex. I had at this time
retired into Devonshire, where I passed, under a feigned name, for a widow; and no one
but my banker, in whose hands I placed my fortune, knew that Jane Matthews was yet
living: you recollect this worthy man accompanying me, when with sweet filial fondness
you witnessed, with overflowing joy, my resuscitation; you was then an apprentice, at the
age of fourteen. "Finding my health gradually decaying, and the approach of death sensibly near, I
made my will; I learned, with much satisfaction, your father's intention of providing for
you by a genteel profession, knowing well that I could leave you independent of it. "As you will, no doubt, receive also some other advantages from a father, who
evinces much affection for you, I have bequeathed, in my will, ten thousand pounds of the
twenty yet in my banker's hands, to Lucy Ringwood, the daughter of the first among
female friends, and a worthy divine, Ellen and Percival Ringwood; all this you will find
explained and enlarged upon in my last will and testament, now in the hands of Mr.
Molesworth, attorney at law, residing in the village of Freelingham, where you was born,


in the parish of St. John's, county of Suffolk. I am told that Lucy Ringwood promises to
possess all that fascination so pleasing to your sex in ours, and which peculiarized her
lovely mother. Let me warn you, my beloved Matthew, against the easy lapse of the heart,
in the season of youth: reflect, that you never can espouse Lucy Ringwood, after my
bequest to her, without an appearance of that sordid interest which would desire to obtain
the whole of your mother's property: I look upon you both as my children; love her like a
kind brother no more. I have equally divided my fortune between ye; but it must be
separately, or it is no longer gratitude on my part towards her valued mother, who
succoured me when I had not a shilling. Oh! no, if Lucy Ringwood and you were united
in marriage, it would be only a desire for it to descend to my children's children. Beware! ah! beware of her attractions; shew yourself uninterested, in every respect, when you
present her, from me, with an independent fortune. "An humble green turf will cover the remains of your mother, on the left hand;
and close to the stately monument she erected over your grandfather: kneeling on that
rustic grave, there breathe a promise (and your mother's spirit will rest in peace,) that no
admiration of Lucy Ringwood's person may tempt you to express a wish, that she should
bestow herself (for with herself her fortune must be bestowed) on you. Yet, ah! take
warning by your unhappy mother, and make no solemn vow! promise only to obey her to
the utmost of your power: all vows are rash; for when made, they must be strictly kept;
for oh! what sin can exceed that of perjury. "We know not what to-morrow may bring
forth;" nor what is hidden in the secret abysses of time: from my religious observance of a
solemn vow, I have suffered ignominy, shame and reproach!