Unmarked by one interesting event, unadorned by one meritorious action; and this conviction makes the retrospect painful.”—
“My parents died when my sister and I were in infancy, and the care of us devolved on my uncle, Sir John Clayton, who is one of the oldest baronets in England, and to whose titles and estates, I have the honour to be heir. He has been a father to the orphans left to his charge, and yet his very kindness has been productive of ill, both to my sister and to myself. From my infancy I had a prediliction for study; my uncle’s education had been much neglected, and a consciousness of his defects, made him always shun the conversation of literary men. He was anxious that I might be spared any mortification, similar to what he had experienced in their society, therefore was delighted with my evident taste for reading, and encouraged it, by giving me a tutor, who to an extensive acquaintance with ancient and modern authors, added a knowledge of the world, and living manners, rarely found in professed scholars. He had been in almost every part of the habitable globe, had served many foreign powers, and was intimately acquainted with all the European courts. Under his tuition, I devoured learning until every branch of it was familiar to me. I lived in my study, and my sister being left my uncle’s sole companion, was taught to know all the points of a horse, as well as any of the grooms, regularly went out to hunt, and could bring a bird down with unerring aim. I take shame to myself, for having observed her education, without endeavouring to correct its defects. To confess the truth, I was immersed so deeply in literature, that every other consideration seemed trifling, and my uncle had no idea that his plans could be improved, so long as my sister exhibited in her countenance, the glow of health, and the smile of good humour; accordingly I became a fastidious bookworm, and she an eccentric amazon.” Edmund smiled at these sketches, and Clayton proceeded. “The first mortification that I ever knew, was a refusal from my uncle, when I asked permission of him to travel. His reason for the peremptory negative which he put upon my request, was that during his life, he could never part with either of his dear brother’s children, the precious legacies of fraternal love, but that at his death, which could not in the course of nature be long delayed, I should find myself master of his wealth and of my own actions. I was obliged to submit to a control, imposed in so affectionate a manner; I resumed my studies, but I regretted every day that I wasted in retirement, at a period of life, when the perceptions are exquisite, the imagination ready to receive every delightful impression, and youthful hopes on the rack of expectation. My tutor had fired me with disdain for a life of inglorious ease, my heart throbbed with ambition, history and poetry had been my favorite studies, and every page I read, placed glorious examples before my eyes, or in the sweetest strains celebrated exploits, which I contemplated until I longed to emulate them. “In this frame of mind, I was deprived of my tutor; he died suddenly, and left me almost inconsolable. The solitude or confined society of Clayton Hall, became more than ever insupportable to me. My uncle was miserable on witnessing my sorrow; I once more entreated him to suffer me to go abroad, but in vain, I then requested his permission to

enter into the army, this likewise he refused, but at last as a compromise, presented me with a commission in the guards. “I went immediately to town, to enter on my new occupation, but not to be interested in it, not to be happy. “I had never been from home before, consequently was an utter stranger to the manners of the higher classes of society, and I soon found that they were not suited to my taste. The men appeared to affect rudeness and indifference, the women contempt of shame, and neglect of virtue. “Unknown to them when sensual pleasures cloy, To fill the languid frame with finer joy;
Unknown those powers that raise the soul to flame, Catch every nerve and vibrate through the frame.”
“No one seemed to feel as I felt, I saw others rise to the unmeaning routine of the day, not indeed with an air of interest, for that has been long voted out of fashionable faces, but at least with an air of complacency. They idled away the day as a thing of course, and retired to rest perfectly contented with looking forward to a repetition of the same nameless pursuits. Life had not for me “vitality enough to keep it from putrefaction,” and loathing its insipidity I looked round for something to give it a relish. “I associated with wits professed, but I soon found that they laughed at no one’s jokes but their own. I entered into literary society, there also I saw that too often admiration of ingenuity and talents, was lost in envy towards their possessor. The sublime alone could please me, and I despised the little occurrences of life, whilst I sighed for a succession of great events. I sickened at the homage paid to valour, and I plunged deeper into company to avoid my own reflections; unfortunately my ideas were too refined, and too far removed from common life to be interested by common scenes, and common actors.” He paused, and then repeated from Shenstone, with such pathos that the tears started into Edmund’s eyes:
“Ah me, my friend, it will not, will not last,
This fairy scene, that cheats our youthful eyes;
The charm dissolves, th’aerial music’s past, The banquet ceases and the vision flies. Smit with the charms of fame whose lovely spoil, The wreath, the garland, fire the poet’s pride;
I trimm’d my lamp, consum’d the midnight oil,
But soon the paths of health and fame divide. And vain are books, the sage’s wisdom vain,
What has the world to bribe our steps astray! Ere reason learns by studied laws to reign,
The weaken’d passions self-subdu’d obey. Tedious again to curse the drizzling day,
Again to trace the wintry tracts of snow,
Or sooth’d by vernal airs, again survey
The selfsame hawthorns bud or cowslips blow. Ah no! ‘tis o’er! the dear delusion’s o’er! A stagnant breezeless air becalms my soul;
A fond aspiring candidate no more,
I scorn the prize before I reach the goal.”
“I am ready to acknowledge,” continued he, “that my mortifications have been imaginary, and my disappointments have had their foundation in my own romantic expectations; I regard myself as a mirror, of which the surface, though exquisitely polished, magnifies the failings of those whom it reflects, and which is too brittle to be useful. My ideas have been refined till they have become chimeras, and my sensibility exalted to a pitch of morbid acuteness. “Last winter I met Lady Rosamond Courtney. In the circle of fashion, she shone like a star of the first magnitude; her beauty attracted me, her talents confirmed my admiration, the haughtiness of her manner did not appear to me a fault; I called it dignity; for I was sick of the condescending familiarity of misses of quality, and I believed myself happy in gaining permission to carry my attentions beyond the mere forms of politeness, and to renew them during the summer at Castle Drelincourt. I fondly thought that I had at length met with an object in whom I could be interested, with whom life would be desirable; but I am doomed to be disappointed, and love does not favour me with his sweets unalloyed by bitters. I admire Lady Rosamond’s charms as much as I did the first day when I beheld her; and her talents yet more, for I daily witness their powers; but in woman, the dignity of Juno and the wisdom of Minerva, is not all that is requisite, the same love of impossibility pursues me: I sigh for perfection amid the frailty of human nature; and I vainly seek in Lady Rosamond, the mild grace and melting sensibility which ought to be the peculiar characteristics of the fair sex. Besides, her behaviour of late to me, is not what I approve, nor ought she to condescend to adopt it. Where a woman will tyrannize before marriage, a man must degrade himself by unnecessary concessions; and it too frequently happens, that after the indissoluble ceremony is past, the man assumes his rights with additional severity; and the lady, in the sullenness of despair, submits only from conviction of the fruitlessness of opposition. “On this subject however, I confess that I ought to remain silent; for, undoubtedly the portionless daughter of an earl, descends from her dignity in accepting the hand of a simple baronet in reversion.”
These words, uttered in a severe and sarcastic tone, concluded Clayton’s recital; and, after a few arguments on life, and its general disappointments, the gentlemen concluded their discourse, by proposing a stroll during the gleam of sunshine which then appeared. We hope that our readers have not forgotten the trying situation of Lady Rosamond during the above conversation; and that they have already compassionated the feelings which must have been excited in her breast by the latter part of the discourse. She

was shocked when she found it was of a confidential nature, as she had flattered herself that it would turn either on literary topics, or that the parties would pursue their respective studies in silence. Whilst however, she hesitated whether or not to make her proximity to them known, every moment encreased her doubt, and the awkwardness of her situation, until she had heard too much to gain credit for disinterestedness in refusing to hear more; she therefore unwillingly remained a listener. She was much gratified with the sentiments of her lover and Edmund, but when the former spoke exclusively of himself, she could not but be attentive; she heard with pleasure his unvarnished tale, and rejoiced in his unaffected abhorrence of every thing mean or profligate. He mentioned her name, her heart throbbed; she anticipated his praises, and her cheeks were crimsoned with the fear of being unworthy of hearing them in that unsuspected manner. But what new emotions did not his words create in her bosom! pride, resentment, self-reproach, wounded love, and mortified vanity, contributed at once to give them poignancy! She heard the whole; tears trembled in her eyes, suppressed sobs filled her bosom, but this was no moment to indulge them; she wished but to escape unobserved; for if she before feared discovery, when she expected only her lover’s praises, how did she now dread it, when humiliated by his censure! she blushed, though alone, and must have sunk had any one witnessed her confusion. She was however relieved by the departure of the gentlemen, and she then resolved to go to her room through the same door by which they had made their exit, in order to avoid meeting any one in the gallery, through which she must have passed by the other door. She resolved likewise to take no notice of what she had overheard, but to appear in an unconcerned temper, and to give the presumptuous lover, who could see faults in his mistress, his dismissal, without assigning any other reason than a change of inclination, and an absolute diminution of her regard. If Lady Rosamond had possessed the control over her feelings, which she flattered herself she could exercise, this scheme would doubtless have been admirable, and the sweetness of the revenge that she meditated, might have consoled her for the bitter mortification which gave rise to it; but Lady Rosamond was not quite the stoic she believed herself, for her heart possessed great sensibility, though her pride often steeled her from its attacks. In going out of the library, she unfortunately met her father. Her agitation was too great to escape the eye of parental affection, particularly as she was a favorite daughter. The Earl enquired the cause of it in the tenderest accents. Poor Lady Rosamond, losing the command with which she had smothered her vexation, in a voice, choaked with hysteric sobs and drowned in tears, rashly entreated her father no longer to consider Captain Clayton as a suitor for her favor, but to give him his dismissal immediately. Astonished at the sudden change in his daughter’s inclinations; mortified at her rejection of a man, whom he already esteemed, and shocked at the breach of hospitality of which she urged him to be guilty, the Earl employed every entreaty to learn the motives of her conduct, and every argument to shew its absurdity; but his efforts were vain; for though Lady Rosamond was too just to condemn, where she could not believe censure to be actually due, yet was she also too proud to submit to it, even whilst she acknowledged its justice. The Earl was therefore obliged, however unwillingly, to aquiesce in his daughter’s wishes. She begged of him to conceal them from the rest of the family; and he, in return, requested her to compose herself, tenderly assuring her, that if he ever appeared desirous of influencing the

inclinations of his children, in so important a step as that of marriage, he was prompted solely by his anxiety for their welfare, and his regard to their happiness. Rude were the storms which deep thro’ my sad breast, Have striv’n the gems of virtue to expel,
Rebellious passions robbed my soul of rest,
But in despondency’s most baleful hour,
I felt within a renovating power Strengthen my soul, and all at last is well. ANN BATTEN CRISTALL. AFTER the relation we have already given, it is unnecessary to inform our readers, that Captain Clayton was civilly informed that the continuance of his addresses was not desirable. Lady Rosamond having gratified her revenge, by the haughty indifference and frigid coldness which she displayed, yet found all her pride insufficient, to prevent her from regretting her precipitance in parting with her lover, whose merits had made a real impression on her heart; and the dictates of an excellent judgment, when the clouds of passion, by which it had been obscured, were dispersed, too plainly informed her, that it would have been more consistant with true wisdom to reform her errors, than to quarrel with the condemner of them. But all was now over, Clayton had taken his leave, with manly fortitude, and his sister coolly observing that they were thrown out, and had run on the wrong side of the post, went to the stable to see Highflyer rubbed down preparatory to her departure, and then returning to the house, amused herself in the intermediate time, by cracking a whip with such dexterity, that Lady Maria’s nerves, and a valuable set of china, were in the most imminent danger of being shattered. This unpleasant occurrence, seemed for some time to cloud the cheerfulness of the remainder of the circle. Lady Maria received Breresford’s attentions so coldly, that he trembled lest dismission should be the order of the day. He therefore redoubled his assiduities, and displayed every day new proofs of his knowledge in the polite arts. The most ingenious and beautifully executed trifles were presented to the insensible fair one, and the newest music, and books, with the most elegant trinkets, daily courted her acceptance; but though our inimitable poet says, “Win her with gifts,” yet in the present instance they failed to touch Lady Maria’s heart, for its wishes pointed to Edmund, who entangled in an intrigue which he had prosecuted without passion, and continued through irresolution, was deprived of his own esteem, and durst no longer solicit that of an object, whom he secretly contrasted every moment with Lady Laura, and every moment lamented the infatuation which had first led him to forget her worth, but to relieve himself from his uneasy reflections, he continued daily to seek refuge at Carisbrook Castle, where he was always received with smiles. One day as he was going thither, he met Clayton, whose eyes beamed unusual animation; far from appearing a despairing lover,—Hope seemed personified in him, and his whole countenance was animated by cheerfulness; “Give me joy, my dear Edmund,” he exclaimed, “I am again a lover, a happy favoured lover, the mountain nymph sweet liberty woos my acceptance of her charms, fair science and rosy health join their voices,

and to-morrow, I wing my flight to classic ground.” After this rapsody, to which Edmund listened in amazement, fearing lest disappointment had ravaged his friend’s understanding, Clayton proceeded to inform him that Sir John, highly indignant at the capricious treatment which he had met with, and fearing from the listless dejection of his manner, that it had made a deeper impression on him than he wished to acknowledge, voluntarily proposed the measure, to which he had before refused to consent, and advised his nephew to resign his commission, to set out immediately on the grand tour, and to spend some time in every place worthy of observation. “The good man,” continued Clayton, “lost all his reluctance to part with me, in his fears for my health; and conjured me to make my expedition as pleasurable as possible, assuring me of an unlimited command over his purse during my absence, and reproaching himself with having kept me at home so long; whilst I inwardly rejoiced at the pale cheek, and hollow eyes, which had procured my emancipation, nor did I ever survey my countenance with more complacency, than the moment after its ghastly expression, and cadaverous hue had produced such agreeable effects. For,
“It was not by vile loitering in case,
That Grace obtained the brightest palm of art, That soft, yet ardent Athens learn’d to please, To keen the wit, and to subdue the heart,
In all supreme! complete in every part. It was not thence majestic Rome arose,
And o’er the nations shook her conqu’ring dart, For sluggard’s brows the laurel never grows, Renown is not the child of indolent repose.”
Edmund was delighted with the animated tone in which Clayton pronounced these lines, and congratulated him on his pleasing prospects, assuring him that he should be happy if he could be of the slightest service to him, for which purpose, he would give him letters to many eminent men in Florence, and one to his father, who could introduce him to all the literati in Tuscany, and would be proud of doing it to one, who could so well appreciate their merits. After some further conversation they parted, with mutual expressions of regard, and Edmund returned to Castle Drelincourt to write his letters. He found the ladies already informed of Clayton’s intentions, by means of Henry, who had seen him, and was rallying Lady Rosamond on the sudden desertion of her lover. Edmund took his seat near the work-table opposite to Lady Emma, who seemed lost in thought, and employed only in cutting a watch-paper; but though she appeared to move the scissars unconsciously, yet the design was completed with all the elegant exactness, which characterised her most trifling undertakings. “What miserable dogs we male creatures are,” exclaimed Henry addressing himself to Edmund, “we are unlucky beings, subject to the arbitrary law of the fair, from whose decree we have no appeal. Here is Rose, not content with depriving her humble adorer of the light of her presence, must banish him even from his native country, and I tremble, lest her cruelty should drive him into uninhabited desarts, or unknown shores: confess, Rose, that you feel some

qualms of conscience, some signs of returning love.” This was a subject, on which Lady Rosamond was ill-disposed to jest, and she replied with a grave countenance, and severe manner, “Love cannot exist without esteem, and I have ceased to esteem Captain Clayton, though I sincerely wish him every happiness.” “Ah!” exclaimed Emma, “you are fortunate in self-command, fortunate in being able to withhold love, when you are obliged to deny esteem, for surely it is possible to continue to love, when we can no longer esteem.” Edmund felt the full force of these words, and was covered with confusion, when his eyes met those of Lady Emma, who was pale with emotion. A severe sentiment uttered in a bitter tone, was so great a novelty from her, that it drew general observation. “Bravo, my little Emma,” exclaimed Henry, “all for love, or the world well lost, I like the noble sentiment.” Lady Maria (addressing her by the appellation, child,) enquired with more ill-humour than was natural to her, how long she had been a casuist in the mysterious science of love? And whence were the sources of her experience? Lady Rosamond coldly observed, that young people would have romantic ideas, till experience taught them their fallacy, and Emma vexed at having betrayed her sentiments, and finding them treated with ridicule, burst into tears, and left the room. Lady Drelincourt mildly reproved her daughters, for speaking harshly to a sister, so gentle and unoffending. Henry laughed, and said, “Women were so fond of mischief, that they would quarrel with each other, rather than not enjoy it.” And Edmund retired to the library to commune with himself.—
“Gentle and unoffending, she is indeed,” he exclaimed, “but I in wretched folly could throw this pearl away, richer than all its tribe, and for what? For a painted doll, artificial allurements, negative pleasures!” He continued to reprobate his conduct in very severe terms, till he had exhausted all the forms of condemnation that he could recollect in English, French, and Italian, he then after sincerely lamenting the past, began to form resolutions for the future, and determined first to go no more to Carisbrooke Castle, which contained no inducement to an honorable man, secondly to listen no more to the suggestions of vanity, which are beneath the consideration of a wise man, and lastly to endeavour to render himself worthy of Lady Emma’s love, as including all the real blessings that a well-placed virtuous attachment can bestow. Having made these resolutions he felt more easy, and after having written his letters, was enabled to join the family at dinner, with the serenity which a consciousness of rectitude and honour, never fails to spread over the mind of the fortunate possessor. ——A prudent father,
By nature formed to guide and rule her choice, Resigns his daughter to a husband’s care, Who with superior dignity, with reason,
And manly tenderness, will ever love her;
Not first a kneeling slave, and then a tyrant. THOMSON. THE tender attentions of a few days, and a continued absence from Carisbrooke Castle, so completely reinstated Edmund in Emma’s good graces, that he ventured to request her permission to inform Lord Drelincourt of his love, and solicit him to sanction it by his approbation. The timid and agitated Emma, vainly endeavoured to put a negative on this unexpected entreaty; the words died on her quivering lips; she looked round the room, but her confusion encreased on finding that she was alone with him; she reddened, and turned pale alternately, and Edmund too delicate to add to the embarrassment, from which, however, he drew the most favorable omens, considered her silence as sufficiently consenting to his wishes, and slightly hinting his hope of her suffering him to believe it so; he turned the conversation to a subject less interesting, in order to give her time to recover her tranquillity before the entrance of a third person. When Emma retired to her dressing-room, she gave way to all the sensations of animated delight, never felt but once, never but on the first avowal of a first lover. In this instance they were perfect; to find the predilection of her heart returned by the homage of the favoured object, unchecked by fears of censure; what more could be desired? Yet, if possible, Edmund’s mind was still happier; his present joy was heightened, by contrasting it with his past anxiety, and he congratulated himself anew on his escape from the snares of Lady Laura, to the silken fetters of the amiable and lovely Lady Emma. Impatient to assure himself of his felicity, he went immediately to the library, where he fortunately found the Earl alone. He felt himself however considerably embarrassed, scarcely knowing how to begin his love-fraught tale; and as the person to whom it was to be addressed, was deeply engaged in the perusal of a new political work, the aukwardness of his situation encreased, and his courage failed so fast, that he even began to meditate a retreat, when the Earl, lifting his eyes for a moment from the fascinating page, saw in Edmund’s countenance things of deep import, and immediately relieved him from the unpleasantness of commencing the conversation, by enquiring, with the utmost good- nature, if he had any thing particular to communicate? Edmund then opened his cause, which he pleaded with the impassioned ardour of youth, ornamenting it with all his natural sensibility and ingenuousness. The Earl heard him with smiles, and stated his objections with tenderness; to the family of the Marchese he could make none, it was noble, and Edmund was the son of his first and dearest friend; his virtues and graces had endeared him to the Earl, who believed that he should place the happiness of his daughter

on a solid foundation, by resigning it to one so capable of promoting it. But Edmund was young, and the Earl had an invincible objection to long engagements. He differed from the generality of the world in many of his opinions, and in this among the rest. Far from believing that a long acquaintance between acknowledged lovers was serviceable in strengthening their attachment, and giving them an insight into each other’s foibles and peculiarities, he thought it too often happened that in the course of four or five years, (a term not seldom recommended by prudent parents and guardians) the interest of love, and the charm of novelty, gave way to a disadvantageous familiarity, and an indifference only to be distinguished from friendship, by being more selfish and less interesting. Nor did he think the knowledge of disposition, which time might be supposed to bestow, any compensation for these disadvantages; as he was convinced that gross vices, or faults, could not be concealed even in a limited acquaintance; and he did not believe, that, on a more intimate one, a marriage had ever been broken off, from the discovery of what might be called trifling failings. He knew enough of the human heart, to be assured that pride, and the dread of censure or ridicule, frequently overpowers the scruples of timidity, or fears for futurity; which, however they may create distrust, are seldom active enough to be serviceable in removing the possibility of subsequent uneasiness. He stated his opinion to Edmund, who willingly acknowledged its justness in every case but his own, and in that he pleaded for an exception with so much energy, that the Earl was persuaded, and endeavoured to believe himself convinced. He told Edmund however, that the conditions must be mutual, and their agreement exactly understood, and faithfully observed. That if he gave his consent for Lady Emma to receive Edmund’s addresses, it must likewise be with the approbation of the Marchese, and on a promise of waiting till a period judged proper and eligible by the parents of both parties, before the marriage should take place. That in the interval, as, on account of residing under the same roof, the greatest delicacy and propriety of conduct were requisite; he must on no consideration solicit the society of Emma alone, or pay her in company the inordinate and exclusive attentions, never excusable but when the opportunities of shewing them might be rare and uncertain. In short, the Earl wished Edmund to shew his love by silent tenderness, and respectful deference, rather than by servile adulation and marked civilities. He repeated to him, in order to soften the apparent severity of these injunctions; that as his attachment was not likely to be tortured by opposition, or embittered by absence, it ought to be manifested with dignity, and pursued with moderation. Edmund listened with the utmost respect; and conviction attended the arguments which he heard. Conscious of his own sincerity, and satisfied of Lady Emma’s, he perfectly agreed with the Earl, that it was unnecessary to be continually proving by words, what should never be doubted from his actions, and that where there was no sentiment which required concealment, stolen interviews were as unnecessary as degrading. He likewise readily promised unbounded compliance with every desire of the Earl, whom he thanked in terms of the warmest gratitude for his paternal kindness and indulgent friendship. It was soon understood that Emma was the object of Edmund’s love, and she received the congratulations of her sisters, on her conquest of the handsome and amiable Italian. Lady Maria turned pale, as she pronounced his name: from the first week of his arrival, she had indulged a secret partiality for him, and was never more sensible of its

force than when she contrasted him with Breresford, whose good-nature, unassuming deportment, and gentle disposition, combined with unceasing attention, had gained a large share of her esteem; but in Edmund she found as much gentleness, and more softness, he was also equally unasuming, yet nobly brave; and had a soul abounding in the finest sensibility, tempered with manly firmness; which, added to his numerous accomplishments, and personal graces, certainly made him a formidable rival to poor Breresford. No sooner however was Lady Maria acquainted with his decision, than, abhorring the idea of endeavouring to rival a sister, by alluring the object of her affections, yet dreading her own weakness, which might lead her to betray her passion, she wisely resolved to deprive herself of the power of erring, by yielding to the entreaties of Breresford, and consented that their marriage should take place early in the spring. The delighted lover immediately took his leave, to make the necessary preparations; and the family were left to themselves, excepting Mr. Fletcher, who was indeed never considered as a stranger, and now devoted himself with the most friendly anxiety, to amuse Lady Rosamond, over whose fine features, since the departure of Clayton, a cloud of regret would sometimes pass, notwithstanding the care with which she endeavoured to conceal the least appearance of uneasiness. Domestic happiness the only bliss, Of Paradise that has survived the fall; Thou art the nurse of Virtue. COWPER. THE Earl was now at leisure to shew a little more attention to his ward, than he had hitherto been able to devote. Henry’s attentions to her were continued, but with his volatile disposition, it was impossible to be inattentive to a young lady, particularly in the country, where there was no variety of choice, or room for caprice; and it was easy to discern, that these attentions were more the effusions of gallantry than the dictates of the heart; they therefore afforded little pleasure to his father, who saw likewise with regret, that Lady Harriett’s mind, if not a barren desert, was however an uncultivated waste; and his mortification was encreased by observing also that all his endeavours to fertilize it, were unsuccessful. Lord Drelincourt had too high a relish for the delights of literature, and had in his own family witnessed the advantages resulting from a taste for them too often not to be anxious to inspire his ward with the same sentiments.