This feeling of universal misery assumed concentration and shape, when I looked on my wife and
children; and the thought of danger to them possessed my whole being with fear. How could I save
them? I revolved a thousand and a thousand plans. They should not die-first I would be gathered to
nothingness, ere infection should come anear these idols of my soul. I would walk barefoot through
the world, to find an uninfected spot; I would build my home on some wave-tossed plank, drifted
about on the barren, shoreless ocean. I would betake me with them to some wild beast's den, where
a tyger's cubs, which I would slay, had been reared in health. I would seek the mountain eagle's eirie,
and live years suspended in some inaccessible recess of a sea-bounding cliff-no labour too great, no
scheme too wild, if it promised life to them. O! ye heart-strings of mine, could ye be torn asunder,
and my soul not spend itself in tears of blood for sorrow! Idris, after the first shock, regained a portion of fortitude. She studiously shut out all prospect of the
future, and cradled her heart in present blessings. She never for a moment lost sight of her children. But while they in health sported about her, she could cherish contentment and hope. A strange and
wild restlessness came over me-the more intolerable, because I was forced to conceal it. My fears
for Adrian were ceaseless; August had come; and the symptoms of plague encreased rapidly in
London. It was deserted by all who possessed the power of removing; and he, the brother of my soul,
was exposed to the perils from which all but slaves enchained by circumstance fled. He remained to
combat the fiend-his side unguarded, his toils unshared-infection might even reach him, and he
die unattended and alone. By day and night these thoughts pursued me. I resolved to visit London, to
see him; to quiet these agonizing throes by the sweet medicine of hope, or the opiate of despair. It was not until I arrived at Brentford, that I perceived much change in the face of the country. The
better sort of houses were shut up; the busy trade of the town palsied; there was an air of anxiety
among the few passengers I met, and they looked wonderingly at my carriage-the first they had
seen pass towards London, since pestilence sat on its high places, and possessed its busy streets. I
met several funerals; they were slenderly attended by mourners, and were regarded by the
spectators as omens of direst import. Some gazed on these processions with wild eagerness- others
fled timidly-some wept aloud. Adrian's chief endeavour, after the immediate succour of the sick, had been to disguise the
symptoms and progress of the plague from the inhabitants of London. He knew that fear and
melancholy forebodings were powerful assistants to disease; that desponding and brooding care
rendered the physical nature of man peculiarly susceptible of infection. No unseemly sights were
therefore discernible: the shops were in general open, the concourse of passengers in some degree
kept up. But although the appearance of an infected town was avoided, to me, who had not beheld it
since the commencement of the visitation, London appeared sufficiently changed. There were no
carriages, and grass had sprung high in the streets; the houses had a desolate look; most of the
shutters were closed; and there was a ghast and frightened stare in the persons I met, very different
from the usual business-like demeanour of the Londoners. My solitary carriage attracted notice, as it
rattled along towards the Protectoral Palace-and the fashionable streets leading to it wore a still
more dreary and deserted appearance. I found Adrian's anti-chamber crowded-it was his hour for
giving audience. I was unwilling to disturb his labours, and waited, watching the ingress and egress of
the petitioners. They consisted of people of the middling and lower classes of society, whose means
of subsistence failed with the cessation of trade, and of the busy spirit of money-making in all its
branches, peculiar to our country. There was an air of anxiety, sometimes of terror in the new-
comers, strongly contrasted with the resigned and even satisfied mien of those who had had
audience. I could read the influence of my friend in their quickened motions and cheerful faces. Two
o'clock struck, after which none were admitted; those who had been disappointed went sullenly or
sorrowfully away, while I entered the audience-chamber. I was struck by the improvement that appeared in the health of Adrian. He was no longer bent to the
ground, like an over-nursed flower of spring, that, shooting up beyond its strength, is weighed down
even by its own coronal of blossoms. His eyes were bright, his countenance composed, an air of
concentrated energy was diffused over his whole person, much unlike its former languor. He sat at a
table with several secretaries, who were arranging petitions, or registering the notes made during
that day's audience. Two or three petitioners were still in attendance. I admired his justice and
patience. Those who possessed a power of living out of London, he advised immediately to quit it,
affording them the means of so doing. Others, whose trade was beneficial to the city, or who
possessed no other refuge, he provided with advice for better avoiding the epidemic; relieving
overloaded families, supplying the gaps made in others by death. Order, comfort, and even health,
rose under his influence, as from the touch of a magician's wand. "I am glad you are come," he said to me, when we were at last alone; "I can only spare a few
minutes, and must tell you much in that time. The plague is now in progress-it is useless closing
one's eyes to the fact-the deaths encrease each week. What will come I cannot guess. As yet, thank
God, I am equal to the government of the town; and I look only to the present. Ryland, whom I have
so long detained, has stipulated that I shall suffer him to depart before the end of this month. The
deputy appointed by parliament is dead; another therefore must be named; I have advanced my
claim, and I believe that I shall have no competitor. To-night the question is to be decided, as there is
a call of the house for the purpose. You must nominate me, Lionel; Ryland, for shame, cannot shew
himself; but you, my friend, will do me this service? How lovely is devotion! Here was a youth, royally sprung, bred in luxury, by nature averse to the
usual struggles of a public life, and now, in time of danger, at a period when to live was the utmost
scope of the ambitious, he, the beloved and heroic Adrian, made, in sweet simplicity, an offer to
sacrifice himself for the public good. The very idea was generous and noble,-but, beyond this, his
unpretending manner, his entire want of the assumption of a virtue, rendered his act ten times more
touching. I would have withstood his request; but I had seen the good he diffused; I felt that his
resolves were not to be shaken, so, with an heavy heart, I consented to do as he asked. He grasped
my hand affectionately:-"Thank you," he said, "you have relieved me from a painful dilemma, and
are, as you ever were, the best of my friends. Farewell-I must now leave you for a few hours. Go
you and converse with Ryland. Although he deserts his post in London, he may be of the greatest
service in the north of England, by receiving and assisting travellers, and contributing to supply the
metropolis with food. Awaken him, I entreat you, to some sense of duty." Adrian left me, as I afterwards learnt, upon his daily task of visiting the hospitals, and inspecting the
crowded parts of London. I found Ryland much altered, even from what he had been when he visited
Windsor. Perpetual fear had jaundiced his complexion, and shrivelled his whole person. I told him of
the business of the evening, and a smile relaxed the contracted muscles. He desired to go; each day
he expected to be infected by pestilence, each day he was unable to resist the gentle violence of
Adrian's detention. The moment Adrian should be legally elected his deputy, he would escape to
safety. Under this impression he listened to all I said; and, elevated almost to joy by the near
prospect of his departure, he entered into a discussion concerning the plans he should adopt in his
own county, forgetting, for the moment, his cherished resolution of shutting himself up from all
communication in the mansion and grounds of his estate. In the evening, Adrian and I proceeded to Westminster. As we went he reminded me of what I was to
say and do, yet, strange to say, I entered the chamber without having once reflected on my purpose. Adrian remained in the coffee-room, while I, in compliance with his desire, took my seat in St.
Stephen's. There reigned unusual silence in the chamber. I had not visited it since Raymond's
protectorate; a period conspicuous for a numerous attendance of members, for the eloquence of the
speakers, and the warmth of the debate. The benches were very empty, those by custom occupied
by the hereditary members were vacant; the city members were there-the members for the
commercial towns, few landed proprietors, and not many of those who entered parliament for the
sake of a career. The first subject that occupied the attention of the house was an address from the
Lord Protector, praying them to appoint a deputy during a necessary absence on his part. A silence prevailed, till one of the members coming to me, whispered that the Earl of Windsor had
sent him word that I was to move his election, in the absence of the person who had been first
chosen for this office. Now for the first time I saw the full extent of my task, and I was overwhelmed
by what I had brought on myself. Ryland had deserted his post through fear of the plague: from the
same fear Adrian had no competitor. And I, the nearest kinsman of the Earl of Windsor, was to
propose his election. I was to thrust this selected and matchless friend into the post of danger-
impossible! the die was cast-I would offer myself as candidate. The few members who were present, had come more for the sake of terminating the business by
securing a legal attendance, than under the idea of a debate. I had risen mechanically-my knees
trembled; irresolution hung on my voice, as I uttered a few words on the necessity of choosing a
person adequate to the dangerous task in hand. But, when the idea of presenting myself in the room
of my friend intruded, the load of doubt and pain was taken from off me. My words flowed
spontaneously-my utterance was firm and quick. I adverted to what Adrian had already done-I
promised the same vigilance in furthering all his views. I drew a touching picture of his vacillating
health; I boasted of my own strength. I prayed them to save even from himself this scion of the
noblest family in England. My alliance with him was the pledge of my sincerity, my union with his
sister, my children, his presumptive heirs, were the hostages of my truth. This unexpected turn in the debate was quickly communicated to Adrian. He hurried in, and
witnessed the termination of my impassioned harangue. I did not see him: my soul was in my
words,-my eyes could not perceive that which was; while a vision of Adrian's form, tainted by
pestilence, and sinking in death, floated before them. He seized my hand, as I concluded- "Unkind!" he cried, "you have betrayed me!" then, springing forwards, with the air of one who had a right to
command, he claimed the place of deputy as his own. He had bought it, he said, with danger, and
paid for it with toil. His ambition rested there; and, after an interval devoted to the interests of his
country, was I to step in, and reap the profit? Let them remember what London had been when he
arrived: the panic that prevailed brought famine, while every moral and legal tie was loosened. He
had restored order-this had been a work which required perseverance, patience, and energy; and
he had neither slept nor waked but for the good of his country.-Would they dare wrong him thus? Would they wrest his hard-earned reward from him, to bestow it on one, who, never having mingled
in public life, would come a tyro to the craft, in which he was an adept. He demanded the place of
deputy as his right. Ryland had shewn that he preferred him. Never before had he, who was born
even to the inheritance of the throne of England, never had he asked favour or honour from those
now his equals, but who might have been his subjects. Would they refuse him? Could they thrust
back from the path of distinction and laudable ambition, the heir of their ancient kings, and heap
another disappointment on a fallen house. No one had ever before heard Adrian allude to the rights of his ancestors. None had ever before
suspected, that power, or the suffrage of the many, could in any manner become dear to him. He
had begun his speech with vehemence; he ended with unassuming gentleness, making his appeal
with the same humility, as if he had asked to be the first in wealth, honour, and power among
Englishmen, and not, as was the truth, to be the foremost in the ranks of loathsome toils and
inevitable death. A murmur of approbation rose after his speech. "Oh, do not listen to him," I cried,
"he speaks false-false to himself,"-I was interrupted: and, silence being restored, we were
ordered, as was the custom, to retire during the decision of the house. I fancied that they hesitated,
and that there was some hope for me-I was mistaken-hardly had we quitted the chamber, before
Adrian was recalled, and installed in his office of Lord Deputy to the Protector. We returned together to the palace. "Why, Lionel," said Adrian, "what did you intend? you could not
hope to conquer, and yet you gave me the pain of a triumph over my dearest friend." "This is mockery," I replied, "you devote yourself,-you, the adored brother of Idris, the being, of all
the world contains, dearest to our hearts-you devote yourself to an early death. I would have
prevented this; my death would be a small evil-or rather I should not die; while you cannot hope to
escape." "As to the likelihood of escaping," said Adrian, "ten years hence the cold stars may shine on the
graves of all of us; but as to my peculiar liability to infection, I could easily prove, both logically and
physically, that in the midst of contagion I have a better chance of life than you. "This is my post: I was born for this-to rule England in anarchy, to save her in danger-to devote
myself for her. The blood of my forefathers cries aloud in my veins, and bids me be first among my
countrymen. Or, if this mode of speech offend you, let me say, that my mother, the proud queen,
instilled early into me a love of distinction, and all that, if the weakness of my physical nature and my
peculiar opinions had not prevented such a design, might have made me long since struggle for the
lost inheritance of my race. But now my mother, or, if you will, my mother's lessons, awaken within
me. I cannot lead on to battle; I cannot, through intrigue and faithlessness rear again the throne
upon the wreck of English public spirit. But I can be the first to support and guard my country, now
that terrific disasters and ruin have laid strong hands upon her. "That country and my beloved sister are all I have. I will protect the first-the latter I commit to your
charge. If I survive, and she be lost, I were far better dead. Preserve her-for her own sake I know
that you will-if you require any other spur, think that, in preserving her, you preserve me. Her
faultless nature, one sum of perfections, is wrapt up in her affections-if they were hurt, she would
droop like an unwatered floweret, and the slightest injury they receive is a nipping frost to her. Already she fears for us. She fears for the children she adores, and for you, the father of these, her
lover, husband, protector; and you must be near her to support and encourage her. Return to
Windsor then, my brother; for such you are by every tie-fill the double place my absence imposes
on you, and let me, in all my sufferings here, turn my eyes towards that dear seclusion, and say-
There is peace." I DID proceed to Windsor, but not with the intention of remaining there. I went but to obtain the
consent of Idris, and then to return and take my station beside my unequalled friend; to share his
labours, and save him, if so it must be, at the expence of my life. Yet I dreaded to witness the anguish
which my resolve might excite in Idris. I had vowed to my own heart never to shadow her
countenance even with transient grief, and should I prove recreant at the hour of greatest need? I
had begun my journey with anxious haste; now I desired to draw it out through the course of days
and months. I longed to avoid the necessity of action; I strove to escape from thought-vainly-
futurity, like a dark image in a phantasmagoria, came nearer and more near, till it clasped the whole
earth in its shadow. A slight circumstance induced me to alter my usual route, and to return home by Egham and
Bishopgate. I alighted at Perdita's ancient abode, her cottage; and, sending forward the carriage,
determined to walk across the park to the castle. This spot, dedicated to sweetest recollections, the
deserted house and neglected garden were well adapted to nurse my melancholy. In our happiest
days, Perdita had adorned her cottage with every aid art might bring, to that which nature had
selected to favour. In the same spirit of exaggeration she had, on the event of her separation from
Raymond, caused it to be entirely neglected. It was now in ruin: the deer had climbed the broken
palings, and reposed among the flowers; grass grew on the threshold, and the swinging lattice
creaking to the wind, gave signal of utter desertion. The sky was blue above, and the air impregnated
with fragrance by the rare flowers that grew among the weeds. The trees moved overhead,
awakening nature's favourite melody-but the melancholy appearance of the choaked paths, and
weed-grown flower-beds, dimmed even this gay summer scene. The time when in proud and happy
security we assembled at this cottage, was gone-soon the present hours would join those past, and
shadows of future ones rose dark and menacing from the womb of time, their cradle and their bier. For the first time in my life I envied the sleep of the dead, and thought with pleasure of one's bed
under the sod, where grief and fear have no power. I passed through the gap of the broken paling-I
felt, while I disdained, the choaking tears-I rushed into the depths of the forest. O death and
change, rulers of our life, where are ye, that I may grapple with you! What was there in our
tranquillity, that excited your envy-in our happiness, that ye should destroy it? We were happy,
loving, and beloved; the horn of Amalthea contained no blessing unshowered upon us, but, alas! la fortuna deidad barbara importuna, oy cadaver y ayer flor, no permanece jamas! As I wandered on thus ruminating, a number of country people passed me. They seemed full of
careful thought, and a few words of their conversation that reached me, induced me to approach
and make further enquiries. A party of people flying from London, as was frequent in those days, had
come up the Thames in a boat. No one at Windsor would afford them shelter; so, going a little
further up, they remained all night in a deserted hut near Bolter's lock. They pursued their way the
following morning, leaving one of their company behind them, sick of the plague. This circumstance
once spread abroad, none dared approach within half a mile of the infected neighbourhood, and the
deserted wretch was left to fight with disease and death in solitude, as he best might. I was urged by
compassion to hasten to the hut, for the purpose of ascertaining his situation, and administering to
his wants. As I advanced I met knots of country-people talking earnestly of this event: distant as they were from
the apprehended contagion, fear was impressed on every countenance. I passed by a group of these
terrorists, in a lane in the direct road to the hut. One of them stopped me, and, conjecturing that I
was ignorant of the circumstance, told me not to go on, for that an infected person lay but at a short
distance. "I know it," I replied, "and I am going to see in what condition the poor fellow is." A murmur of surprise and horror ran through the assembly. I continued:-
"This poor wretch is deserted, dying, succourless; in these unhappy times,
God knows how soon any or all of us may be in like want. I am going to do,
as I would be done by." "But you will never be able to return to the Castle-Lady Idris-his children-" in confused speech
were the words that struck my ear. "Do you not know, my friends," I said, "that the Earl himself, now Lord Protector, visits daily, not only
those probably infected by this disease, but the hospitals and pest houses, going near, and even
touching the sick? yet he was never in better health. You labour under an entire mistake as to the
nature of the plague; but do not fear, I do not ask any of you to accompany me, nor to believe me,
until I return safe and sound from my patient." So I left them, and hurried on. I soon arrived at the hut: the door was ajar. I entered, and one glance
assured me that its former inhabitant was no more-he lay on a heap of straw, cold and stiff; while a
pernicious effluvia filled the room, and various stains and marks served to shew the virulence of the
disorder. I had never before beheld one killed by pestilence. While every mind was full of dismay at its effects,
a craving for excitement had led us to peruse De Foe's account, and the masterly delineations of the
author of Arthur Mervyn. The pictures drawn in these books were so vivid, that we seemed to have
experienced the results depicted by them. But cold were the sensations excited by words, burning
though they were, and describing the death and misery of thousands, compared to what I felt in
looking on the corpse of this unhappy stranger. This indeed was the plague. I raised his rigid limbs, I
marked the distortion of his face, and the stony eyes lost to perception. As I was thus occupied, chill
horror congealed my blood, making my flesh quiver and my hair to stand on end. Half insanely I
spoke to the dead. So the plague killed you, I muttered. How came this? Was the coming painful? You look as if the enemy had tortured, before he murdered you. And now I leapt up precipitately,
and escaped from the hut, before nature could revoke her laws, and inorganic words be breathed in
answer from the lips of the departed. On returning through the lane, I saw at a distance the same assemblage of persons which I had left. They hurried away, as soon as they saw me; my agitated mien added to their fear of coming near one
who had entered within the verge of contagion. At a distance from facts one draws conclusions which appear infallible, which yet when put to the
test of reality, vanish like unreal dreams. I had ridiculed the fears of my countrymen, when they
related to others; now that they came home to myself, I paused. The Rubicon, I felt, was passed; and
it behoved me well to reflect what I should do on this hither side of disease and danger. According to
the vulgar superstition, my dress, my person, the air I breathed, bore in it mortal danger to myself
and others. Should I return to the Castle, to my wife and children, with this taint upon me? Not surely
if I were infected; but I felt certain that I was not-a few hours would determine the question-I
would spend these in the forest, in reflection on what was to come, and what my future actions were
to be. In the feeling communicated to me by the sight of one struck by the plague, I forgot the events
that had excited me so strongly in London; new and more painful prospects, by degrees were cleared
of the mist which had hitherto veiled them. The question was no longer whether I should share
Adrian's toils and danger; but in what manner I could, in Windsor and the neighbourhood, imitate
the prudence and zeal which, under his government, produced order and plenty in London, and how,
now pestilence had spread more widely, I could secure the health of my own family. I spread the whole earth out as a map before me. On no one spot of its surface could I put my finger
and say, here is safety. In the south, the disease, virulent and immedicable, had nearly annihilated
the race of man; storm and inundation, poisonous winds and blights, filled up the measure of
suffering. In the north it was worse-the lesser population gradually declined, and famine and plague
kept watch on the survivors, who, helpless and feeble, were ready to fall an easy prey into their
hands. I contracted my view to England. The overgrown metropolis, the great heart of mighty Britain, was
pulseless. Commerce had ceased. All resort for ambition or pleasure was cut off-the streets were
grass-grown-the houses empty-the few, that from necessity remained, seemed already branded
with the taint of inevitable pestilence. In the larger manufacturing towns the same tragedy was acted
on a smaller, yet more disastrous scale. There was no Adrian to superintend and direct, while whole
flocks of the poor were struck and killed. Yet we were not all to die. No truly, though thinned, the
race of man would continue, and the great plague would, in after years, become matter of history
and wonder. Doubtless this visitation was for extent unexampled-more need that we should work
hard to dispute its progress; ere this men have gone out in sport, and slain their thousands and tens
of thousands; but now man had become a creature of price; the life of one of them was of more
worth than the so called treasures of kings. Look at his thought-endued countenance, his graceful
limbs, his majestic brow, his wondrous mechanism-the type and model of this best work of God is
not to be cast aside as a broken vessel-he shall be preserved, and his children and his children's
children carry down the name and form of man to latest time. Above all I must guard those entrusted by nature and fate to my especial care. And surely, if among
all my fellow-creatures I were to select those who might stand forth examples of the greatness and
goodness of man, I could choose no other than those allied to me by the most sacred ties. Some from
among the family of man must survive, and these should be among the survivors; that should be my
task-to accomplish it my own life were a small sacrifice. There then in that castle-in Windsor
Castle, birth-place of Idris and my babes, should be the haven and retreat for the wrecked bark of
human society. Its forest should be our world-its garden afford us food; within its walls I would
establish the shaken throne of health. I was an outcast and a vagabond, when Adrian gently threw
over me the silver net of love and civilization, and linked me inextricably to human charities and
human excellence. I was one, who, though an aspirant after good, and an ardent lover of wisdom,
was yet unenrolled in any list of worth, when Idris, the princely born, who was herself the
personification of all that was divine in woman, she who walked the earth like a poet's dream, as a
carved goddess endued with sense, or pictured saint stepping from the canvas-she, the most
worthy, chose me, and gave me herself-a priceless gift. During several hours I continued thus to meditate, till hunger and fatigue brought me back to the
passing hour, then marked by long shadows cast from the descending sun. I had wandered towards
Bracknel, far to the west of Windsor. The feeling of perfect health which I enjoyed, assured me that I
was free from contagion. I remembered that Idris had been kept in ignorance of my proceedings. She
might have heard of my return from London, and my visit to Bolter's Lock, which, connected with my
continued absence, might tend greatly to alarm her. I returned to Windsor by the Long Walk, and
passing through the town towards the Castle, I found it in a state of agitation and disturbance. "It is too late to be ambitious," says Sir Thomas Browne. "We cannot hope to live so long in our
names as some have done in their persons; one face of Janus holds no proportion to the other." Upon this text many fanatics arose, who prophesied that the end of time was come. The spirit of
superstition had birth, from the wreck of our hopes, and antics wild and dangerous were played on
the great theatre, while the remaining particle of futurity dwindled into a point in the eyes of the
prognosticators. Weak-spirited women died of fear as they listened to their denunciations; men of
robust form and seeming strength fell into idiotcy and madness, racked by the dread of coming
eternity. A man of this kind was now pouring forth his eloquent despair among the inhabitants of
Windsor. The scene of the morning, and my visit to the dead, which had been spread abroad, had
alarmed the country-people, so they had become fit instruments to be played upon by a maniac. The poor wretch had lost his young wife and lovely infant by the plague. He was a mechanic; and,
rendered unable to attend to the occupation which supplied his necessities, famine was added to his
other miseries. He left the chamber which contained his wife and child-wife and child no more, but
"dead earth upon the earth"-wild with hunger, watching and grief, his diseased fancy made him
believe himself sent by heaven to preach the end of time to the world. He entered the churches, and
foretold to the congregations their speedy removal to the vaults below. He appeared like the
forgotten spirit of the time in the theatres, and bade the spectators go home and die. He had been
seized and confined; he had escaped and wandered from London among the neighbouring towns,
and, with frantic gestures and thrilling words, he unveiled to each their hidden fears, and gave voice
to the soundless thought they dared not syllable. He stood under the arcade of the town-hall of
Windsor, and from this elevation harangued a trembling crowd. "Hear, O ye inhabitants of the earth," he cried, "hear thou, all seeing, but most pitiless Heaven! hear
thou too, O tempest-tossed heart, which breathes out these words, yet faints beneath their
meaning! Death is among us! The earth is beautiful and flower-bedecked, but she is our grave! The
clouds of heaven weep for us-the pageantry of the stars is but our funeral torchlight. Grey headed
men, ye hoped for yet a few years in your long-known abode-but the lease is up, you must
remove-children, ye will never reach maturity, even now the small grave is dug for ye- mothers,
clasp them in your arms, one death embraces you!" Shuddering, he stretched out his hands, his eyes cast up, seemed bursting from their sockets, while
he appeared to follow shapes, to us invisible, in the yielding air-"There they are," he cried, "the
dead! They rise in their shrouds, and pass in silent procession towards the far land of their doom-
their bloodless lips move not-their shadowy limbs are void of motion, while still they glide onwards. We come," he exclaimed, springing forwards, "for what should we wait? Haste, my friends, apparel
yourselves in the court-dress of death. Pestilence will usher you to his presence. Why thus long? they, the good, the wise, and the beloved, are gone before. Mothers, kiss you last-husbands,
protectors no more, lead on the partners of your death! Come, O come! while the dear ones are yet
in sight, for soon they will pass away, and we never never shall join them more." From such ravings as these, he would suddenly become collected, and with unexaggerated but
terrific words, paint the horrors of the time; describe with minute detail, the effects of the plague on
the human frame, and tell heart-breaking tales of the snapping of dear affinities-the gasping horror
of despair over the death-bed of the last beloved-so that groans and even shrieks burst from the
crowd. One man in particular stood in front, his eyes fixt on the prophet, his mouth open, his limbs
rigid, while his face changed to various colours, yellow, blue, and green, through intense fear. The
maniac caught his glance, and turned his eye on him- one has heard of the gaze of the rattle-snake,
which allures the trembling victim till he falls within his jaws. The maniac became composed; his
person rose higher; authority beamed from his countenance. He looked on the peasant, who began
to tremble, while he still gazed; his knees knocked together; his teeth chattered. He at last fell down
in convulsions. "That man has the plague," said the maniac calmly. A shriek burst from the lips of the
poor wretch; and then sudden motionlessness came over him; it was manifest to all that he was
dead. Cries of horror filled the place-every one endeavoured to effect his escape-in a few minutes the
market place was cleared-the corpse lay on the ground; and the maniac, subdued and exhausted,
sat beside it, leaning his gaunt cheek upon his thin hand. Soon some people, deputed by the
magistrates, came to remove the body; the unfortunate being saw a jailor in each-he fled
precipitately, while I passed onwards to the Castle. Death, cruel and relentless, had entered these beloved walls. An old servant, who had nursed Idris in
infancy, and who lived with us more on the footing of a revered relative than a domestic, had gone a
few days before to visit a daughter, married, and settled in the neighbourhood of London. On the
night of her return she sickened of the plague. From the haughty and unbending nature of the
Countess of Windsor, Idris had few tender filial associations with her. This good woman had stood in
the place of a mother, and her very deficiencies of education and knowledge, by rendering her
humble and defenceless, endeared her to us-she was the especial favourite of the children. I found
my poor girl, there is no exaggeration in the expression, wild with grief and dread. She hung over the
patient in agony, which was not mitigated when her thoughts wandered towards her babes, for
whom she feared infection. My arrival was like the newly discovered lamp of a lighthouse to sailors,
who are weathering some dangerous point. She deposited her appalling doubts in my hands; she
relied on my judgment, and was comforted by my participation in her sorrow. Soon our poor nurse
expired; and the anguish of suspense was changed to deep regret, which though at first more painful,
yet yielded with greater readiness to my consolations. Sleep, the sovereign balm, at length steeped
her tearful eyes in forgetfulness. She slept; and quiet prevailed in the Castle, whose inhabitants were hushed to repose. I was awake,
and during the long hours of dead night, my busy thoughts worked in my brain, like ten thousand
mill-wheels, rapid, acute, untameable. All slept-all England slept; and from my window,
commanding a wide prospect of the star-illumined country, I saw the land stretched out in placid
rest. I was awake, alive, while the brother of death possessed my race. What, if the more potent of
these fraternal deities should obtain dominion over it? The silence of midnight, to speak truly,
though apparently a paradox, rung in my ears. The solitude became intolerable-I placed my hand on
the beating heart of Idris, I bent my head to catch the sound of her breath, to assure myself that she
still existed-for a moment I doubted whether I should not awake her; so effeminate an horror ran
through my frame.-Great God! would it one day be thus? One day all extinct, save myself, should I
walk the earth alone? Were these warning voices, whose inarticulate and oracular sense forced
belief upon me? Yet I would not call them
  Voices of warning, that announce to us
  Only the inevitable. As the sun,
  Ere it is risen, sometimes paints its image
  In the atmosphere-so often do the spirits
  Of great events stride on before the events,
  And in to-day already walks to-morrow. AFTER a long interval, I am again impelled by the restless spirit within me to continue my narration;
but I must alter the mode which I have hitherto adopted. The details contained in the foregoing
pages, apparently trivial, yet each slightest one weighing like lead in the depressed scale of human
afflictions; this tedious dwelling on the sorrows of others, while my own were only in apprehension;
this slowly laying bare of my soul's wounds: this journal of death; this long drawn and tortuous path,
leading to the ocean of countless tears, awakens me again to keen grief. I had used this history as an
opiate; while it described my beloved friends, fresh with life and glowing with hope, active assistants
on the scene, I was soothed; there will be a more melancholy pleasure in painting the end of all. But
the intermediate steps, the climbing the wall, raised up between what was and is, while I still looked
back nor saw the concealed desert beyond, is a labour past my strength. Time and experience have
placed me on an height from which I can comprehend the past as a whole; and in this way I must
describe it, bringing forward the leading incidents, and disposing light and shade so as to form a
picture in whose very darkness there will be harmony. It would be needless to narrate those disastrous occurrences, for which a parallel might be found in
any slighter visitation of our gigantic calamity. Does the reader wish to hear of the pest-houses,
where death is the comforter-of the mournful passage of the death-cart-of the insensibility of the
worthless, and the anguish of the loving heart-of harrowing shrieks and silence dire-of the variety
of disease, desertion, famine, despair, and death? There are many books which can feed the appetite
craving for these things; let them turn to the accounts of Boccaccio, De Foe, and Browne. The vast
annihilation that has swallowed all things-the voiceless solitude of the once busy earth-the lonely
state of singleness which hems me in, has deprived even such details of their stinging reality, and
mellowing the lurid tints of past anguish with poetic hues, I am able to escape from the mosaic of
circumstance, by perceiving and reflecting back the grouping and combined colouring of the past. I had returned from London possessed by the idea, with the intimate feeling that it was my first duty
to secure, as well as I was able, the well-being of my family, and then to return and take my post
beside Adrian. The events that immediately followed on my arrival at Windsor changed this view of
things. The plague was not in London alone, it was every where-it came on us, as Ryland had said,
like a thousand packs of wolves, howling through the winter night, gaunt and fierce. When once
disease was introduced into the rural districts, its effects appeared more horrible, more exigent, and
more difficult to cure, than in towns. There was a companionship in suffering there, and, the
neighbours keeping constant watch on each other, and inspired by the active benevolence of Adrian,
succour was afforded, and the path of destruction smoothed. But in the country, among the
scattered farm-houses, in lone cottages, in fields, and barns, tragedies were acted harrowing to the
soul, unseen, unheard, unnoticed. Medical aid was less easily procured, food was more difficult to
obtain, and human beings, unwithheld by shame, for they were unbeheld of their fellows, ventured
on deeds of greater wickedness, or gave way more readily to their abject fears. Deeds of heroism also occurred, whose very mention swells the heart and brings tears into the eyes. Such is human nature, that beauty and deformity are often closely linked. In reading history we are
chiefly struck by the generosity and self-devotion that follow close on the heels of crime, veiling with
supernal flowers the stain of blood. Such acts were not wanting to adorn the grim train that waited
on the progress of the plague. The inhabitants of Berkshire and Bucks had been long aware that the plague was in London, in
Liverpool, Bristol, Manchester, York, in short, in all the more populous towns of England. They were
not however the less astonished and dismayed when it appeared among themselves. They were
impatient and angry in the midst of terror. They would do something to throw off the clinging evil,
and, while in action, they fancied that a remedy was applied. The inhabitants of the smaller towns
left their houses, pitched tents in the fields, wandering separate from each other careless of hunger
or the sky's inclemency, while they imagined that they avoided the death-dealing disease. The
farmers and cottagers, on the contrary, struck with the fear of solitude, and madly desirous of
medical assistance, flocked into the towns. But winter was coming, and with winter, hope. In August, the plague had appeared in the country of
England, and during September it made its ravages. Towards the end of October it dwindled away,
and was in some degree replaced by a typhus, of hardly less virulence. The autumn was warm and
rainy: the infirm and sickly died off-happier they: many young people flushed with health and
prosperity, made pale by wasting malady, became the inhabitants of the grave. The crop had failed,
the bad corn, and want of foreign wines, added vigour to disease. Before Christmas half England was
under water. The storms of the last winter were renewed; but the diminished shipping of this year
caused us to feel less the tempests of the sea. The flood and storms did more harm to continental
Europe than to us-giving, as it were, the last blow to the calamities which destroyed it. In Italy the
rivers were unwatched by the diminished peasantry; and, like wild beasts from their lair when the
hunters and dogs are afar, did Tiber, Arno, and Po, rush upon and destroy the fertility of the plains. Whole villages were carried away. Rome, and Florence, and Pisa were overflowed, and their marble
palaces, late mirrored in tranquil streams, had their foundations shaken by their winter-gifted power. In Germany and Russia the injury was still more momentous. But frost would come at last, and with it a renewal of our lease of earth. Frost would blunt the
arrows of pestilence, and enchain the furious elements; and the land would in spring throw off her
garment of snow, released from her menace of destruction. It was not until February that the desired
signs of winter appeared. For three days the snow fell, ice stopped the current of the rivers, and the
birds flew out from crackling branches of the frost-whitened trees. On the fourth morning all
vanished. A south-west wind brought up rain-the sun came out, and mocking the usual laws of
nature, seemed even at this early season to burn with solsticial force. It was no consolation, that with
the first winds of March the lanes were filled with violets, the fruit trees covered with blossoms, that
the corn sprung up, and the leaves came out, forced by the unseasonable heat. We feared the balmy
air-we feared the cloudless sky, the flower-covered earth, and delightful woods, for we looked on
the fabric of the universe no longer as our dwelling, but our tomb, and the fragrant land smelled to
the apprehension of fear like a wide church-yard. Pisando la tierra dura de continuo el hombre esta y cada passo que da es sobre su sepultura. Yet notwithstanding these disadvantages winter was breathing time; and we exerted ourselves to
make the best of it. Plague might not revive with the summer; but if it did, it should find us prepared. It is a part of man's nature to adapt itself through habit even to pain and sorrow. Pestilence had
become a part of our future, our existence; it was to be guarded against, like the flooding of rivers,
the encroachments of ocean, or the inclemency of the sky. After long suffering and bitter experience,
some panacea might be discovered; as it was, all that received infection died- all however were not
infected; and it became our part to fix deep the foundations, and raise high the barrier between
contagion and the sane; to introduce such order as would conduce to the well-being of the survivors,
and as would preserve hope and some portion of happiness to those who were spectators of the still
renewed tragedy. Adrian had introduced systematic modes of proceeding in the metropolis, which,
while they were unable to stop the progress of death, yet prevented other evils, vice and folly, from
rendering the awful fate of the hour still more tremendous. I wished to imitate his example, but men
are used to
-move all together, if they move at all,
and I could find no means of leading the inhabitants of scattered towns and villages, who forgot my
words as soon as they heard them not, and veered with every baffling wind, that might arise from an
apparent change of circumstance. I adopted another plan.