Shocked, astonished, and ashamed at all that had passed, I threw myself
on the bed, and unburdened my full heart in a bitter fit of crying. What! thought I, not the Lady Cherubina De Willoughby after all;--the
tale fabricated by Betterton himself;--the parchment that I had built
the hope of my noble birth upon a mere lease of lives;--could these
things be? Alas, there was no doubt of the fatal fact! I had overheard
the wretches boasting of it, and I had discovered their other
impositions with my own eyes. To be thus upset in my favourite
speculation, in the business of my whole life; to have to begin all
over again,--to have to search the wide world anew for my real name, my
real family--or was Wilkinson indeed my father? Oh! if so, what a fall! and how horridly had I treated him! But I would not suffer myself to
think of it. Then to be laughed at, despised, insulted by dissolute
creatures calling themselves lords and barons, and bravos, and heroes
and heroines; and I declared to be no heroine! am I a heroine? I caught
myself constantly repeating; and then I walked about wildly, then sat
on the bed, then cast my body across it. Once I fell into a doze, and
dreamed frightful dreams of monsters pursuing me swifter than the wind,
while my bending limbs could only creep; and my voice, calling for
help, could not rise above a whisper. Then I woke, repeating, am I a
heroine? I believe I was quite delirious; for notwithstanding all that
I could do to prevent myself, I ran on rapidly, am I a heroine? am I? am I? am I? am I? till my brain reeled from its poise, and my hands
were clenched with perturbation. Thus passed the night, and towards morning I fell into a slumber. Adieu. This morning my head felt rather better, and I appeared before Stuart
with the sprightliest air imaginable; not that my mind was at
ease;--far from it;--but that I could not endure to betray my
mortification at having proved such a dupe to buffoons and villains. After breakfast, we began arranging our plans, and decided on
proceeding to London; but did not determine on my place of residence
there. I had my own projects, however. As Higginson had assisted in rescuing me from the police, Stuart
advised him to remain concealed somewhere, till after the trials of
Betterton and Grundy; for though the poor man did not know that they
were officers of justice whom he was assaulting (he having been in the
turret when the fray commenced), yet this fact might be difficult to
prove. Stuart, therefore, gave him some money, and I a letter; and he
set off, in extreme tribulation, for the cottage of the poor woman;
there to stay till the business should be decided. Stuart and I then took our departure in a chaise. Unable to counterfeit
gaiety long, I relapsed into languor; nor could my companion, by any
effort, withdraw me from the contemplation of my late disgrace. As we drew near Lady Gwyn's, he represented the propriety of my
restoring her portrait, lest she should have recourse to an arrest. Disheartened by the past, and terrified for the future, I soon
consented; and on our arriving at the avenue of the gentleman who had
the portrait in his possession, Stuart, by my desire, went to the house
without me. He was absent some time, but at last came back with it in
his hand. We then drove to Lady Gwyn's; and while I remained at the gate, he
proceeded to execute the commission for me. Presently, however, I saw
him return accompanied by Lady Gwyn herself, who welcomed me with much
kindness, begged I would forget the past, and prevailed on me to go
into the house. But it was only to suffer new mortifications. For now, at the instance
of Stuart, she began to relate all the pranks which she had practised
upon me while I was with her. She confessed that the crowning ceremony
was merely to amuse her guests at my expence; and that my great mother
was her own nephew! Think of that, Biddy! She said that Stuart, who had
known her for some years, begged of her when I paid her my first visit
to let me remain under her care, till his return from Town; and to
humour my pretty caprices, as she called them. But he did not desire
her to go so far with the jest; and she had now just begun an apology
for her conduct, when I rose, overwhelmed with shame and indignation,
dropped a hasty courtesy, and fairly ran out of the house. We proceeded some miles silent and uncomfortable. My heart was
bursting, and my head felt as if billows were tossing through it. At last I found myself in sight of the village where William, whom I
had separated from his mistress a few weeks before, used to live. As
this was a favourable opportunity for reconciling the lovers, I now
made Stuart acquainted with the real origin of their quarrel, which I
had concealed from him at the time it happened, lest he should mar it. He shook his head at the recital, and desired the driver to find out
William's house, and stop there. This was done, and in a few moments
William made his appearance. He betrayed some agitation at seeing me,
but saluted me with respect. 'Well, William,' said I, sportively, 'how goes on your little quarrel
with Mary? Is it made up?' 'No, Ma'am,' answered he, with a doleful look, 'and I fear never will.' 'Yes, William,' cried I, with an assuring nod, 'I have the happiness to
tell you that it will.' 'Ah, Ma'am,' said he, 'I suppose you do not know what a sad calamity
has fallen upon her since you were here. The poor creature has quite
lost her senses.' 'For shame!' cried I, 'What are you saying? Lost her senses! Well, I am
sure it was not my fault, however.' 'Your's?' said he. 'Oh, no, Ma'am. But she has never been in her reason
since the day you left her.' 'Let us be gone,' whispered I to Stuart, as I sank back in the
carriage. 'Surely not,' said he. 'Tis at least your duty to repair the
mischief you have done.' 'I should die before I could disclose it!' cried I. 'Then I will disclose it for you,' said he, leaping out of the chaise. He went with William into the house, and I remained in such a state of
mind, that I was several times on the point of quitting the chaise, and
escaping I knew not whither; but any where from the horrid scene
awaiting me. At last, Stuart appeared without William; and getting in,
gave the driver directions to Mary's cottage. I wanted him to go without me: but he declared that no effectual
explanation could take place, unless from myself. He then said every
thing to re-assure me. He told me that the poor girl was quite
harmless, and had only temporary fits of wandering; and that, were the
circumstances of the fatal letter once explained to her, and a
reconciliation effected, she might eventually recover from her
derangement; for William, it seems, had never divulged the contents of
that letter, as it enjoined him not; but now Stuart brought it with
him. Having arrived near the cottage, we got out, and walked towards it. With a faltering step I crossed the threshold, and found the father in
the parlour. 'Dear Miss,' said he, 'welcome here once more. I suppose you have come
to see poor Mary. Oh! 'tis a piteous, piteous sight. There she does
nothing but walk about, and sigh, and talk so wild; and nobody can tell
the cause but that William; and he will not, for he says she forbade
him.' 'Come with me,' said Stuart, 'and I will tell you the cause.' He then led the miserable old man out of the room, and I remained at
the window weeping. But in a few minutes I heard a step; and on turning round, saw the
father, running towards me with a face haggard and ghastly; and crying
out, 'Cruel, cruel, cruel!' then grasping my shoulder, and lifting his
tremulous hand to heaven: 'Now,' said he, 'may the lightning of a just
and good Providence----'

'Oh! pray,' cried I, snatching down his hand--'oh! pray do not curse
me! Do not curse a poor, silly, mad creature. It was a horrid affair;
very horrid; but, indeed, indeed, I meant no harm.' 'Be calm, my good man,' said Stuart, 'and let us go to the garden where
your daughter is walking. I am sure this young lady will not refuse to
accompany us, and do her utmost in this critical moment.' 'I will do any thing,' cried I, 'come along.' We now passed into the garden; and I shuddered as I beheld the
beautiful wreck at a distance. She had just stopt short in a stepping
posture: her cloak had half fallen from her shoulders, and as her head
hung down, her forefinger was lightly laid on her lip. Panting to tell her all, I flew towards her, and caught her hand. 'Do you remember me, Mary?' said I softly. She looked at me some moments with a faint smile; and at last she
coloured. 'Ah! yes, I remember you,' said she. 'You were with us that very
evening when I was so wretched. But I don't care about him now;--I
don't indeed; and if I could only see him once more, I would tell him
so. And then I would frown and turn from him; and then he would follow,
so sad and so pale: don't you think he would? And I am keeping his
presents to give back to him, as he did mine; and see how I have my
hair parted on my forehead, just as he used to like it, ready the
moment I see him to rumple it all about; and then he will cry so. Don't
you think he will? And then I will run, run, run away like the wind,
and never see him again; never, never again.' 'My dear Mary,' said I, 'you shall see him again, and be friends with
him too. Your William is still faithful to you;--most faithful, and
still loves you better than his life. I have seen him myself this
moment.' 'You have?' cried she, reddening. 'Oh! and what did he say? But hush,
not a word before my father and that man:' and she put one hand upon my
mouth, and with the other round my waist, hurried me into a little
arbour, where we sat down. 'And now,' whispered she, stealing her arms about my neck, and looking
earnestly into my eyes, while her whole frame shook, 'and now what did
he say?' 'Mary,' said I, with a serious tone and aspect, 'you must collect your
ideas, and listen attentively, for I have much to disclose. Do you
recollect a letter that I got you to write for me when I was here
last?' 'Letter--' muttered she. 'Letter.--Yes, I believe I do. Oh! yes, I
recollect it well; for it was a sad letter to your sweetheart, telling
him that you had married another; and your sweetheart's name was
William; and I thought, at the time, I would never write such a letter
to my own William.' 'And yet, Mary,' said I, 'your own William got that letter, by some
mistake,' (for I could not bear to tell the real fact) 'that very
evening; and seeing it in your hand-writing, and addressed to William,
he thought it was from you to him; and so he gave you back your
presents, and----'

'What is all that?' cried Mary, starting up. 'Merciful powers! say all
that over again!' I made her sit down, and I shewed her the letter. As she read it, her
colour changed, her lip quivered, her hand shook; and at the
conclusion, she dropped it with a dreadful groan, and remained quite
motionless. 'Mary!' cried I, 'dear Mary, do not look so. Speak, Mary,' and I
stirred her shoulder; but she still sat motionless with a fixed smile. 'I shall, I will see her!' cried the voice of William at a distance;
and the next instant he was seated breathless by her side. 'Mary, my Mary!' cried he in the most touching accents. At the well-known voice, she started, and turned towards him; but in a
moment averted her face, and rose as pale as ashes. Then drawing some
letters and baubles from her bosom, she threw them into his lap, and
began gently disarranging her hair, all the time looking sideways at
him, with an air of pretty dignity. 'Come,' said she, taking my hand, and leading me out of the arbour. 'Well, was not that glorious? Now I shall die content.' 'Yes,' said I, 'after having first killed your William. Have I not
explained all about the letter; and how can you now treat him so
cruelly?' 'The letter,' said she. 'Ay, true, the letter. Let me consider a
moment. He thought it was mine, do you say?' 'He did indeed, Mary; and yet you will not be friends with him.' 'But you see he won't follow me,' said she. 'He would have followed me
once. Is he following me?' 'He cannot,' answered I. 'The poor young man is lying on the ground,
and sobbing ready to break his heart.' Mary stopped. 'Shall I call him?' said I. 'Why now,' said she, 'how can I prevent you?' 'William!' cried I. 'Mary calls you.' William came flying towards her. At the sound of his steps she turned,
stretched forth her hands, uttered a long and piercing cry;--and they
were locked in each other's arms. But the poor girl, quite overpowered by the sudden change, fell back
insensible; while William, kissing her, and weeping over her, bore her
into the house, and laid her on a bed. It was so long before she shewed any symptoms of animation, that we
began to feel serious alarm; and William ran to the village for an
apothecary. By degrees she came to herself, and appeared somewhat more
composed; but still wandering. At last, with her hand clasped in her
lover's, she fell asleep; and then, as our presence could be no farther
useful, we took leave of the venerable peasant; who, generous with
recent hope, freely gave me his forgiveness and his blessing. In my first transports of anguish at this scene, I disclosed to Stuart,
what I had all day determined, but dreaded to tell--the situation of my
father in the madhouse. At the horrid account, the good young man
turned pale, but said not a word. I saw that I was undone, and I burst
into tears. 'Be comforted, my dear girl,' said he, laying his hand on mine. 'You
have long been acting under the delusion of a dreadful dream, but this
confession, and these tears, are, I trust, the prognostics of a total
renunciation of error. So now let us hasten to your father and release
him. He shall forgive you; past follies shall be forgotten, past
pleasures renewed; you shall return to your real home, and Cherry
Wilkinson shall again be the daughter of an honest squire.' 'Mr. Stuart,' said I, 'as to my past follies, I know of none but
two;--Mary's and my father's matters. And as to that father, he may not
be what you suppose him. I fancy, Sir, there are such things as men who
begin life with plain names, and end it with the most Italian in the
world.' 'Well?' cried Stuart. 'Well,' said I, 'that honest squire, as you call him, may yet come out
to be a marquis.' Stuart groaned, and put his head out at the window. We have reached London, and I take the opportunity to write while
Stuart is procuring from Grundy, who now lies in prison, such a
statement as cannot fail to make the Doctor release my poor father
without hesitation. How shall I support this approaching interview? I shall sink, I shall
die under it. Indeed I wish to die; and I feel an irresistible
presentiment that my prayer will shortly be granted. All day long I
have a horrid gloom hanging over me, besides a frequent wildness of
ideas, and an unusual irritability. I have a chilliness, and yet a
burning through my skin; and I am unwilling even to move. If I could
lock myself up in a room, with heaps of romances, and shut out all the
world, I sometimes fancy that I should be happy. But no, my friend; the
grave will soon be my chamber, the worms my books; and if ever I write
again, I shall write from the bed of death. I know it; I feel it. I
shall be reconciled to my dear parent, acknowledge my follies, and die. Adieu. Agitated beyond measure, I found myself at the madhouse, without well
knowing how I had got there; and Stuart, after a long altercation with
the Doctor, supported me to the room where my father was confined. He
had to push me gently before him, and as I stopped breathless inside
the door, I saw by the dusky twilight a miserable object, shivering,
and sitting on a bed. A few rags and a blanket were cast about it: the
face was haggard, and the chin overgrown with a grisly beard. Yet,
amidst all this disfigurement, I could not mistake my father. I ran,
prostrated myself at his feet, and clasping his knees, exclaimed,
'Father, dear father!' He started, and gazed at me for a moment; then flung me from him, and
threw himself with his face downward on the bed. I cast my body across
his, and endeavoured, with both my hands, to turn round his head, that
I might embrace him; but he resisted every effort. 'Father!' cried I, clasping his neck, 'will you break my heart? Will
you drive me to distraction? Speak, father! Oh! one word, one little
word, to save me from death!' Still he lay mute and immoveable. 'You are cold, father,' said I. 'You shiver. Shall I put something
about you? shall I, father? Ah! I can be so kind and so tender when I
love one; and I love you dearly--Heaven knows I do.' I stole my hand on one of his, and lay caressing his forehead, and
murmuring words of fondness in his ear. But nothing could avail. He
withdrew his hand by degrees, and buried his forehead deeper in the
cloaths. And now half frantic, I began to wring my hands, and beat the
pillow, and moan, and utter the most deplorable lamentations. At last I thought I saw him a little convulsed, as if with smothered
tears. 'Ah,' cried I, 'you are relenting, you are weeping. Bless you for that. Dear, dear father, look up, and see with what joy a daughter can
embrace you.' 'My child, my child!' cried he, turning, and throwing himself upon my
bosom. 'A heart of stone could not withstand this! There, there, there,
I forgive you all!' Fast and fondly did we cling round each other, and sweet were the sighs
that we breathed, and the tears that we shed. But I suffered too much: the disorder which had some time been
engendering in my frame now burst forth with alarming vehemence, and I
was conveyed raving into a carriage. On our arrival at the hotel, they
sent for a physician, who pronounced me in a violent fever of a nervous
nature. For a fortnight I was not expected to recover; and I myself
felt so convinced of my speedy dissolution, that I requested the
presence of a clergyman. He came; and his conversations, by composing
my mind, contributed in a great degree to my recovery. At my request,
he paid me daily visits. Our subject was religion,--not those
theological controversies which excite so much irreligious feeling, and
teach men to hate each other for the love of God; but those plain and
simple truths which convince without confounding, and which avoid the
bigotry that would worship error, because it is hereditary; and the
fanaticism that would lay rash hands on the holy temple, because some
of its smaller pillars appear unsound. After several days of discussion on this important topic, he led me, by
degrees, to give him an account of my late adventures; and as I
related, he made comments. Affected by his previous precepts, and by my own awful approach to
eternity, which had suppressed in my heart the passions of ambition and
pride, I now became as desirous of conviction as I had heretofore been
sophistical in support of my folly. To be predisposed is to be half
converted; and soon this exemplary pastor convinced my understanding of
the impious and immoral tendency of my past life. He shewed me, that to
the inordinate gratification of a particular caprice, I had sacrificed
my duty towards my natural protectors, myself, and my God. That my
ruling passion, though harmless in its nature, was injurious in its
effects; that it gave me a distaste for all sober occupations,
perverted my judgment, and even threatened me with the deprivation of
my reason. Religion itself, he said, if indulged with immoderate
enthusiasm, at last degenerates into zealotry, and leaves the poor
devotee too rapturous to be rational, and too virulent to be religious. In a word, I have risen from my bed, an altered being; and I now look
back on my past delusions with abhorrence and disgust. Though the new
principles of conduct which I have adopted are not yet rooted or
methodized in my mind, and though the prejudices of a whole life are
not (and indeed could not be) entirely eradicated in a few days; still,
as I am resolved on endeavouring to get rid of them, I trust that my
reason will second my desire, and that the final consequence of my
perceiving what is erroneous will be my learning what is correct. Adieu. My health is now so far re-established, that I am no longer confined to
my room. Stuart pays us constant visits, and his lively advice and
witty reasoning, more complimentary than reproachful, and more
insinuated than expressed, have tended to perfect my reformation. He had put Don Quixote (a work which I never read before) into my
hands; and on my returning it to him, with a confession of the benefit
that I derived from it, the conversation naturally ran upon romances in
general. He thus delivered his sentiments. 'I do not protest against the perusal of fictitious biography
altogether; for many works of this kind may be read without injury,
and some with profit. Novels such as the Vicar of Wakefield, The
Fashionable Tales, and Coelebs, which draw man as he is, imperfect,
instead of man as he cannot be, superhuman, are both instructive
and entertaining. Romances such as the Mysteries of Udolpho, the
Italian, and the Bravo of Venice, which address themselves to the
imagination alone, are often captivating, and seldom detrimental. But
unfortunately so seductive are the latter class of composition, that
one is apt to neglect more useful books for them; besides, when
indulged in extreme, they tend to incapacitate us from encountering
the turmoils of active life. They present us with incidents and
characters which we can never meet in the world; and act upon the mind
like intoxicating stimulants; first elevate, and at last enervate it. They teach us to revel in ideal scenes of transport and distraction;
and harden our hearts against living misery, by making us so refined
as to feel disgust at its unpoetical accompaniments. 'In a country where morals are on the decline, novels always fall
several degrees below the standard of national virtue: and the contrary
holds in an opposite state of things. For as these works are an
exaggerated picture of the times, they represent the prevalent opinions
and manners with a gigantic pencil. Thus, since France became depraved,
her novels have become dissolute; and since her social system arrived
at its extreme of vicious refinement, they too have adopted that last
master-stroke of refined vice, which wins the heart by the chastest
aphorisms, and then corrupts it by the most alluring pictures of
villainy. Take Rousseau for instance. What St. Preux is to Heloise, the
book is to the reader. The lover so fascinates his mistress by his
honourable sentiments, that she cannot resist his criminal advances. The book infatuates the reader, till, in his admiration of its
morality, he loses all recollection of its licentiousness; for as
virtue is more captivating, so vice is less disgusting when adorned
with the Graces. It may be said that an author ought to portray vice in
its seductive colours, for the purpose of unmasking its arts, and thus
warning the young and inexperienced. But let it be recollected, that
though familiarity with enchanting descriptions of vice may add to
prudence, it must diminish virtue; and that while it teaches the reason
to resist, it entices the passions to yield. It was Rousseau's system,
however, to paint the scenes of a brothel, in order to speak the cant
of a monastery; and thus has he undone many an imitating miss or wife,
who began by listening to the language of love, that she might talk
sentiment, and act virtue; and ended by falling a victim to it, because
her heart had become entangled, her head bewildered, and her principles
depraved. 'Now, though we seldom see such publications in this country, yet there
is a strain of well-meaning, but false morality prevalent in some. I
will add (for why should I conceal it from you?) that your principles,
which have hitherto been formed upon such books alone, appear, at
times, a little perverted by their influence. It should now, therefore,
be your object to counteract these bad effects by some more rational
line of reading; and, as your ideas of real life are drawn from novels;
and as even your manners and language are vitiated by them, I would
recommend to you to mix in the world, to copy living instead of
imaginary beings, and to study the customs of actual, not ideal
society.' With this opinion my father perfectly coincided: the system has already
been begun, and I now pass my time in an alternation of instruction and
amusement. Morality, history, languages, and music, occupy my mornings;
and my evenings are sometimes enlivened by balls, operas, and familiar
parties. As, therefore, we shall remain some time in town, my father
has taken a house. Stuart, my counsellor and my companion, sits by my side, directs my
studies, re-assures my timidity, and corrects my mistakes. Indeed he
has to correct them often; for I still retain some taints of my former
follies and affectations. My postures are sometimes too picturesque, my
phrases too flowery, and my sentiments too sublime. This having been the day fixed for the trials of Betterton and Grundy,
the prisoners were brought to the bar, and the names of the prosecutors
called. But these did not appear, and of consequence the culprits were
discharged. It is supposed that Betterton, the great declaimer against
bribery and corruption, had tampered with the postilion and the police,
and thus escaped the fate which awaited him. Adieu. In ridding ourselves of a particular fault, we are apt, at first, to
run too far into its opposite virtue. I had poured forth my tender
feelings to you with such sentimental absurdity, when I fancied myself
enamoured of one man, that as soon as I began to reform, and found
myself actually attached to another, I determined on concealing my
fondness from you, with the most scrupulous discretion of pen. Perhaps,
therefore, I should beg your forgiveness for never having hinted to you
before, what I am now about disclosing to you without any reserve. Even at the very time when I thought I was bound in duty to be
devotedly in love with the hateful Grundy, I felt an unconscious
partiality for Stuart. But after my reformation, that partiality became
too decisive to be misinterpreted or concealed. And indeed he was so
constantly with me, and so kind a comforter and friend; and then so
fascinating are his manners, and so good his disposition; for I am
certain there is no such young man at all--you see in his eyes what he
is; you see instantly that his heart is all gentleness and benevolence,
and yet he has a fire in them, a fire that would delight you: and I
could tell you a thousand anecdotes of him that would astonish
you.--But what have I done with my sentence? Go back, good pen, and
restore it to the grammar it deserves: or rather leave it as it is--a
cripple for life, and hasten to the happy catastrophe. With a secret transport which I cannot describe, I began of late to
perceive that Stuart had become more assiduous than usual in his visits
to me; that his manners betrayed more tenderness, and his language more
regard. These attentions increased daily; nor did he omit opportunities
of hinting his passion, in terms which I could not mistake. This morning, however, put the matter beyond a doubt. I was alone when
he came to pay his accustomed visit. At first he made some faint
attempts at conversing upon indifferent topics; but all the time I
could perceive an uneasiness and perturbation in his manner that
surprised me. 'Pray,' said I, at length, 'what makes you so dull and absent to-day?' 'You,' replied he, with a smile. 'And what have I done?' said I. ''Tis not what you have done,' answered he; 'but what you will do.' 'And what is that?' said I. He changed to a nearer chair, and looked at me with much agitation. I
guessed what was coming; I had expected it some time; but now, when the
moment arrived, I felt my heart fail; so I suddenly moved towards the
door, saying that I was sure I heard my father call. Stuart sprang
after me, and led me back by the hand. 'When I tell you,' said he, 'that on the possession of this hand
depends my happiness, may I flatter myself with the hope that my
happiness would not contribute to your misery?' 'As I am no longer a heroine,' said I, smiling, 'I do not intend to get
up a scene. You happen to have my hand now; and I am afraid--very much
afraid, that----'

'That what?' cried he, holding it faster. 'That it is not worth withdrawing,' said I. But in this effort to shun a romance eclaircissement, I had, I feared,
run into the contrary extreme, and betrayed an undue boldness; so I got
sentimental in good earnest, and burst into tears. Stuart led me to my
chair, and soon dissipated my uneasiness by his eloquent expressions of
gratitude and delight, and his glowing pictures of our future
happiness. I told him, that I wondered how he, who knew my failings so
well, would venture to stake his happiness upon me. 'It was by my knowledge of your failings,' said he, 'that I discovered
your perfections. Those embarrassments of your life which I witnessed
have enabled me to judge of you more justly in a few months, than had I
been acquainted with you whole years, in the common routine of
intercourse. They have shewn me, that if you had weakness enough to
court danger, you had firmness enough to withstand temptation; and that
while the faulty part of your character was factitious and
superinduced, all the pure and generous impulses came from your heart.' Our conversation was interrupted by the sudden entrance of my father;
and on his hearing from Stuart (who, it seems had made him a confidant)
the favourable issue of our interview, the good old man hugged both of
us in his arms. To detain you no longer, a week hence is fixed for our wedding. I have just received a letter from Mary, mentioning her perfect
restoration to health, and her union with William. I shall offer no
observation on your late marriage with the butler; but I must remark,
that your reason for having never given me advice, during my
follies--namely, because my father had deprived you of the right to do
so, evinced more anger towards him than love for me. However, I shall
always be happy to hear of your welfare. Adieu. I have just time to tell you, before I leave town, that my fate was
sealed this morning, and that I am a wife. On my return to the house, after the ceremony, I found an epithalamium,
addressed to me by poor Higginson; but it was more filled with hints at
his own misery than congratulations upon my happiness.