However, the peutering went on, and I took no part. The
two candidates were as civil and as liberal, the one after the other, to
Mrs Pawkie and my daughters, as any gentlemen of a parliamentary
understanding could be. Indeed, I verily believe, that although I had
been really chosen delegate, as it was at one time intended I should be,
I could not have hoped for half the profit that came in from the dubiety
which my declaration of neutrality caused; for as often as I assured the
one candidate that I did not intend even to be present at the choosing of
the delegate, some rich present was sure to be sent to my wife, of which
the other no sooner heard than he was upsides with him. It was just a
sport to think of me protesting my neutrality, and to see how little I
was believed. For still the friends of the two candidates, like the
figures of the four quarters of the world round Britannia in a picture,
came about my wife, and poured into her lap a most extraordinary
paraphernalia from the horn of their abundance. The common talk of the town was, that surely I was bereft of my wonted
discretion, to traffic so openly with corruption; and that it could not
be doubted I would have to face the House of Commons, and suffer the
worst pains and penalties of bribery. But what did all this signify to
me, who was conscious of the truth and integrity of my motives and
talents? "They say!--what say they?--let them say!" --was what I said, as
often as any of my canny friends came to me, saying, "For God's sake, Mr
Pawkie, tak'tent"--"I hope, Mr Pawkie, ye ken the ground ye stand on"--or,
"I wish that some folks were aware of what's said about them." In short,
I was both angered and diverted by their clishmaclavers; and having some
need to go into Glasgow just on the eve of the election, I thought I
would, for diversion, give them something in truth to play with; so
saying nothing to my shop lad the night before, nor even to Mrs Pawkie,
(for the best of women are given to tattling), till we were in our beds,
I went off early on the morning of the day appointed for choosing the
delegate. The consternation in the town at my evasion was wonderful. Nobody could
fathom it; and the friends and supporters of the rival candidates looked,
as I was told, at one another, in a state of suspicion that was just a
curiosity to witness. Even when the delegate was chosen, every body
thought that something would be found wanting, merely because I was not
present. The new member himself, when his election was declared, did not
feel quite easy; and more than once, when I saw him after my return from
Glasgow, he said to me, in a particular manner--"But tell me now, bailie,
what was the true reason of your visit to Glasgow?" And, in like manner,
his opponent also hinted that he would petition against the return; but
there were some facts which he could not well get at without my
assistance--insinuating that I might find my account in helping him. At last, the true policy of the part I had played began to be understood;
and I got far more credit for the way in which I had turned both parties
so well to my own advantage, than if I had been the means of deciding the
election by my single vote. But the new member was, in some points, not of so tractable a nature as
many of his predecessors had been; and notwithstanding all the couthy
jocosity and curry-favouring of his demeanour towards us before the
election, he was no sooner returned, than he began, as it were, to snap
his fingers in the very faces of those of the council to whom he was most
indebted, which was a thing not of very easy endurance, considering how
they had taxed their consciences in his behalf; and this treatment was
the more bitterly felt, as the old member had been, during the whole of
his time, as considerate and obliging as could reasonably be expected;
doing any little job that needed his helping hand when it was in his
power, and when it was not, replying to our letters in a most discreet
and civil manner. To be sure, poor man, he had but little to say in the
way of granting favours; for being latterly inclined to a whiggish
principle, he was, in consequence, debarred from all manner of government
patronage, and had little in his gift but soft words and fair promises. Indeed, I have often remarked, in the course of my time, that there is a
surprising difference, in regard to the urbanities in use among those who
have not yet come to authority, or who have been cast down from it, and
those who are in the full possession of the rule and domination of
office; but never was the thing plainer than in the conduct of the new
member. He was by nature and inclination one of the upsetting sort; a kind of man
who, in all manner of business, have a leaven of contrariness, that makes
them very hard to deal with; and he, being conjunct with his majesty's
ministers at London, had imbibed and partook of that domineering spirit
to which all men are ordained, to be given over whenever they are clothed
in the garments of power. Many among us thought, by his colleaguing with
the government, that we had got a great catch, and they were both blythe
and vogie when he was chosen; none doubting but he would do much good
servitude to the corporation, and the interests of the burgh. However he
soon gave a rebuff, that laid us all on our backs in a state of the
greatest mortification. But although it behoved me to sink down with the
rest, I was but little hurt: on the contary, I had a good laugh in my
sleeve at the time; and afterwards, many a merry tumbler of toddy with my
brethren, when they had recovered from their discomfiture. The story was
this:--

About a fortnight after the election, Mr Scudmyloof, the schoolmaster,
called one day on me, in my shop, and said, "That being of a nervous
turn, the din of the school did not agree with him; and that he would,
therefore, be greatly obligated to me if I would get him made a gauger." There had been something in the carriage of our new member, before he
left the town, that was not satisfactory to me, forbye my part at the
election, the which made me loth to be the first to ask for any grace,
though the master was a most respectable and decent man; so I advised Mr
Scudmyloof to apply to Provost Pickandab, who had been the delegate, as
the person to whose instrumentality the member was most obliged; and to
whose application, he of course would pay the greatest attention. Whether Provost Pickandab had made any observe similar to mine, I never
could rightly understand, though I had a notion to that effect: he,
however, instead of writing himself, made the application for Mr
Scudmyloof an affair of the council; recommending him as a worthy modest
man, which he really was, and well qualified for the post. Off went this
notable letter, and by return of post from London, we got our answer as
we were all sitting in council; deliberating anent the rebuilding of the
Crosswell, which had been for some time in a sore state of dilapidation;
and surely never was any letter more to the point and less to the purpose
of an applicant. It was very short and pithy, just acknowledging receipt
of ours; and adding thereto, "circumstances do not allow me to pay any
attention to such applications." We all with one accord, in sympathy and
instinct, threw ourselves back in our chairs at the words, looking at
Provost Pickandab, with the pragmatical epistle in his hand, sitting in
his place at the head of the table, with the countenance of
consternation. When I came to myself, I began to consider that there must have been
something no right in the provost's own letter on the subject, to cause
such an uncourteous rebuff; so after condemning, in very strong terms,
the member's most ungenteel style, in order to procure for myself a
patient hearing, I warily proposed that the provost's application should
be read, a copy thereof being kept, and I had soon a positive
confirmation of my suspicion. For the provost, being fresh in the
dignity of his office, and naturally of a prideful turn, had addressed
the parliament man as if he was under an obligation to him; and as if the
council had a right to command him to get the gauger's post, or indeed
any other, for whomsoever they might apply. So, seeing whence the
original sin of the affair had sprung, I said nothing; but the same night
I wrote a humiliated letter from myself to the member, telling him how
sorry we all were for the indiscretion that had been used towards him,
and how much it would pleasure me to heal the breach that had happened
between him and the burgh, with other words of an oily and conciliating
policy. The indignant member, by the time my letter reached hand, had cooled in
his passion, and, I fancy, was glad of an occasion to do away the
consequence of the rupture; for with a most extraordinary alacrity he
procured Mr Scudmyloof the post, writing me, when he had done so, in the
civilest manner, and saying many condescending things concerning his
regard for me; all which ministered to maintain and uphold my repute and
consideration in the town, as superior to that of the provost. It was at the Michaelmas 1813 that I was chosen provost for the third
time, and at the special request of my lord the earl, who, being in ill
health, had been advised by the faculty of doctors in London to try the
medicinal virtues of the air and climate of Sicily, in the Mediterranean
sea; and there was an understanding on the occasion, that I should hold
the post of honour for two years, chiefly in order to bring to a
conclusion different works that the town had then in hand. At the two former times when I was raised to the dignity, and indeed at
all times when I received any advancement, I had enjoyed an elation of
heart, and was, as I may say, crouse and vogie; but experience had worked
a change upon my nature, and when I was saluted on my election with the
customary greetings and gratulations of those present, I felt a solemnity
enter into the frame of my thoughts, and I became as it were a new man on
the spot. When I returned home to my own house, I retired into my
private chamber for a time, to consult with myself in what manner my
deportment should be regulated; for I was conscious that heretofore I had
been overly governed with a disposition to do things my own way, and
although not in an avaricious temper, yet something, I must confess, with
a sort of sinister respect for my own interests. It may be, that
standing now clear and free of the world, I had less incitement to be so
grippy, and so was thought of me, I very well know; but in sobriety and
truth I conscientiously affirm, and herein record, that I had lived to
partake of the purer spirit which the great mutations of the age had
conjured into public affairs, and I saw that there was a necessity to
carry into all dealings with the concerns of the community, the same
probity which helps a man to prosperity in the sequestered traffic of
private life. This serious and religious communing wrought within me to a benign and
pleasant issue, and when I went back in the afternoon to dine with the
corporation in the council-room, and looked around me on the bailies, the
councillors, and the deacons, I felt as if I was indeed elevated above
them all, and that I had a task to perform, in which I could hope for but
little sympathy from many; and the first thing I did was to measure, with
a discreet hand, the festivity of the occasion. At all former and precedent banquets, it had been the custom to give vent
to muckle wanton and luxurious indulgence, and to galravitch, both at
hack and manger, in a very expensive manner to the funds of the town. I
therefore resolved to set my face against this for the future; and
accordingly, when we had enjoyed a jocose temperance of loyalty and
hilarity, with a decent measure of wine, I filled a glass, and requesting
all present to do the same, without any preliminary reflections on the
gavaulling of past times, I drank good afternoon to each severally, and
then rose from the table, in a way that put an end to all the
expectations of more drink. But this conduct did not give satisfaction to some of the old hands, who
had been for years in the habit and practice of looking forward to the
provost's dinner as to a feast of fat things. Mr Peevie, one of the very
sickerest of all the former sederunts, came to me next morning, in a
remonstrating disposition, to enquire what had come over me, and to tell
me that every body was much surprised, and many thought it not right of
me to break in upon ancient and wonted customs in such a sudden and
unconcerted manner. This Mr Peevie was, in his person, a stumpy man, well advanced in years. He had been, in his origin, a bonnet-maker; but falling heir to a friend
that left him a property, he retired from business about the fiftieth
year of his age, doing nothing but walking about with an ivory-headed
staff, in a suit of dark bluecloth with yellow buttons, wearing a large
cocked hat, and a white three-tiered wig, which was well powdered every
morning by Duncan Curl, the barber. The method of his discourse and
conversation was very precise, and his words were all set forth in a
style of consequence, that took with many for a season as the pith and
marrow of solidity and sense. The body, however, was but a pompous
trifle, and I had for many a day held his observes and admonishments in
no very reverential estimation. So that, when I heard him address me in
such a memorializing manner, I was inclined and tempted to set him off
with a flea in his lug. However, I was enabled to bridle and rein in
this prejudicial humour, and answer him in his own way. "Mr Peevie," quo' I, "you know that few in the town hae the repute that
ye hae for a gift of sagacity by common, and therefore I'll open my mind
to you in this matter, with a frankness that would not be a judicious
polity with folk of a lighter understanding." This was before the counter in my shop. I then walked in behind it, and
drew the chair that stands in the corner nearer to the fire, for Mr
Peevie.