This was the first intimation Miss Oldbuck had received that the young
stranger was to be their guest for the night; and such was the surprise
with which she was struck by a proposal so uncommon, that, had the
superincumbent weight of her head-dress, such as we before described,
been less preponderant, her grey locks must have started up on end, and
hurled it from its position. “Lord haud a care o’ us!” exclaimed the astounded maiden. “What’s the matter now, Grizel?”

“Wad ye but just speak a moment, Monkbarns?”

“Speak!--what should I speak about? I want to get to my bed--and this poor
young fellow--let a bed be made ready for him instantly.”

“A bed?--The Lord preserve us!” again ejaculated Grizel. “Why, what’s the matter now?--are there not beds and rooms enough in the
house?--was it not an ancient hospitium, in which, I am warranted to say,
beds were nightly made down for a score of pilgrims?”

“O dear, Monkbarns! wha kens what they might do lang syne?--but in our
time--beds--ay, troth, there’s beds enow sic as they are--and rooms enow
too--but ye ken yoursell the beds haena been sleepit in, Lord kens the
time, nor the rooms aired.--If I had kenn’d, Mary and me might hae gaen
down to the manse--Miss Beckie is aye fond to see us--(and sae is the
minister, brother)--But now, gude save us!”--

“Is there not the Green Room, Grizel?”

“Troth is there, and it is in decent order too, though naebody has
sleepit there since Dr. Heavysterne, and”--

“And what?”

“And what! I am sure ye ken yoursell what a night he had--ye wadna expose
the young gentleman to the like o’ that, wad ye?”

Lovel interfered upon hearing this altercation, and protested he would
far rather walk home than put them to the least inconvenience--that the
exercise would be of service to him--that he knew the road perfectly,
by night or day, to Fairport--that the storm was abating, and so
forth--adding all that civility could suggest as an excuse for escaping
from a hospitality which seemed more inconvenient to his host than he
could possibly have anticipated. But the howling of the wind, and the
pattering of the rain against the windows, with his knowledge of the
preceding fatigues of the evening, must have prohibited Oldbuck, even
had he entertained less regard for his young friend than he really felt,
from permitting him to depart. Besides, he was piqued in honour to show
that he himself was not governed by womankind--“Sit ye down, sit ye down,
sit ye down, man,” he reiterated;--“an ye part so, I would I might never
draw a cork again, and here comes out one from a prime bottle of--strong
ale--right anno domini--none of your Wassia Quassia decoctions, but brewed
of Monkbarns barley--John of the Girnel never drew a better flagon to
entertain a wandering minstrel, or palmer, with the freshest news from
Palestine.--And to remove from your mind the slightest wish to depart,
know, that if you do so, your character as a gallant knight is gone
for ever. Why, ‘tis an adventure, man, to sleep in the Green Room
at Monkbarns.--Sister, pray see it got ready--And, although the bold
adventurer, Heavysterne, dree’d pain and dolour in that charmed
apartment, it is no reason why a gallant knight like you, nearly twice
as tall, and not half so heavy, should not encounter and break the
spell.”

“What! a haunted apartment, I suppose?”

“To be sure, to be sure--every mansion in this country of the slightest
antiquity has its ghosts and its haunted chamber, and you must not
suppose us worse off than our neighbours. They are going, indeed,
somewhat out of fashion. I have seen the day, when if you had doubted
the reality of a ghost in an old manor-house you ran the risk of being
made a ghost yourself, as Hamlet says.--Yes, if you had challenged
the existence of Redcowl in the Castle of Glenstirym, old Sir Peter
Pepperbrand would have had ye out to his court-yard, made you betake
yourself to your weapon, and if your trick of fence were not the better,
would have sticked you like a paddock, on his own baronial midden-stead. I once narrowly escaped such an affray--but I humbled myself, and
apologised to Redcowl; for, even in my younger days, I was no friend to
the monomachia, or duel, and would rather walk with Sir Priest than with
Sir Knight--I care not who knows so much of my valour. Thank God, I am
old now, and can indulge my irritabilities without the necessity of
supporting them by cold steel.”

Here Miss Oldbuck re-entered, with a singularly sage expression of
countenance.--“Mr. Lovel’s bed’s ready, brother--clean sheets--weel aired--a
spunk of fire in the chimney--I am sure, Mr. Lovel,” (addressing him),
“it’s no for the trouble--and I hope you will have a good night’s
rest--But”--

“You are resolved,” said the Antiquary, “to do what you can to prevent
it.”

“Me?--I am sure I have said naething, Monkbarns.”

“My dear madam,” said Lovel, “allow me to ask you the meaning of your
obliging anxiety on my account.”

“Ou, Monkbarns does not like to hear of it--but he kens himsell that the
room has an ill name. It’s weel minded that it was there auld Rab Tull
the town-clerk was sleeping when he had that marvellous communication
about the grand law-plea between us and the feuars at the Mussel-craig. --It had cost a hantle siller, Mr. Lovel; for law-pleas were no carried
on without siller lang syne mair than they are now--and the Monkbarns of
that day--our gudesire, Mr. Lovel, as I said before--was like to be waured
afore the Session for want of a paper--Monkbarns there kens weel what
paper it was, but I’se warrant he’ll no help me out wi’ my tale--but it
was a paper of great significance to the plea, and we were to be waured
for want o’t. Aweel, the cause was to come on before the fifteen--in
presence, as they ca’t--and auld Rab Tull, the town-clerk, he cam ower to
make a last search for the paper that was wanting, before our gudesire
gaed into Edinburgh to look after his plea--so there was little time to
come and gang on. He was but a doited snuffy body, Rab, as I’ve heard
--but then he was the town-clerk of Fairport, and the Monkbarns heritors
aye employed him on account of their connection wi’ the burgh, ye ken.”

“Sister Grizel, this is abominable,” interrupted Oldbuck; “I vow to
Heaven ye might have raised the ghosts of every abbot of Trotcosey,
since the days of Waldimir, in the time you have been detailing the
introduction to this single spectre.--Learn to be succinct in your
narrative.--Imitate the concise style of old Aubrey, an experienced
ghost-seer, who entered his memoranda on these subjects in a terse
business-like manner; exempli gratia--At Cirencester, 5th March, 1670,
was an apparition.--Being demanded whether good spirit or bad, made
no answer, but instantly disappeared with a curious perfume, and a
melodious twang’--Vide his Miscellanies, p. eighteen, as well as I can
remember, and near the middle of the page.”

“O, Monkbarns, man! do ye think everybody is as book-learned as
yoursell?--But ye like to gar folk look like fools--ye can do that to Sir
Arthur, and the minister his very sell.”

“Nature has been beforehand with me, Grizel, in both these instances,
and in another which shall be nameless--but take a glass of ale, Grizel,
and proceed with your story, for it waxes late.”

“Jenny’s just warming your bed, Monkbarns, and ye maun e’en wait till
she’s done.--Weel, I was at the search that our gudesire, Monkbarns that
then was, made wi’ auld Rab Tull’s assistance;--but ne’er-be-licket could
they find that was to their purpose. And sae after they had touzled out
mony a leather poke-full o’ papers, the town-clerk had his drap punch at
e’en to wash the dust out of his throat--we never were glass-breakers in
this house, Mr. Lovel, but the body had got sic a trick of sippling and
tippling wi’ the bailies and deacons when they met (which was amaist
ilka night) concerning the common gude o’ the burgh, that he couldna
weel sleep without it--But his punch he gat, and to bed he gaed; and in
the middle of the night he got a fearfu’ wakening!--he was never just
himsell after it, and he was strucken wi’ the dead palsy that very day
four years. He thought, Mr. Lovel, that he heard the curtains o’ his
bed fissil, and out he lookit, fancying, puir man, it might hae been the
cat--But he saw--God hae a care o’ us! it gars my flesh aye creep, though
I hae tauld the story twenty times--he saw a weel-fa’ard auld gentleman
standing by his bedside, in the moonlight, in a queer-fashioned dress,
wi’ mony a button and band-string about it, and that part o’ his
garments which it does not become a leddy to particulareeze, was baith
side and wide, and as mony plies o’t as of ony Hamburgh skipper’s--He had
a beard too, and whiskers turned upwards on his upper-lip, as lang as
baudrons’--and mony mair particulars there were that Rab Tull tauld
o’, but they are forgotten now--it’s an auld story. Aweel, Rab was a
just-living man for a country writer--and he was less feared than maybe
might just hae been expected; and he asked in the name o’ goodness what
the apparition wanted--and the spirit answered in an unknown tongue. Then
Rab said he tried him wi’ Erse, for he cam in his youth frae the braes
of Glenlivat--but it wadna do. Aweel, in this strait, he bethought him
of the twa or three words o’ Latin that he used in making out the town’s
deeds, and he had nae sooner tried the spirit wi’ that, than out cam sic
a blatter o’ Latin about his lugs, that poor Rab Tull, wha was nae great
scholar, was clean overwhelmed. Od, but he was a bauld body, and he
minded the Latin name for the deed that he was wanting. It was something
about a cart, I fancy, for the ghaist cried aye, Carter, carter--”

“Carta, you transformer of languages!” cried Oldbuck;--“if my ancestor
had learned no other language in the other world, at least he would not
forget the Latinity for which he was so famous while in this.”

“Weel, weel, carta be it then, but they ca’d it carter that tell’d me
the story. It cried aye carta, if sae be that it was carta, and made a
sign to Rab to follow it. Rab Tull keepit a Highland heart, and banged
out o’ bed, and till some of his readiest claes--and he did follow the
thing up stairs and down stairs to the place we ca’ the high dow-cot--(a
sort of a little tower in the corner of the auld house, where there was
a Rickle o’ useless boxes and trunks)--and there the ghaist gae Rab a
kick wi’ the tae foot, and a kick wi’ the tother, to that very auld
east-country tabernacle of a cabinet that my brother has standing beside
his library table, and then disappeared like a fuff o’ tobacco, leaving
Rab in a very pitiful condition.”

“Tenues secessit in auras,” quoth Oldbuck. “Marry, sir, mansit odor--But,
sure enough, the deed was there found in a drawer of this forgotten
repository, which contained many other curious old papers, now properly
labelled and arranged, and which seemed to have belonged to my ancestor,
the first possessor of Monkbarns. The deed, thus strangely recovered,
was the original Charter of Erection of the Abbey, Abbey Lands, and so
forth, of Trotcosey, comprehending Monkbarns and others, into a Lordship
of Regality in favour of the first Earl of Glengibber, a favourite
of James the Sixth. It is subscribed by the King at Westminster,
the seventeenth day of January, A. D. one thousand six hundred and
twelve--thirteen. It’s not worth while to repeat the witnesses’ names.”

“I would rather,” said Lovel with awakened curiosity, “I would rather
hear your opinion of the way in which the deed was discovered.”

“Why, if I wanted a patron for my legend, I could find no less a one
than Saint Augustine, who tells the story of a deceased person appearing
to his son, when sued for a debt which had been paid, and directing him
where, to find the discharge. Note D. Mr. Rutherford’s dream. But I rather opine with Lord Bacon, who says that imagination is much
akin to miracle-working faith. There was always some idle story of
the room being haunted by the spirit of Aldobrand Oldenbuck, my
great-great-great-grandfather--it’s a shame to the English language that,
we have not a less clumsy way of expressing a relationship of which we
have occasion to think and speak so frequently. He was a foreigner, and
wore his national dress, of which tradition had preserved an accurate
description; and indeed there is a print of him, supposed to be by
Reginald Elstracke, pulling the press with his own hand, as it works off
the sheets of his scarce edition of the Augsburg Confession. He was a
chemist as well as a good mechanic, and either of these qualities in
this country was at that time sufficient to constitute a white witch at
least. This superstitious old writer had heard all this, and probably
believed it, and in his sleep the image and idea of my ancestor recalled
that of his cabinet, which, with the grateful attention to antiquities
and the memory of our ancestors not unusually met with, had been pushed
into the pigeon-house to be out of the way--Add a quantum sufficit of
exaggeration, and you have a key to the whole mystery.”

“O brother! brother! but Dr. Heavysterne, brother--whose sleep was so
sore broken, that he declared he wadna pass another night in the Green
Room to get all Monkbarns, so that Mary and I were forced to yield our”--

“Why, Grizel, the doctor is a good, honest, pudding-headed German, of
much merit in his own way, but fond of the mystical, like many of his
countrymen. You and he had a traffic the whole evening in which you
received tales of Mesmer, Shropfer, Cagliostro, and other modern
pretenders to the mystery of raising spirits, discovering hidden
treasure, and so forth, in exchange for your legends of the green
bedchamber;--and considering that the Illustrissimus ate a pound and a
half of Scotch collops to supper, smoked six pipes, and drank ale and
brandy in proportion, I am not surprised at his having a fit of the
night-mare. But everything is now ready. Permit me to light you to your
apartment, Mr. Lovel--I am sure you have need of rest--and I trust my
ancestor is too sensible of the duties of hospitality to interfere with
the repose which you have so well merited by your manly and gallant
behaviour.”

So saying, the Antiquary took up a bedroom candlestick of massive silver
and antique form, which, he observed, was wrought out of the silver
found in the mines of the Harz mountains, and had been the property
of the very personage who had supplied them with a subject for
conversation. And having so said, he led the way through many a dusky
and winding passage, now ascending, and anon descending again, until he
came to the apartment destined for his young guest. When midnight o’er the moonless skies
                 Her pall of transient death has spread,
                 When mortals sleep, when spectres rise,
                   And none are wakeful but the dead;
                   No bloodless shape my way pursues,
                   No sheeted ghost my couch annoys,
                   Visions more sad my fancy views,--
                       Visions of long departed joys. W. R. Spenser. When they reached the Green Room, as it was called, Oldbuck placed the
candle on the toilet table, before a huge mirror with a black japanned
frame, surrounded by dressing-boxes of the same, and looked around him
with something of a disturbed expression of countenance. “I am seldom
in this apartment,” he said, “and never without yielding to a melancholy
feeling--not, of course, on account of the childish nonsense that Grizel
was telling you, but owing to circumstances of an early and unhappy
attachment. It is at such moments as these, Mr. Lovel, that we feel the
changes of time. The same objects are before us--those inanimate things
which we have gazed on in wayward infancy and impetuous youth, in
anxious and scheming manhood--they are permanent and the same; but when
we look upon them in cold unfeeling old age, can we, changed in our
temper, our pursuits, our feelings--changed in our form, our limbs, and
our strength,--can we be ourselves called the same? or do we not rather
look back with a sort of wonder upon our former selves, as being
separate and distinct from what we now are? The philosopher who appealed
from Philip inflamed with wine to Philip in his hours of sobriety, did
not choose a judge so different, as if he had appealed from Philip in
his youth to Philip in his old age. I cannot but be touched with the
feeling so beautifully expressed in a poem which I have heard repeated:

Probably Wordsworth’s Lyrical Ballads had not as yet been published. My eyes are dim with childish tears,
                       My heart is idly stirred,
                   For the same sound is in my ears
                      Which in those days I heard. Thus fares it still in our decay;
                        And yet the wiser mind
                   Mourns less for what time takes away,
                       Than what he leaves behind. Well, time cures every wound, and though the scar may remain and
occasionally ache, yet the earliest agony of its recent infliction is
felt no more.”--So saying, he shook Lovel cordially by the hand, wished
him good-night, and took his leave. Step after step Lovel could trace his host’s retreat along the various
passages, and each door which he closed behind him fell with a sound
more distant and dead. The guest, thus separated from the living world,
took up the candle and surveyed the apartment. The fire blazed cheerfully. Mrs. Grizel’s attention had left some
fresh wood, should he choose to continue it, and the apartment had a
comfortable, though not a lively appearance. It was hung with tapestry,
which the looms of Arras had produced in the sixteenth century, and
which the learned typographer, so often mentioned, had brought with
him as a sample of the arts of the Continent. The subject was a
hunting-piece; and as the leafy boughs of the forest-trees, branching
over the tapestry, formed the predominant colour, the apartment had
thence acquired its name of the Green Chamber. Grim figures in the
old Flemish dress, with slashed doublets covered with ribbands,
short cloaks, and trunk-hose, were engaged in holding grey-hounds, or
stag-hounds, in the leash, or cheering them upon the objects of their
game. Others, with boar-spears, swords, and old-fashioned guns, were
attacking stags or boars whom they had brought to bay. The branches of
the woven forest were crowded with fowls of various kinds, each depicted
with its proper plumage. It seemed as if the prolific and rich invention
of old Chaucer had animated the Flemish artist with its profusion, and
Oldbuck had accordingly caused the following verses, from that ancient
and excellent poet, to be embroidered in Gothic letters, on a sort of
border which he had added to the tapestry:--

              Lo! here be oakis grete, streight as a line,
              Under the which the grass, so fresh of line,
              Be’th newly sprung--at eight foot or nine. Everich tree well from his fellow grew,
              With branches broad laden with leaves new,
              That sprongen out against the sonne sheene,
              Some golden red and some a glad bright green. And in another canton was the following similar legend:--

                  And many an hart and many an hind,
                    Was both before me, and behind. Of fawns, sownders, bucks and does,
                    Was full the wood and many roes,
                    And many squirrels that ysate
                    High on the trees and nuts ate. The bed was of a dark and faded green, wrought to correspond with the
tapestry, but by a more modern and less skilful hand. The large and
heavy stuff-bottomed chairs, with black ebony backs, were embroidered
after the same pattern, and a lofty mirror, over the antique
chimney-piece, corresponded in its mounting with that on the
old-fashioned toilet. “I have heard,” muttered Lovel, as he took a cursory view of the room
and its furniture, “that ghosts often chose the best room in the mansion
to which they attached themselves; and I cannot disapprove of the taste
of the disembodied printer of the Augsburg Confession.” But he found it
so difficult to fix his mind upon the stories which had been told him of
an apartment with which they seemed so singularly to correspond, that he
almost regretted the absence of those agitated feelings, half fear half
curiosity, which sympathise with the old legends of awe and wonder,
from which the anxious reality of his own hopeless passion at present
detached him. For he now only felt emotions like those expressed in the
lines,--

                 Ah! cruel maid, how hast thou changed
                        The temper of my mind! My heart, by thee from all estranged,
                        Becomes like thee unkind. He endeavoured to conjure up something like the feelings which would, at
another time, have been congenial to his situation, but his heart had
no room for these vagaries of imagination. The recollection of Miss
Wardour, determined not to acknowledge him when compelled to endure his
society, and evincing her purpose to escape from it, would have
alone occupied his imagination exclusively. But with this were
united recollections more agitating if less painful,--her hair-breadth
escape--the fortunate assistance which he had been able to render
her--Yet what was his requital? She left the cliff while his fate was yet
doubtful--while it was uncertain whether her preserver had not lost the
life which he had exposed for her so freely. Surely gratitude, at least,
called for some little interest in his fate--But no--she could not be
selfish or unjust--it was no part of her nature. She only desired to shut
the door against hope, and, even in compassion to him, to extinguish a
passion which she could never return. But this lover-like mode of reasoning was not likely to reconcile him to
his fate, since the more amiable his imagination presented Miss Wardour,
the more inconsolable he felt he should be rendered by the extinction of
his hopes. He was, indeed, conscious of possessing the power of removing
her prejudices on some points; but, even in extremity, he determined
to keep the original determination which he had formed, of ascertaining
that she desired an explanation, ere he intruded one upon her. And, turn
the matter as he would, he could not regard his suit as desperate. There
was something of embarrassment as well as of grave surprise in her look
when Oldbuck presented him--and, perhaps, upon second thoughts, the one
was assumed to cover the other. He would not relinquish a pursuit which
had already cost him such pains. Plans, suiting the romantic temper of
the brain that entertained them, chased each other through his head,
thick and irregular as the motes of the sun-beam, and, long after he had
laid himself to rest, continued to prevent the repose which he greatly
needed. Then, wearied by the uncertainty and difficulties with which
each scheme appeared to be attended, he bent up his mind to the strong
effort of shaking off his love, “like dew-drops from the lion’s mane,”
 and resuming those studies and that career of life which his unrequited
affection had so long and so fruitlessly interrupted. In this last
resolution he endeavoured to fortify himself by every argument which
pride, as well as reason, could suggest. “She shall not suppose,” he
said, “that, presuming on an accidental service to her or to her father,
I am desirous to intrude myself upon that notice, to which, personally,
she considered me as having no title. I will see her no more. I will
return to the land which, if it affords none fairer, has at least many
as fair, and less haughty than Miss Wardour. Tomorrow I will bid adieu
to these northern shores, and to her who is as cold and relentless
as her climate.” When he had for some time brooded over this sturdy
resolution, exhausted nature at length gave way, and, despite of wrath,
doubt, and anxiety, he sank into slumber. It is seldom that sleep, after such violent agitation, is either sound
or refreshing. Lovel’s was disturbed by a thousand baseless and confused
visions. He was a bird--he was a fish--or he flew like the one, and swam
like the other,--qualities which would have been very essential to his
safety a few hours before. Then Miss Wardour was a syren, or a bird of
Paradise; her father a triton, or a sea-gull; and Oldbuck alternately
a porpoise and a cormorant. These agreeable imaginations were varied by
all the usual vagaries of a feverish dream;--the air refused to bear the
visionary, the water seemed to burn him--the rocks felt like down pillows
as he was dashed against them--whatever he undertook, failed in some
strange and unexpected manner--and whatever attracted his attention,
underwent, as he attempted to investigate it, some wild and wonderful
metamorphosis, while his mind continued all the while in some degree
conscious of the delusion, from which it in vain struggled to free
itself by awaking;--feverish symptoms all, with which those who are
haunted by the night-hag, whom the learned call Ephialtes, are but too
well acquainted. At length these crude phantasmata arranged themselves
into something more regular, if indeed the imagination of Lovel, after
he awoke (for it was by no means the faculty in which his mind was least
rich), did not gradually, insensibly, and unintentionally, arrange in
better order the scene of which his sleep presented, it may be, a less
distinct outline. Or it is possible that his feverish agitation may have
assisted him in forming the vision. Leaving this discussion to the learned, we will say, that after a
succession of wild images, such as we have above described, our hero,
for such we must acknowledge him, so far regained a consciousness of
locality as to remember where he was, and the whole furniture of the
Green Chamber was depicted to his slumbering eye. And here, once more,
let me protest, that if there should be so much old-fashioned faith
left among this shrewd and sceptical generation, as to suppose that
what follows was an impression conveyed rather by the eye than by the
imagination, I do not impugn their doctrine. He was, then, or imagined
himself, broad awake in the Green Chamber, gazing upon the flickering
and occasional flame which the unconsumed remnants of the faggots sent
forth, as, one by one, they fell down upon the red embers, into which
the principal part of the boughs to which they belonged had crumbled
away. Insensibly the legend of Aldobrand Oldenbuck, and his mysterious
visits to the inmates of the chamber, awoke in his mind, and with it,
as we often feel in dreams, an anxious and fearful expectation, which
seldom fails instantly to summon up before our mind’s eye the object of
our fear. Brighter sparkles of light flashed from the chimney, with
such intense brilliancy as to enlighten all the room. The tapestry waved
wildly on the wall, till its dusky forms seemed to become animated. The
hunters blew their horns--the stag seemed to fly, the boar to resist,
and the hounds to assail the one and pursue the other; the cry of deer,
mangled by throttling dogs--the shouts of men, and the clatter of horses’
hoofs, seemed at once to surround him--while every group pursued, with
all the fury of the chase, the employment in which the artist had
represented them as engaged. Lovel looked on this strange scene devoid
of wonder (which seldom intrudes itself upon the sleeping fancy), but
with an anxious sensation of awful fear. At length an individual figure
among the tissued huntsmen, as he gazed upon them more fixedly, seemed
to leave the arras and to approach the bed of the slumberer. As he
drew near, his figure appeared to alter. His bugle-horn became a brazen
clasped volume; his hunting-cap changed to such a furred head-gear as
graces the burgomasters of Rembrandt; his Flemish garb remained but his
features, no longer agitated with the fury of the chase, were changed
to such a state of awful and stern composure, as might best portray the
first proprietor of Monkbarns, such as he had been described to Lovel
by his descendants in the course of the preceding evening. As this
metamorphosis took place, the hubbub among the other personages in the
arras disappeared from the imagination of the dreamer, which was now
exclusively bent on the single figure before him. Lovel strove to
interrogate this awful person in the form of exorcism proper for the
occasion; but his tongue, as is usual in frightful dreams, refused its
office, and clung, palsied, to the roof of his mouth. Aldobrand held up
his finger, as if to impose silence upon the guest who had intruded on
his apartment, and began deliberately to unclasp the venerable, volume
which occupied his left hand. When it was unfolded, he turned over the
leaves hastily for a short space, and then raising his figure to its
full dimensions, and holding the book aloft in his left hand, pointed to
a passage in the page which he thus displayed. Although the language was
unknown to our dreamer, his eye and attention were both strongly caught
by the line which the figure seemed thus to press upon his notice, the
words of which appeared to blaze with a supernatural light, and remained
riveted upon his memory. As the vision shut his volume, a strain of
delightful music seemed to fill the apartment--Lovel started, and became
completely awake. The music, however, was still in his ears, nor ceased
till he could distinctly follow the measure of an old Scottish tune. He sate up in bed, and endeavoured to clear his brain of the phantoms
which had disturbed it during this weary night. The beams of the morning
sun streamed through the half-closed shutters, and admitted a distinct
light into the apartment. He looked round upon the hangings,--but the
mixed groups of silken and worsted huntsmen were as stationary as
tenter-hooks could make them, and only trembled slightly as the early
breeze, which found its way through an open crevice of the latticed
window, glided along their surface. Lovel leapt out of bed, and,
wrapping himself in a morning-gown, that had been considerately laid by
his bedside, stepped towards the window, which commanded a view of the
sea, the roar of whose billows announced it still disquieted by the
storm of the preceding evening, although the morning was fair and
serene. The window of a turret, which projected at an angle with the
wall, and thus came to be very near Lovel’s apartment, was half-open,
and from that quarter he heard again the same music which had probably
broken short his dream. With its visionary character it had lost much
of its charms--it was now nothing more than an air on the harpsichord,
tolerably well performed--such is the caprice of imagination as
affecting the fine arts. A female voice sung, with some taste and
great simplicity, something between a song and a hymn, in words to the
following effect:--

                 “Why sitt’st thou by that ruin’d hall,
                  Thou aged carle so stern and grey? Dost thou its former pride recall,
                     Or ponder how it passed away? “Know’st thou not me!” the Deep Voice cried,
                   “So long enjoyed, so oft misused--
                    Alternate, in thy fickle pride,
                    Desired, neglected, and accused? “Before my breath, like, blazing flax,
                    Man and his marvels pass away;
                    And changing empires wane and wax,
                   Are founded, flourish and decay. “Redeem mine hours--the space is brief--
                While in my glass the sand-grains shiver,
                   And measureless thy joy or grief,
                When Time and thou shalt part for ever!”

While the verses were yet singing, Lovel had returned to his bed; the
train of ideas which they awakened was romantic and pleasing, such as
his soul delighted in, and, willingly adjourning till more broad day the
doubtful task of determining on his future line of conduct, he abandoned
himself to the pleasing languor inspired by the music, and fell into a
sound and refreshing sleep, from which he was only awakened at a late
hour by old Caxon, who came creeping into the room to render the offices
of a valet-de-chambre. “I have brushed your coat, sir,” said the old man, when he perceived
Lovel was awake; “the callant brought it frae Fairport this morning, for
that ye had on yesterday is scantly feasibly dry, though it’s been a’
night at the kitchen fire; and I hae cleaned your shoon. I doubt ye’ll
no be wanting me to tie your hair, for” (with a gentle sigh) “a’ the
young gentlemen wear crops now; but I hae the curling tangs here to
gie it a bit turn ower the brow, if ye like, before ye gae down to the
leddies.”

Lovel, who was by this time once more on his legs, declined the old
man’s professional offices, but accompanied the refusal with such a
douceur as completely sweetened Caxon’s mortification. “It’s a pity he disna get his hair tied and pouthered,” said the ancient
friseur, when he had got once more into the kitchen, in which, on one
pretence or other, he spent three parts of his idle time--that is to
say, of his whole time--“it’s a great pity, for he’s a comely young
gentleman.”

“Hout awa, ye auld gowk,” said Jenny Rintherout, “would ye creesh his
bonny brown hair wi’ your nasty ulyie, and then moust it like the auld
minister’s wig? Ye’ll be for your breakfast, I’se warrant?--hae, there’s
a soup parritch for ye--it will set ye better tae be slaistering at them
and the lapper-milk than meddling wi’ Mr. Lovel’s head--ye wad spoil the
maist natural and beautifaest head o’ hair in a’ Fairport, baith burgh
and county.”

The poor barber sighed over the disrespect into which his art had so
universally fallen, but Jenny was a person too important to offend by
contradiction; so, sitting quietly down in the kitchen, he digested at
once his humiliation, and the contents of a bicker which held a Scotch
pint of substantial oatmeal porridge. Sometimes he thinks that Heaven this pageant sent,
               And ordered all the pageants as they went;
             Sometimes that only ‘twas wild Fancy’s play,--
               The loose and scattered relics of the day. We must now request our readers to adjourn to the breakfast parlour
of Mr. Oldbuck, who, despising the modern slops of tea and coffee, was
substantially regaling himself, more majorum, with cold roast-beef, and
a glass of a sort of beverage called mum--a species of fat ale, brewed
from wheat and bitter herbs, of which the present generation only know
the name by its occurrence in revenue acts of parliament, coupled with
cider, perry, and other excisable commodities. Lovel, who was seduced to
taste it, with difficulty refrained from pronouncing it detestable, but
did refrain, as he saw he should otherwise give great offence to his
host, who had the liquor annually prepared with peculiar care, according
to the approved recipe bequeathed to him by the so-often mentioned
Aldobrand Oldenbuck. The hospitality of the ladies offered Lovel a
breakfast more suited to modern taste, and while he was engaged in
partaking of it, he was assailed by indirect inquiries concerning the
manner in which he had passed the night. “We canna compliment Mr. Lovel on his looks this morning, brother--but
he winna condescend on any ground of disturbance he has had in the night
time. I am certain he looks very pale, and when he came here he was as
fresh as a rose.”

“Why, sister, consider this rose of yours has been knocked about by sea
and wind all yesterday evening, as if he had been a bunch of kelp or
tangle, and how the devil would you have him retain his colour?”

“I certainly do still feel somewhat fatigued,” said Lovel,
“notwithstanding the excellent accommodations with which your
hospitality so amply supplied me.”

“Ah, sir!” said Miss Oldbuck looking at him with a knowing smile, or
what was meant to be one, “ye’ll not allow of ony inconvenience, out of
civility to us.”

“Really, madam,” replied Lovel, “I had no disturbance; for I cannot term
such the music with which some kind fairy favoured me.”

“I doubted Mary wad waken you wi’ her skreighing; she dinna ken I had
left open a chink of your window, for, forbye the ghaist, the Green
Room disna vent weel in a high wind--But I am judging ye heard mair
than Mary’s lilts yestreen. Weel, men are hardy creatures--they can gae
through wi’ a’ thing. I am sure, had I been to undergo ony thing of that
nature,--that’s to say that’s beyond nature--I would hae skreigh’d out at
once, and raised the house, be the consequence what liket--and, I dare
say, the minister wad hae done as mickle, and sae I hae tauld him,--I ken
naebody but my brother, Monkbarns himsell, wad gae through the like o’t,
if, indeed, it binna you, Mr. Lovel.”

“A man of Mr. Oldbuck’s learning, madam,” answered the questioned party,
“would not be exposed to the inconvenience sustained by the Highland
gentleman you mentioned last night.”

“Ay, ay--ye understand now where the difficulty lies. Language? he has
ways o’ his ain wad banish a’ thae sort o’ worricows as far as
the hindermost parts of Gideon” (meaning possibly Midian), “as Mr.
Blattergowl says--only ane widna be uncivil to ane’s forbear, though he
be a ghaist. I am sure I will try that receipt of yours, brother, that
ye showed me in a book, if onybody is to sleep in that room again,
though I think, in Christian charity, ye should rather fit up the
matted-room--it’s a wee damp and dark, to be sure, but then we hae sae
seldom occasion for a spare bed.”

“No, no, sister;--dampness and darkness are worse than spectres--ours are
spirits of light, and I would rather have you try the spell.”

“I will do that blythely, Monkbarns, an I had the ingredients, as my
cookery book ca’s them--There was vervain and dill--I mind that--Davie
Dibble will ken about them, though, maybe, he’ll gie them Latin
names--and Peppercorn, we hae walth o’ them, for”--

“Hypericon, thou foolish woman!” thundered Oldbuck; “d’ye suppose you’re
making a haggis--or do you think that a spirit, though he be formed of
air, can be expelled by a receipt against wind?--This wise Grizel of
mine, Mr. Lovel, recollects (with what accuracy you may judge) a
charm which I once mentioned to her, and which, happening to hit her
superstitious noddle, she remembers better than anything tending to a
useful purpose, I may chance to have said for this ten years. But many
an old woman besides herself”--

“Auld woman, Monkbarns!” said Miss Oldbuck, roused something above her
usual submissive tone; “ye really are less than civil to me.”

“Not less than just, Grizel: however, I include in the same class many
a sounding name, from Jamblichus down to Aubrey, who have wasted their
time in devising imaginary remedies for non-existing diseases.--But I
hope, my young friend, that, charmed or uncharmed--secured by the potency
of Hypericon,

                      With vervain and with dill,
                      That hinder witches of their will,

or left disarmed and defenceless to the inroads of the invisible world,
you will give another night to the terrors of the haunted apartment, and
another day to your faithful and feal friends.”

“I heartily wish I could, but”--

“Nay, but me no buts--I have set my heart upon it.”

“I am greatly obliged, my dear sir, but”--

“Look ye there, now--but again!--I hate but; I know no form of expression
in which he can appear, that is amiable, excepting as a butt of sack. But is to me a more detestable combination of letters than no itself.No
is a surly, honest fellow--speaks his mind rough and round at once. But is
a sneaking, evasive, half-bred, exceptuous sort of a conjunction, which
comes to pull away the cup just when it is at your lips--

                             --it does allay
                The good precedent--fie upon but yet! But yet is as a jailor to bring forth
                         Some monstrous malefactor.”

“Well, then,” answered Lovel, whose motions were really undetermined at
the moment, “you shall not connect the recollection of my name with
so churlish a particle. I must soon think of leaving Fairport, I am
afraid--and I will, since you are good enough to wish it, take this
opportunity of spending another day here.”

“And you shall be rewarded, my boy. First, you shall see John o’ the
Girnel’s grave, and then we’ll walk gently along the sands, the state
of the tide being first ascertained (for we will have no more
Peter Wilkins’ adventures, no more Glum and Gawrie work), as far as
Knockwinnock Castle, and inquire after the old knight and my fair
foe--which will but be barely civil, and then”--

“I beg pardon, my dear sir; but, perhaps, you had better adjourn your
visit till to-morrow--I am a stranger, you know.”

“And are, therefore, the more bound to show civility, I should suppose. But I beg your pardon for mentioning a word that perhaps belongs only to
a collector of antiquities--I am one of the old school,

  When courtiers galloped o’er four counties
  The ball’s fair partner to behold,
  And humbly hope she caught no cold.”

“Why, if--if--if you thought it would be expected--but I believe I had
better stay.”

“Nay, nay, my good friend, I am not so old-fashioned as to press you to
what is disagreeable, neither--it is sufficient that I see there is some
remora, some cause of delay, some mid impediment, which I have no title
to inquire into. Or you are still somewhat tired, perhaps;--I warrant I
find means to entertain your intellects without fatiguing your limbs--I
am no friend to violent exertion myself--a walk in the garden once
a-day is exercise, enough for any thinking being--none but a fool or a
fox-hunter would require more. Well, what shall we set about?--my Essay
on Castrametation--but I have that in petto for our afternoon cordial;--or
I will show you the controversy upon Ossian’s Poems between Mac-Cribb
and me. I hold with the acute Orcadian--he with the defenders of the
authenticity;--the controversy began in smooth, oily, lady-like terms,
but is now waxing more sour and eager as we get on--it already partakes
somewhat of old Scaliger’s style. I fear the rogue will get some scent
of that story of Ochiltree’s--but at worst, I have a hard repartee for
him on the affair of the abstracted Antigonus--I will show you his last
epistle and the scroll of my answer--egad, it is a trimmer!”

So saying, the Antiquary opened a drawer, and began rummaging among a
quantity of miscellaneous papers, ancient and modern. But it was the
misfortune of this learned gentleman, as it may be that of many learned
and unlearned, that he frequently experienced, on such occasions, what
Harlequin calls l’embarras des richesses; in other words, the abundance
of his collection often prevented him from finding the article he sought
for. “Curse the papers!--I believe,” said Oldbuck, as he shuffled them to
and fro--“I believe they make themselves wings like grasshoppers, and fly
away bodily--but here, in the meanwhile, look at that little treasure.”
 So saying, he put into his hand a case made of oak, fenced at the corner
with silver roses and studs--“Pr’ythee, undo this button,” said he, as
he observed Lovel fumbling at the clasp. He did so,--the lid opened, and
discovered a thin quarto, curiously bound in black shagreen--“There, Mr.
Lovel--there is the work I mentioned to you last night--the rare quarto of
the Augsburg Confession, the foundation at once and the bulwark of the
Reformation drawn up by the learned and venerable Melancthon, defended
by the Elector of Saxony, and the other valiant hearts who stood up
for their faith, even against the front of a powerful and victorious
emperor, and imprinted by the scarcely less venerable and praiseworthy
Aldobrand Oldenbuck, my happy progenitor, during the yet more tyrannical
attempts of Philip II. to suppress at once civil and religious liberty. Yes, sir--for printing this work, that eminent man was expelled from his
ungrateful country, and driven to establish his household gods even here
at Monkbarns, among the ruins of papal superstition and domination.--Look
upon his venerable effigies, Mr. Lovel, and respect the honourable
occupation in which it presents him, as labouring personally at the
press for the diffusion of Christian and political knowledge.--And see
here his favourite motto, expressive of his independence and self-reliance,
which scorned to owe anything to patronage that was not earned by
desert--expressive also of that firmness of mind and tenacity of purpose
recommended by Horace. He was indeed a man who would have stood firm,
had his whole printing-house, presses, fonts, forms, great and small
pica, been shivered to pieces around him--Read, I say, his motto,--for
each printer had his motto, or device, when that illustrious art was
first practised. My ancestor’s was expressed, as you see, in the
Teutonic phrase, Kunst macht Gunst--that is, skill, or prudence, in
availing ourselves of our natural talents and advantages, will compel
favour and patronage, even where it is withheld from prejudice or
ignorance.”

“And that,” said Lovel, after a moment’s thoughtful silence--“that, then,
is the meaning of these German words?”

“Unquestionably. You perceive the appropriate application to a
consciousness of inward worth, and of eminence in a useful and
honourable art.--Each printer in those days, as I have already informed
you, had his device, his impresa, as I may call it, in the same manner
as the doughty chivalry of the age, who frequented tilt and tournament. My ancestor boasted as much in his, as if he had displayed it over
a conquered field of battle, though it betokened the diffusion of
knowledge, not the effusion of blood. And yet there is a family
tradition which affirms him to have chosen it from a more romantic
circumstance.”

“And what is that said to have been, my good sir?” inquired his young
friend. “Why, it rather encroaches on my respected predecessor’s fame for
prudence and wisdom--Sed semel insanivimus omnes--everybody has played the
fool in their turn. It is said, my ancestor, during his apprenticeship
with the descendant of old Faust, whom popular tradition hath sent to
the devil under the name of Faustus, was attracted by a paltry slip of
womankind, his master’s daughter, called Bertha--they broke rings, or
went through some idiotical ceremony, as is usual on such idle occasions
as the plighting of a true-love troth, and Aldobrand set out on his
journey through Germany, as became an honest hand-werker; for such was
the custom of mechanics at that time, to make a tour through the empire,
and work at their trade for a time in each of the most eminent towns,
before they finally settled themselves for life. It was a wise custom;
for, as such travellers were received like brethren in each town by
those of their own handicraft, they were sure, in every case, to have
the means either of gaining or communicating knowledge. When my ancestor
returned to Nuremburg, he is said to have found his old master newly
dead, and two or three gallant young suitors, some of them half-starved
sprigs of nobility forsooth, in pursuit of the Yung-fraw Bertha, whose
father was understood to have bequeathed her a dowry which might weigh
against sixteen armorial quarters. But Bertha, not a bad sample of
womankind, had made a vow she would only marry that man who would work
her father’s press. The skill, at that time, was as rare as wonderful;
besides that the expedient rid her at once of most of her gentle
suitors, who would have as soon wielded a conjuring wand as a composing
stick. Some of the more ordinary typographers made the attempt: but none
were sufficiently possessed of the mystery--But I tire you.”

“By no means; pray, proceed, Mr. Oldbuck--I listen with uncommon
interest.”

“Ah! it is all folly. However--Aldobrand arrived in the ordinary dress,
as we would say, of a journeyman printer--the same in which he had
traversed Germany, and conversed with Luther, Melancthon, Erasmus, and
other learned men, who disdained not his knowledge, and the power he
possessed of diffusing it, though hid under a garb so homely. But what
appeared respectable in the eyes of wisdom, religion, learning, and
philosophy, seemed mean, as might readily be supposed, and disgusting,
in those of silly and affected womankind, and Bertha refused to
acknowledge her former lover, in the torn doublet, skin cap, clouted
shoes, and leathern apron, of a travelling handicraftsman or mechanic. He claimed his privilege, however, of being admitted to a trial; and
when the rest of the suitors had either declined the contest, or made
such work as the devil could not read if his pardon depended on it, all
eyes were bent on the stranger. Aldobrand stepped gracefully forward,
arranged the types without omission of a single letter, hyphen, or
comma, imposed them without deranging a single space, and pulled off the
first proof as clear and free from errors, as if it had been a triple
revise! All applauded the worthy successor of the immortal Faustus--the
blushing maiden acknowledged her error in trusting to the eye more than
the intellect--and the elected bridegroom thenceforward chose for his
impress or device the appropriate words, Skill wins favour.’--But what is
the matter with you?--you are in a brown study! Come, I told you this was
but trumpery conversation for thinking people--and now I have my hand on
the Ossianic Controversy.”

“I beg your pardon,” said Lovel; “I am going to appear very silly and
changeable in your eyes, Mr. Oldbuck--but you seemed to think Sir Arthur
might in civility expect a call from me?”

“Psha! psha! I can make your apology; and if you must leave us so soon
as you say, what signifies how you stand in his honours good graces?--And
I warn you that the Essay on Castrametation is something prolix, and
will occupy the time we can spare after dinner, so you may lose the
Ossianic Controversy if we do not dedicate this morning to it. We will
go out to my ever-green bower, my sacred holly-tree yonder, and have it
_fronde super viridi_. Sing heigh-ho! heigh-ho! for the green holly,
         Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly. But, egad,” continued the old gentleman, “when I look closer at you,
I begin to think you may be of a different opinion.