The last action at which I was present was the taking of --. The
Turks resisted to the last, the garrison perished on the ramparts, and we entered by assault. Every
breathing creature within the walls was massacred. Think you, amidst the shrieks of violated
innocence and helpless infancy, I did not feel in every nerve the cry of a fellow being? They were men
and women, the sufferers, before they were Mahometans, and when they rise turbanless from the
grave, in what except their good or evil actions will they be the better or worse than we? Two
soldiers contended for a girl, whose rich dress and extreme beauty excited the brutal appetites of
these wretches, who, perhaps good men among their families, were changed by the fury of the
moment into incarnated evils. An old man, with a silver beard, decrepid and bald, he might be her
grandfather, interposed to save her; the battle axe of one of them clove his skull. I rushed to her
defence, but rage made them blind and deaf; they did not distinguish my Christian garb or heed my
words-words were blunt weapons then, for while war cried "havoc," and murder gave fit echo, how
could I-
  Turn back the tide of ills, relieving wrong
  With mild accost of soothing eloquence? One of the fellows, enraged at my interference, struck me with his bayonet in the side, and I fell
senseless. "This wound will probably shorten my life, having shattered a frame, weak of itself. But I am content
to die. I have learnt in Greece that one man, more or less, is of small import, while human bodies
remain to fill up the thinned ranks of the soldiery; and that the identity of an individual may be
overlooked, so that the muster roll contain its full numbers. All this has a different effect upon
Raymond. He is able to contemplate the ideal of war, while I am sensible only to its realities. He is a
soldier, a general. He can influence the blood-thirsty war-dogs, while I resist their propensities vainly. The cause is simple. Burke has said that, 'in all bodies those who would lead, must also, in a
considerable degree, follow.' -I cannot follow; for I do not sympathize in their dreams of massacre
and glory-to follow and to lead in such a career, is the natural bent of Raymond's mind. He is always
successful, and bids fair, at the same time that he acquires high name and station for himself, to
secure liberty, probably extended empire, to the Greeks." Perdita's mind was not softened by this account. He, she thought, can be great and happy without
me. Would that I also had a career! Would that I could freight some untried bark with all my hopes,
energies, and desires, and launch it forth into the ocean of life-bound for some attainable point,
with ambition or pleasure at the helm! But adverse winds detain me on shore; like Ulysses, I sit at the
water's edge and weep. But my nerveless hands can neither fell the trees, nor smooth the planks. Under the influence of these melancholy thoughts, she became more than ever in love with sorrow. Yet Adrian's presence did some good; he at once broke through the law of silence observed
concerning Raymond. At first she started from the unaccustomed sound; soon she got used to it and
to love it, and she listened with avidity to the account of his achievements. Clara got rid also of her
restraint; Adrian and she had been old playfellows; and now, as they walked or rode together, he
yielded to her earnest entreaty, and repeated, for the hundredth time, some tale of her father's
bravery, munificence, or justice. Each vessel in the mean time brought exhilarating tidings from Greece. The presence of a friend in its
armies and councils made us enter into the details with enthusiasm; and a short letter now and then
from Raymond told us how he was engrossed by the interests of his adopted country. The Greeks
were strongly attached to their commercial pursuits, and would have been satisfied with their
present acquisitions, had not the Turks roused them by invasion. The patriots were victorious; a spirit
of conquest was instilled; and already they looked on Constantinople as their own. Raymond rose
perpetually in their estimation; but one man held a superior command to him in their armies. He was
conspicuous for his conduct and choice of position in a battle fought in the plains of Thrace, on the
banks of the Hebrus, which was to decide the fate of Islam. The Mahometans were defeated, and
driven entirely from the country west of this river. The battle was sanguinary, the loss of the Turks
apparently irreparable; the Greeks, in losing one man, forgot the nameless crowd strewed upon the
bloody field, and they ceased to value themselves on a victory, which cost them- Raymond. At the battle of Makri he had led the charge of cavalry, and pursued the fugitives even to the banks
of the Hebrus. His favourite horse was found grazing by the margin of the tranquil river. It became a
question whether he had fallen among the unrecognized; but no broken ornament or stained
trapping betrayed his fate. It was suspected that the Turks, finding themselves possessed of so
illustrious a captive, resolved to satisfy their cruelty rather than their avarice, and fearful of the
interference of England, had come to the determination of concealing for ever the cold-blooded
murder of the soldier they most hated and feared in the squadrons of their enemy. Raymond was not forgotten in England. His abdication of the Protectorate had caused an
unexampled sensation; and, when his magnificent and manly system was contrasted with the narrow
views of succeeding politicians, the period of his elevation was referred to with sorrow. The
perpetual recurrence of his name, joined to most honourable testimonials, in the Greek gazettes,
kept up the interest he had excited. He seemed the favourite child of fortune, and his untimely loss
eclipsed the world, and shewed forth the remnant of mankind with diminished lustre. They clung
with eagerness to the hope held out that he might yet be alive. Their minister at Constantinople was
urged to make the necessary perquisitions, and should his existence be ascertained, to demand his
release. It was to be hoped that their efforts would succeed, and that though now a prisoner, the
sport of cruelty and the mark of hate, he would be rescued from danger and restored to the
happiness, power, and honour which he deserved. The effect of this intelligence upon my sister was striking. She never for a moment credited the story
of his death; she resolved instantly to go to Greece. Reasoning and persuasion were thrown away
upon her; she would endure no hindrance, no delay. It may be advanced for a truth, that, if argument
or entreaty can turn any one from a desperate purpose, whose motive and end depends on the
strength of the affections only, then it is right so to turn them, since their docility shews, that neither
the motive nor the end were of sufficient force to bear them through the obstacles attendant on
their undertaking. If, on the contrary, they are proof against expostulation, this very steadiness is an
omen of success; and it becomes the duty of those who love them, to assist in smoothing the
obstructions in their path. Such sentiments actuated our little circle. Finding Perdita immoveable, we
consulted as to the best means of furthering her purpose. She could not go alone to a country where
she had no friends, where she might arrive only to hear the dreadful news, which must overwhelm
her with grief and remorse. Adrian, whose health had always been weak, now suffered considerable
aggravation of suffering from the effects of his wound. Idris could not endure to leave him in this
state; nor was it right either to quit or take with us a young family for a journey of this description. I
resolved at length to accompany Perdita. The separation from my Idris was painful-but necessity
reconciled us to it in some degree: necessity and the hope of saving Raymond, and restoring him
again to happiness and Perdita. No delay was to ensue. Two days after we came to our
determination, we set out for Portsmouth, and embarked. The season was May, the weather
stormless; we were promised a prosperous voyage. Cherishing the most fervent hopes, embarked on
the waste ocean, we saw with delight the receding shore of Britain, and on the wings of desire
outspeeded our well filled sails towards the South. The light curling waves bore us onward, and old
ocean smiled at the freight of love and hope committed to his charge; it stroked gently its
tempestuous plains, and the path was smoothed for us. Day and night the wind right aft, gave steady
impulse to our keel-nor did rough gale, or treacherous sand, or destructive rock interpose an
obstacle between my sister and the land which was to restore her to her first beloved,
Her dear heart's confessor-a heart within that heart. DURING this voyage, when on calm evenings we conversed on deck, watching the glancing of the
waves and the changeful appearances of the sky, I discovered the total revolution that the disasters
of Raymond had wrought in the mind of my sister. Were they the same waters of love, which, lately
cold and cutting as ice, repelling as that, now loosened from their frozen chains, flowed through the
regions of her soul in gushing and grateful exuberance? She did not believe that he was dead, but she
knew that he was in danger, and the hope of assisting in his liberation, and the idea of soothing by
tenderness the ills that he might have undergone, elevated and harmonized the late jarring element
of her being. I was not so sanguine as she as to the result of our voyage. She was not sanguine, but
secure; and the expectation of seeing the lover she had banished, the husband, friend, heart's
companion from whom she had long been alienated, wrapt her senses in delight, her mind in
placidity. It was beginning life again; it was leaving barren sands for an abode of fertile beauty; it was
a harbour after a tempest, an opiate after sleepless nights, a happy waking from a terrible dream. Little Clara accompanied us; the poor child did not well understand what was going forward. She
heard that we were bound for Greece, that she would see her father, and now, for the first time, she
prattled of him to her mother. On landing at Athens we found difficulties encrease upon us: nor could the storied earth or balmy
atmosphere inspire us with enthusiasm or pleasure, while the fate of Raymond was in jeopardy. No
man had ever excited so strong an interest in the public mind; this was apparent even among the
phlegmatic English, from whom he had long been absent. The Athenians had expected their hero to
return in triumph; the women had taught their children to lisp his name joined to thanksgiving; his
manly beauty, his courage, his devotion to their cause, made him appear in their eyes almost as one
of the ancient deities of the soil descended from their native Olympus to defend them. When they
spoke of his probable death and certain captivity, tears streamed from their eyes; even as the
women of Syria sorrowed for Adonis, did the wives and mothers of Greece lament our English
Raymond-Athens was a city of mourning. All these shews of despair struck Perdita with affright. With that sanguine but confused expectation,
which desire engendered while she was at a distance from reality, she had formed an image in her
mind of instantaneous change, when she should set her foot on Grecian shores. She fancied that
Raymond would already be free, and that her tender attentions would come to entirely obliterate
even the memory of his mischance. But his fate was still uncertain; she began to fear the worst, and
to feel that her soul's hope was cast on a chance that might prove a blank. The wife and lovely child
of Lord Raymond became objects of intense interest in Athens. The gates of their abode were
besieged, audible prayers were breathed for his restoration; all these circumstances added to the
dismay and fears of Perdita. My exertions were unremitted: after a time I left Athens, and joined the army stationed at Kishan in
Thrace. Bribery, threats, and intrigue, soon discovered the secret that Raymond was alive, a prisoner,
suffering the most rigorous confinement and wanton cruelties. We put in movement every impulse
of policy and money to redeem him from their hands. The impatience of my sister's disposition now returned on her, awakened by repentance, sharpened
by remorse. The very beauty of the Grecian climate, during the season of spring, added torture to her
sensations. The unexampled loveliness of the flower-clad earth-the genial sunshine and grateful
shade-the melody of the birds-the majesty of the woods- the splendour of the marble ruins-the
clear effulgence of the stars by night-the combination of all that was exciting and voluptuous in this
transcending land, by inspiring a quicker spirit of life and an added sensitiveness to every articulation
of her frame, only gave edge to the poignancy of her grief. Each long hour was counted, and "He
suffers" was the burthen of all her thoughts. She abstained from food; she lay on the bare earth, and,
by such mimickry of his enforced torments, endeavoured to hold communion with his distant pain. I
remembered in one of her harshest moments a quotation of mine had roused her to anger and
disdain. "Perdita," I had said, "some day you will discover that you have done wrong in again casting
Raymond on the thorns of life. When disappointment has sullied his beauty, when a soldier's
hardships have bent his manly form, and loneliness made even triumph bitter to him, then you will
repent; and regret for the irreparable change
"will move In hearts all rocky now, the late remorse of love." The stinging "remorse of love" now pierced her heart. She accused herself of his journey to Greece-
his dangers-his imprisonment. She pictured to herself the anguish of his solitude; she remembered
with what eager delight he had in former days made her the partner of his joyful hopes- with what
grateful affection he received her sympathy in his cares. She called to mind how often he had
declared that solitude was to him the greatest of all evils, and how death itself was to him more full
of fear and pain when he pictured to himself a lonely grave. "My best girl," he had said, "relieves me
from these phantasies. United to her, cherished in her dear heart, never again shall I know the misery
of finding myself alone. Even if I die before you, my Perdita, treasure up my ashes till yours may
mingle with mine. It is a foolish sentiment for one who is not a materialist, yet, methinks, even in
that dark cell, I may feel that my inanimate dust mingles with yours, and thus have a companion in
decay." In her resentful mood, these expressions had been remembered with acrimony and disdain;
they visited her in her softened hour, taking sleep from her eyes, all hope of rest from her uneasy
mind. Two months passed thus, when at last we obtained a promise of Raymond's release. Confinement
and hardship had undermined his health; the Turks feared an accomplishment of the threats of the
English government, if he died under their hands; they looked upon his recovery as impossible; they
delivered him up as a dying man, willingly making over to us the rites of burial. He came by sea from Constantinople to Athens. The wind, favourable to him, blew so strongly in
shore, that we were unable, as we had at first intended, to meet him on his watery road. The
watchtower of Athens was besieged by inquirers, each sail eagerly looked out for; till on the first of
May the gallant frigate bore in sight, freighted with treasure more invaluable than the wealth which,
piloted from Mexico, the vexed Pacific swallowed, or that was conveyed over its tranquil bosom to
enrich the crown of Spain. At early dawn the vessel was discovered bearing in shore; it was
conjectured that it would cast anchor about five miles from land. The news spread through Athens,
and the whole city poured out at the gate of the Piraeus, down the roads, through the vineyards, the
olive woods and plantations of fig-trees, towards the harbour. The noisy joy of the populace, the
gaudy colours of their dress, the tumult of carriages and horses, the march of soldiers intermixed, the
waving of banners and sound of martial music added to the high excitement of the scene; while
round us reposed in solemn majesty the relics of antient time. To our right the Acropolis rose high,
spectatress of a thousand changes, of ancient glory, Turkish slavery, and the restoration of dear-
bought liberty; tombs and cenotaphs were strewed thick around, adorned by ever renewing
vegetation; the mighty dead hovered over their monuments, and beheld in our enthusiasm and
congregated numbers a renewal of the scenes in which they had been the actors. Perdita and Clara
rode in a close carriage; I attended them on horseback. At length we arrived at the harbour; it was
agitated by the outward swell of the sea; the beach, as far could be discerned, was covered by a
moving multitude, which, urged by those behind toward the sea, again rushed back as the heavy
waves with sullen roar burst close to them. I applied my glass, and could discern that the frigate had
already cast anchor, fearful of the danger of approaching nearer to a lee shore: a boat was lowered;
with a pang I saw that Raymond was unable to descend the vessel's side; he was let down in a chair,
and lay wrapt in cloaks at the bottom of the boat. I dismounted, and called to some sailors who were rowing about the harbour to pull up, and take me
into their skiff; Perdita at the same moment alighted from her carriage-she seized my arm-"Take
me with you," she cried; she was trembling and pale; Clara clung to her-"You must not," I said, "the
sea is rough-he will soon be here-do you not see his boat?" The little bark to which I had beckoned
had now pulled up; before I could stop her, Perdita, assisted by the sailors was in it-Clara followed
her mother-a loud shout echoed from the crowd as we pulled out of the inner harbour; while my
sister at the prow, had caught hold of one of the men who was using a glass, asking a thousand
questions, careless of the spray that broke over her, deaf, sightless to all, except the little speck that,
just visible on the top of the waves, evidently neared. We approached with all the speed six rowers
could give; the orderly and picturesque dress of the soldiers on the beach, the sounds of exulting
music, the stirring breeze and waving flags, the unchecked exclamations of the eager crowd, whose
dark looks and foreign garb were purely eastern; the sight of temple-crowned rock, the white marble
of the buildings glittering in the sun, and standing in bright relief against the dark ridge of lofty
mountains beyond; the near roar of the sea, the splash of oars, and dash of spray, all steeped my
soul in a delirium, unfelt, unimagined in the common course of common life. Trembling, I was unable
to continue to look through the glass with which I had watched the motion of the crew, when the
frigate's boat had first been launched. We rapidly drew near, so that at length the number and forms
of those within could be discerned; its dark sides grew big, and the splash of its oars became audible:
I could distinguish the languid form of my friend, as he half raised himself at our approach. Perdita's questions had ceased; she leaned on my arm, panting with emotions too acute for tears-
our men pulled alongside the other boat. As a last effort, my sister mustered her strength, her
firmness; she stepped from one boat to the other, and then with a shriek she sprang towards
Raymond, knelt at his side, and glueing her lips to the hand she seized, her face shrouded by her long
hair, gave herself up to tears. Raymond had somewhat raised himself at our approach, but it was with difficulty that he exerted
himself even thus much. With sunken cheek and hollow eyes, pale and gaunt, how could I recognize
the beloved of Perdita? I continued awe-struck and mute-he looked smilingly on the poor girl; the
smile was his. A day of sun-shine falling on a dark valley, displays its before hidden characteristics;
and now this smile, the same with which he first spoke love to Perdita, with which he had welcomed
the protectorate, playing on his altered countenance, made me in my heart's core feel that this was
Raymond. He stretched out to me his other hand; I discerned the trace of manacles on his bared wrist. I heard
my sister's sobs, and thought, happy are women who can weep, and in a passionate caress
disburthen the oppression of their feelings; shame and habitual restraint hold back a man. I would
have given worlds to have acted as in days of boyhood, have strained him to my breast, pressed his
hand to my lips, and wept over him; my swelling heart choked me; the natural current would not be
checked; the big rebellious tears gathered in my eyes; I turned aside, and they dropped in the sea-
they came fast and faster;-yet I could hardly be ashamed, for I saw that the rough sailors were not
unmoved, and Raymond's eyes alone were dry from among our crew. He lay in that blessed calm
which convalescence always induces, enjoying in secure tranquillity his liberty and re-union with her
whom he adored. Perdita at length subdued her burst of passion, and rose, -she looked round for
Clara; the child frightened, not recognizing her father, and neglected by us, had crept to the other
end of the boat; she came at her mother's call. Perdita presented her to Raymond; her first words
were: "Beloved, embrace our child!" "Come hither, sweet one," said her father, "do you not know me?" she knew his voice, and cast
herself in his arms with half bashful but uncontrollable emotion. Perceiving the weakness of Raymond, I was afraid of ill consequences from the pressure of the crowd
on his landing. But they were awed as I had been, at the change of his appearance. The music died
away, the shouts abruptly ended; the soldiers had cleared a space in which a carriage was drawn up. He was placed in it; Perdita and Clara entered with him, and his escort closed round it; a hollow
murmur, akin to the roaring of the near waves, went through the multitude; they fell back as the
carriage advanced, and fearful of injuring him they had come to welcome, by loud testimonies of joy,
they satisfied themselves with bending in a low salaam as the carriage passed; it went slowly along
the road of the Piraeus; passed by antique temple and heroic tomb, beneath the craggy rock of the
citadel. The sound of the waves was left behind; that of the multitude continued at intervals,
supressed and hoarse; and though, in the city, the houses, churches, and public buildings were
decorated with tapestry and banners-though the soldiery lined the streets, and the inhabitants in
thousands were assembled to give him hail, the same solemn silence prevailed, the soldiery
presented arms, the banners vailed, many a white hand waved a streamer, and vainly sought to
discern the hero in the vehicle, which, closed and encompassed by the city guards, drew him to the
palace allotted for his abode. Raymond was weak and exhausted, yet the interest he perceived to be excited on his account, filled
him with proud pleasure. He was nearly killed with kindness. It is true, the populace retained
themselves; but there arose a perpetual hum and bustle from the throng round the palace, which
added to the noise of fireworks, the frequent explosion of arms, the tramp to and fro of horsemen
and carriages, to which effervescence he was the focus, retarded his recovery. So we retired awhile
to Eleusis, and here rest and tender care added each day to the strength of our invalid. The zealous
attention of Perdita claimed the first rank in the causes which induced his rapid recovery; but the
second was surely the delight he felt in the affection and good will of the Greeks. We are said to love
much those whom we greatly benefit. Raymond had fought and conquered for the Athenians; he had
suffered, on their account, peril, imprisonment, and hardship; their gratitude affected him deeply,
and he inly vowed to unite his fate for ever to that of a people so enthusiastically devoted to him. Social feeling and sympathy constituted a marked feature in my disposition. In early youth, the living
drama acted around me, drew me heart and soul into its vortex. I was now conscious of a change. I
loved, I hoped, I enjoyed; but there was something besides this. I was inquisitive as to the internal
principles of action of those around me: anxious to read their thoughts justly, and for ever occupied
in divining their inmost mind. All events, at the same time that they deeply interested me, arranged
themselves in pictures before me. I gave the right place to every personage in the groupe, the just
balance to every sentiment. This undercurrent of thought, often soothed me amidst distress, and
even agony. It gave ideality to that, from which, taken in naked truth, the soul would have revolted:
it bestowed pictorial colours on misery and disease, and not unfrequently relieved me from despair
in deplorable changes. This faculty, or instinct, was now rouzed. I watched the re-awakened devotion
of my sister; Clara's timid, but concentrated admiration of her father, and Raymond's appetite for
renown, and sensitiveness to the demonstrations of affection of the Athenians. Attentively perusing
this animated volume, I was the less surprised at the tale I read on the new-turned page. The Turkish army were at this time besieging Rodosto; and the Greeks, hastening their preparations,
and sending each day reinforcements, were on the eve of forcing the enemy to battle. Each people
looked on the coming struggle as that which would be to a great degree decisive; as, in case of
victory, the next step would be the siege of Constantinople by the Greeks. Raymond, being
somewhat recovered, prepared to re-assume his command in the army. Perdita did not oppose herself to his determination. She only stipulated to be permitted to
accompany him. She had set down no rule of conduct for herself; but for her life she could not have
opposed his slightest wish, or do other than acquiesce cheerfully in all his projects. One word, in
truth, had alarmed her more than battles or sieges, during which she trusted Raymond's high
command would exempt him from danger. That word, as yet it was not more to her, was PLAGUE. This enemy to the human race had begun early in June to raise its serpent-head on the shores of the
Nile; parts of Asia, not usually subject to this evil, were infected. It was in Constantinople; but as each
year that city experienced a like visitation, small attention was paid to those accounts which declared
more people to have died there already, than usually made up the accustomed prey of the whole of
the hotter months. However it might be, neither plague nor war could prevent Perdita from
following her lord, or induce her to utter one objection to the plans which he proposed. To be near
him, to be loved by him, to feel him again her own, was the limit of her desires. The object of her life
was to do him pleasure: it had been so before, but with a difference. In past times, without thought
or foresight she had made him happy, being so herself, and in any question of choice, consulted her
own wishes, as being one with his. Now she sedulously put herself out of the question, sacrificing
even her anxiety for his health and welfare to her resolve not to oppose any of his desires. Love of
the Greek people, appetite for glory, and hatred of the barbarian government under which he had
suffered even to the approach of death, stimulated him. He wished to repay the kindness of the
Athenians, to keep alive the splendid associations connected with his name, and to eradicate from
Europe a power which, while every other nation advanced in civilization, stood still, a monument of
antique barbarism. Having effected the reunion of Raymond and Perdita, I was eager to return to
England; but his earnest request, added to awakening curiosity, and an indefinable anxiety to behold
the catastrophe, now apparently at hand, in the long drawn history of Grecian and Turkish warfare,
induced me to consent to prolong until the autumn, the period of my residence in Greece. As soon as the health of Raymond was sufficiently re-established, he prepared to join the Grecian
camp, hear Kishan, a town of some importance, situated to the east of the Hebrus; in which Perdita
and Clara were to remain until the event of the expected battle. We quitted Athens on the 2nd of
June. Raymond had recovered from the gaunt and pallid looks of fever. If I no longer saw the fresh
glow of youth on his matured countenance, if care had besieged his brow, "And dug deep trenches in
his beauty's field," if his hair, slightly mingled with grey, and his look, considerate even in its
eagerness, gave signs of added years and past sufferings, yet there was something irresistibly
affecting in the sight of one, lately snatched from the grave, renewing his career, untamed by
sickness or disaster. The Athenians saw in him, not as heretofore, the heroic boy or desperate man,
who was ready to die for them; but the prudent commander, who for their sakes was careful of his
life, and could make his own warrior-propensities second to the scheme of conduct policy might
point out. All Athens accompanied us for several miles. When he had landed a month ago, the noisy populace
had been hushed by sorrow and fear; but this was a festival day to all. The air resounded with their
shouts; their picturesque costume, and the gay colours of which it was composed, flaunted in the
sunshine; their eager gestures and rapid utterance accorded with their wild appearance. Raymond
was the theme of every tongue, the hope of each wife, mother or betrothed bride, whose husband,
child, or lover, making a part of the Greek army, were to be conducted to victory by him. Notwithstanding the hazardous object of our journey, it was full of romantic interest, as we passed
through the vallies, and over the hills, of this divine country. Raymond was inspirited by the intense
sensations of recovered health; he felt that in being general of the Athenians, he filled a post worthy
of his ambition; and, in his hope of the conquest of Constantinople, he counted on an event which
would be as a landmark in the waste of ages, an exploit unequalled in the annals of man; when a city
of grand historic association, the beauty of whose site was the wonder of the world, which for many
hundred years had been the strong hold of the Moslems, should be rescued from slavery and
barbarism, and restored to a people illustrious for genius, civilization, and a spirit of liberty. Perdita
rested on his restored society, on his love, his hopes and fame, even as a Sybarite on a luxurious
couch; every thought was transport, each emotion bathed as it were in a congenial and balmy
element. We arrived at Kishan on the 7th of July. The weather during our journey had been serene. Each day,
before dawn, we left our night's encampment, and watched the shadows as they retreated from hill
and valley, and the golden splendour of the sun's approach. The accompanying soldiers received,
with national vivacity, enthusiastic pleasure from the sight of beautiful nature. The uprising of the
star of day was hailed by triumphant strains, while the birds, heard by snatches, filled up the intervals
of the music. At noon, we pitched our tents in some shady valley, or embowering wood among the
mountains, while a stream prattling over pebbles induced grateful sleep. Our evening march, more
calm, was yet more delightful than the morning restlessness of spirit. If the band played, involuntarily
they chose airs of moderated passion; the farewell of love, or lament at absence, was followed and
closed by some solemn hymn, which harmonized with the tranquil loveliness of evening, and
elevated the soul to grand and religious thought. Often all sounds were suspended, that we might
listen to the nightingale, while the fire-flies danced in bright measure, and the soft cooing of the
aziolo spoke of fair weather to the travellers. Did we pass a valley? Soft shades encompassed us, and
rocks tinged with beauteous hues. If we traversed a mountain, Greece, a living map, was spread
beneath, her renowned pinnacles cleaving the ether; her rivers threading in silver line the fertile
land. Afraid almost to breathe, we English travellers surveyed with extasy this splendid landscape, so
different from the sober hues and melancholy graces of our native scenery. When we quitted
Macedonia, the fertile but low plains of Thrace afforded fewer beauties; yet our journey continued to
be interesting. An advanced guard gave information of our approach, and the country people were
quickly in motion to do honour to Lord Raymond. The villages were decorated by triumphal arches of
greenery by day, and lamps by night; tapestry waved from the windows, the ground was strewed
with flowers, and the name of Raymond, joined to that of Greece, was echoed in the Evive of the
peasant crowd. When we arrived at Kishan, we learnt, that on hearing of the advance of Lord Raymond and his
detachment, the Turkish army had retreated from Rodosto; but meeting with a reinforcement, they
had re-trod their steps. In the meantime, Argyropylo, the Greek commander-in-chief, had advanced,
so as to be between the Turks and Rodosto; a battle, it was said, was inevitable. Perdita and her child
were to remain at Kishan. Raymond asked me, if I would not continue with them. "Now by the fells of
Cumberland," I cried, "by all of the vagabond and poacher that appertains to me, I will stand at your
side, draw my sword in the Greek cause, and be hailed as a victor along with you!" All the plain, from Kishan to Rodosto, a distance of sixteen leagues, was alive with troops, or with the
camp-followers, all in motion at the approach of a battle. The small garrisons were drawn from the
various towns and fortresses, and went to swell the main army. We met baggage waggons, and many
females of high and low rank returning to Fairy or Kishan, there to wait the issue of the expected day. When we arrived at Rodosto, we found that the field had been taken, and the scheme of the battle
arranged. The sound of firing, early on the following morning, informed us that advanced posts of the
armies were engaged. Regiment after regiment advanced, their colours flying and bands playing. They planted the cannon on the tumuli, sole elevations in this level country, and formed themselves
into column and hollow square; while the pioneers threw up small mounds for their protection. These then were the preparations for a battle, nay, the battle itself; far different from any thing the
imagination had pictured. We read of centre and wing in Greek and Roman history; we fancy a spot,
plain as a table, and soldiers small as chessmen; and drawn forth, so that the most ignorant of the
game can discover science and order in the disposition of the forces. When I came to the reality, and
saw regiments file off to the left far out of sight, fields intervening between the battalions, but a few
troops sufficiently near me to observe their motions, I gave up all idea of understanding, even of
seeing a battle, but attaching myself to Raymond attended with intense interest to his actions. He
shewed himself collected, gallant and imperial; his commands were prompt, his intuition of the
events of the day to me miraculous. In the mean time the cannon roared; the music lifted up its
enlivening voice at intervals; and we on the highest of the mounds I mentioned, too far off to
observe the fallen sheaves which death gathered into his storehouse, beheld the regiments, now lost
in smoke, now banners and staves peering above the cloud, while shout and clamour drowned every
sound. Early in the day, Argyropylo was wounded dangerously, and Raymond assumed the command of the
whole army. He made few remarks, till, on observing through his glass the sequel of an order he had
given, his face, clouded for awhile with doubt, became radiant. "The day is ours," he cried, "the Turks
fly from the bayonet." And then swiftly he dispatched his aides-de-camp to command the horse to
fall on the routed enemy. The defeat became total; the cannon ceased to roar; the infantry rallied,
and horse pursued the flying Turks along the dreary plain; the staff of Raymond was dispersed in
various directions, to make observations, and bear commands. Even I was dispatched to a distant
part of the field. The ground on which the battle was fought, was a level plain-so level, that from the tumuli you saw
the waving line of mountains on the wide-stretched horizon; yet the intervening space was unvaried
by the least irregularity, save such undulations as resembled the waves of the sea. The whole of this
part of Thrace had been so long a scene of contest, that it had remained uncultivated, and presented
a dreary, barren appearance. The order I had received, was to make an observation of the direction
which a detachment of the enemy might have taken, from a northern tumulus; the whole Turkish
army, followed by the Greek, had poured eastward; none but the dead remained in the direction of
my side. From the top of the mound, I looked far round-all was silent and deserted. The last beams of the nearly sunken sun shot up from behind the far summit of Mount Athos; the sea
of Marmora still glittered beneath its rays, while the Asiatic coast beyond was half hid in a haze of
low cloud. Many a casque, and bayonet, and sword, fallen from unnerved arms, reflected the
departing ray; they lay scattered far and near. From the east, a band of ravens, old inhabitants of the
Turkish cemeteries, came sailing along towards their harvest; the sun disappeared. This hour,
melancholy yet sweet, has always seemed to me the time when we are most naturally led to
commune with higher powers; our mortal sternness departs, and gentle complacency invests the
soul. But now, in the midst of the dying and the dead, how could a thought of heaven or a sensation
of tranquillity possess one of the murderers? During the busy day, my mind had yielded itself a
willing slave to the state of things presented to it by its fellow-beings; historical association, hatred of
the foe, and military enthusiasm had held dominion over me. Now, I looked on the evening star, as
softly and calmly it hung pendulous in the orange hues of sunset. I turned to the corse-strewn earth;
and felt ashamed of my species. So perhaps were the placid skies; for they quickly veiled themselves
in mist, and in this change assisted the swift disappearance of twilight usual in the south; heavy
masses of cloud floated up from the south east, and red and turbid lightning shot from their dark
edges; the rushing wind disturbed the garments of the dead, and was chilled as it passed over their
icy forms. Darkness gathered round; the objects about me became indistinct, I descended from my
station, and with difficulty guided my horse, so as to avoid the slain. Suddenly I heard a piercing shriek; a form seemed to rise from the earth; it flew swiftly towards me,
sinking to the ground again as it drew near. All this passed so suddenly, that I with difficulty reined in
my horse, so that it should not trample on the prostrate being. The dress of this person was that of a
soldier, but the bared neck and arms, and the continued shrieks discovered a female thus disguised. I
dismounted to her aid, while she, with heavy groans, and her hand placed on her side, resisted my
attempt to lead her on. In the hurry of the moment I forgot that I was in Greece, and in my native
accents endeavoured to soothe the sufferer. With wild and terrific exclamations did the lost, dying
Evadne (for it was she) recognize the language of her lover; pain and fever from her wound had
deranged her intellects, while her piteous cries and feeble efforts to escape, penetrated me with
compassion. In wild delirium she called upon the name of Raymond; she exclaimed that I was
keeping him from her, while the Turks with fearful instruments of torture were about to take his life. Then again she sadly lamented her hard fate; that a woman, with a woman's heart and sensibility,
should be driven by hopeless love and vacant hopes to take up the trade of arms, and suffer beyond
the endurance of man privation, labour, and pain-the while her dry, hot hand pressed mine, and
her brow and lips burned with consuming fire. As her strength grew less, I lifted her from the ground; her emaciated form hung over my arm, her
sunken cheek rested on my breast; in a sepulchral voice she murmured:-"This is the end of love!-
Yet not the end! "- and frenzy lent her strength as she cast her arm up to heaven: "there is the end! there we meet again. Many living deaths have I borne for thee, O Raymond, and now I expire, thy
victim!-By my death I purchase thee- lo! the instruments of war, fire, the plague are my servitors. I
dared, I conquered them all, till now! I have sold myself to death, with the sole condition that thou
shouldst follow me-Fire, and war, and plague, unite for thy destruction-O my Raymond, there is
no safety for thee!" With an heavy heart I listened to the changes of her delirium; I made her a bed of cloaks; her
violence decreased and a clammy dew stood on her brow as the paleness of death succeeded to the
crimson of fever, I placed her on the cloaks. She continued to rave of her speedy meeting with her
beloved in the grave, of his death nigh at hand; sometimes she solemnly declared that he was
summoned; sometimes she bewailed his hard destiny. Her voice grew feebler, her speech
interrupted; a few convulsive movements, and her muscles relaxed, the limbs fell, no more to be
sustained, one deep sigh, and life was gone. I bore her from the near neighbourhood of the dead; wrapt in cloaks, I placed her beneath a tree. Once more I looked on her altered face; the last time I saw her she was eighteen; beautiful as poet's
vision, splendid as a Sultana of the East-Twelve years had past; twelve years of change, sorrow and
hardship; her brilliant complexion had become worn and dark, her limbs had lost the roundness of
youth and womanhood; her eyes had sunk deep,
    Crushed and o'erworn,
  The hours had drained her blood, and filled her brow
  With lines and wrinkles. With shuddering horror I veiled this monument of human passion and human misery; I heaped over
her all of flags and heavy accoutrements I could find, to guard her from birds and beasts of prey, until
I could bestow on her a fitting grave. Sadly and slowly I stemmed my course from among the heaps
of slain, and, guided by the twinkling lights of the town, at length reached Rodosto. ON my arrival, I found that an order had already gone forth for the army to proceed immediately
towards Constantinople; and the troops which had suffered least in the battle were already on their
way. The town was full of tumult. The wound, and consequent inability of Argyropylo, caused
Raymond to be the first in command. He rode through the town, visiting the wounded, and giving
such orders as were necessary for the siege he meditated. Early in the morning the whole army was
in motion. In the hurry I could hardly find an opportunity to bestow the last offices on Evadne. Attended only by my servant, I dug a deep grave for her at the foot of the tree, and without
disturbing her warrior shroud, I placed her in it, heaping stones upon the grave. The dazzling sun and
glare of daylight, deprived the scene of solemnity; from Evadne's low tomb, I joined Raymond and his
staff, now on their way to the Golden City. Constantinople was invested, trenches dug, and advances made. The whole Greek fleet blockaded it
by sea; on land from the river Kyat Kbanah, near the Sweet Waters, to the Tower of Marmora, on the
shores of the Propontis, along the whole line of the ancient walls, the trenches of the siege were
drawn. We already possessed Pera; the Golden Horn itself, the city, bastioned by the sea, and the
ivy-mantled walls of the Greek emperors was all of Europe that the Mahometans could call theirs. Our army looked on her as certain prey. They counted the garrison; it was impossible that it should
be relieved; each sally was a victory; for, even when the Turks were triumphant, the loss of men they
sustained was an irreparable injury. I rode one morning with Raymond to the lofty mound, not far
from the Top Kapou, (Cannon-gate), on which Mahmoud planted his standard, and first saw the city. Still the same lofty domes and minarets towered above the verdurous walls, where Constantine had
died, and the Turk had entered the city. The plain around was interspersed with cemeteries, Turk,
Greek, and Armenian, with their growth of cypress trees; and other woods of more cheerful aspect,
diversified the scene. Among them the Greek army was encamped, and their squadrons moved to
and fro-now in regular march, now in swift career. Raymond's eyes were fixed on the city. "I have counted the hours of her life," said he; "one month,
and she falls. Remain with me till then; wait till you see the cross on St. Sophia; and then return to
your peaceful glades." "You then," I asked, "still remain in Greece?" "Assuredly," replied Raymond. "Yet Lionel, when I say this, believe me I look back with regret to our
tranquil life at Windsor. I am but half a soldier; I love the renown, but not the trade of war. Before
the battle of Rodosto I was full of hope and spirit; to conquer there, and afterwards to take
Constantinople, was the hope, the bourne, the fulfilment of my ambition. This enthusiasm is now
spent, I know not why; I seem to myself to be entering a darksome gulph; the ardent spirit of the
army is irksome to me, the rapture of triumph null." He paused, and was lost in thought. His serious mien recalled, by some association, the half-
forgotten Evadne to my mind, and I seized this opportunity to make enquiries from him concerning
her strange lot. I asked him, if he had ever seen among the troops any one resembling her; if since he
had returned to Greece he had heard of her? He started at her name,-he looked uneasily on me. "Even so," he cried, "I knew you would speak of
her. Long, long I had forgotten her. Since our encampment here, she daily, hourly visits my thoughts. When I am addressed, her name is the sound I expect: in every communication, I imagine that she
will form a part. At length you have broken the spell; tell me what you know of her." I related my meeting with her; the story of her death was told and re-told. With painful earnestness
he questioned me concerning her prophecies with regard to him. I treated them as the ravings of a
maniac. "No, no," he said, "do not deceive yourself,-me you cannot. She has said nothing but what I
knew before-though this is confirmation. Fire, the sword, and plague! They may all be found in
yonder city; on my head alone may they fall!" From this day Raymond's melancholy increased. He secluded himself as much as the duties of his
station permitted. When in company, sadness would in spite of every effort steal over his features,
and he sat absent and mute among the busy crowd that thronged about him. Perdita rejoined him,
and before her he forced himself to appear cheerful, for she, even as a mirror, changed as he
changed, and if he were silent and anxious, she solicitously inquired concerning, and endeavoured to
remove the cause of his seriousness. She resided at the palace of Sweet Waters, a summer seraglio
of the Sultan; the beauty of the surrounding scenery, undefiled by war, and the freshness of the
river, made this spot doubly delightful. Raymond felt no relief, received no pleasure from any show
of heaven or earth. He often left Perdita, to wander in the grounds alone; or in a light shallop he
floated idly on the pure waters, musing deeply. Sometimes I joined him; at such times his
countenance was invariably solemn, his air dejected. He seemed relieved on seeing me, and would
talk with some degree of interest on the affairs of the day. There was evidently something behind all
this; yet, when he appeared about to speak of that which was nearest his heart, he would abruptly
turn away, and with a sigh endeavour to deliver the painful idea to the winds. It had often occurred, that, when, as I said, Raymond quitted Perdita's drawing-room, Clara came up
to me, and gently drawing me aside, said, "Papa is gone; shall we go to him? I dare say he will be glad
to see you." And, as accident permitted, I complied with or refused her request. One evening a
numerous assembly of Greek chieftains were gathered together in the palace. The intriguing Palli,
the accomplished Karazza, the warlike Ypsilanti, were among the principal. They talked of the events
of the day; the skirmish at noon; the diminished numbers of the Infidels; their defeat and flight: they
contemplated, after a short interval of time, the capture of the Golden City. They endeavoured to
picture forth what would then happen, and spoke in lofty terms of the prosperity of Greece, when
Constantinople should become its capital. The conversation then reverted to Asiatic intelligence, and
the ravages the plague made in its chief cities; conjectures were hazarded as to the progress that
disease might have made in the besieged city. Raymond had joined in the former part of the discussion. In lively terms he demonstrated the
extremities to which Constantinople was reduced; the wasted and haggard, though ferocious
appearance of the troops; famine and pestilence was at work for them, he observed, and the infidels
would soon be obliged to take refuge in their only hope-submission. Suddenly in the midst of his
harangue he broke off, as if stung by some painful thought; he rose uneasily, and I perceived him at
length quit the hall, and through the long corridor seek the open air. He did not return; and soon
Clara crept round to me, making the accustomed invitation. I consented to her request, and taking
her little hand, followed Raymond. We found him just about to embark in his boat, and he readily
agreed to receive us as companions. After the heats of the day, the cooling land-breeze ruffled the
river, and filled our little sail. The city looked dark to the south, while numerous lights along the near
shores, and the beautiful aspect of the banks reposing in placid night, the waters keenly reflecting
the heavenly lights, gave to this beauteous river a dower of loveliness that might have characterized
a retreat in Paradise. Our single boatman attended to the sail; Raymond steered; Clara sat at his feet,
clasping his knees with her arms, and laying her head on them. Raymond began the conversation
somewhat abruptly. "This, my friend, is probably the last time we shall have an opportunity of conversing freely; my plans
are now in full operation, and my time will become more and more occupied. Besides, I wish at once
to tell you my wishes and expectations, and then never again to revert to so painful a subject. First, I
must thank you, Lionel, for having remained here at my request. Vanity first prompted me to ask
you: vanity, I call it; yet even in this I see the hand of fate-your presence will soon be necessary; you
will become the last resource of Perdita, her protector and consoler. You will take her back to
Windsor. "-
"Not without you," I said.