Instantly the thought struck me that this was one of the four whom the
ruffians had murdered, and I flung myself from it, with a shiver of
horror; but in doing so, laid my hand on another face; while a faint
gleam of lightning that flashed at the moment shewed me two bodies,
pale, ghastly, naked, and half covered with straw. I started up, screaming, and made a desperate effort to reach the door;
but just as I was darting out of it, I found my shoulder seized with a
ferocious grasp. 'I have caught one of them,' cried the person. 'Fetch the lantern.' 'I am innocent of the murder!' cried I. 'I swear to you that I am. They
did not fall by my dagger, I can assure you.' 'Who? what murder?' cried he. 'Hollo, help! here is a murder
committed.' 'Not by me!' cried I. 'Not by me, not by me! No, no, no, my hands are
unstained with their blood.' And now a lantern being brought, I perceived several servants in
liveries, who first examined my features, and then dragged me back into
the building, while they searched there for some poachers, whom they
had been way-laying when they found me. The building! And what was the
building, think you? Why nothing more than the shell of an unfinished
house,--a mere modern morsel of a tasteless temple! And what were the
banditti who had knocked me down, think you? Why nothing more than a
few harmless sheep, that now lay huddled together in a corner! And what
were the two corpses, think you? Why nothing more than two Heathen
statues for the little temple!--And the ruffians that talked of their
having killed, and having to kill, were only the poachers, who had
killed four hares! Here then was the whole mystery developed, and a
great deal of good fright gone for nothing. However, some trouble still remained to me. The servants, swearing that
I was either concerned with the poachers, or in some murder, dragged me
down a shrubbery, till we reached a large mansion. We then entered a
lighted hall: one of them went to call his master, and after a few
minutes, an elderly gentleman, with a troop of young men and women at
his heels, came out of a parlour. 'Is that the murderess? What a young murderess! I never saw a murderess
before!' was whispered about by the ladies. 'What murder is this you were talking of, young woman?' said the
gentleman to me. 'I will tell you with pleasure,' answered I. 'You must know that I am a
wandering beggar-girl, without home, parents, or friends; and when the
storm began, I ran, for shelter, into the Temple of Taste, as your
servants called it. So, thinking it a castle, and some sheep which
threw me down, banditti, and a couple of statues, corpses, of course it
was quite natural for me to suppose, when two men entered, and began to
talk of having killed something, that they meant these very corpses. Was it not natural now? And so that is the plain and simple narrative
of the whole affair.' To my great surprise, a general burst of laughter ran round the hall. 'Sheep banditti, and statues corpses. Dear me,--Bless me--Well to be
sure!' tittered the misses. 'Young woman,' said the gentleman, 'your incoherent account inclines me
to think you concerned in some atrocious transaction, which I must make
it my business to discover.' 'I am sure,' said a young lady, 'she carries the gallows in her face.' ''Tis so pretty a gallows,' said a young gentleman, 'that I wish I were
hanging upon it.' 'Fie brother,' said the young lady, 'how can you talk so to a
murderess?' 'And how can you talk so,' cried I, 'before you know me to be a
murderess? It is not just, it is not generous, it is not feminine. Men
impelled by love, may deprive our sex of virtue; but we ourselves,
actuated by rancorous, not gentle impulses, rob each other of
character.' 'Oh! indeed, you have done for yourself now,' said the young lady. 'That sentence of morality has settled you completely.' 'Then I presume you do not admire morality,' said I. 'Not from the lips of a low wretch like you,' said she. 'Know, young woman,' cried I, 'that the current which runs through
these veins is registered in hereditary heraldry.' The company gave a most disgusting laugh. 'It is,' cried I, 'I tell you it is. I tell you I am of the blood
noble.' 'Oh blood!' squeaked a young gentleman. What wonder that I forgot my prudence amidst these indignities? Yes,
the proud spirit of my ancestors swelled my heart, all my house stirred
within me, and the blood of the De Willoughbys rose into my face, as I
drew the magnificent picture from my bosom, pointed a quivering finger
at it, and exclaimed:

'Behold the portrait of my titled mother!' 'See, see!' cried the girls crowding round. ''Tis covered all over with
diamonds!' 'I flatter myself it is,' said I. 'There is proof irrefragable for
you!' 'Proof enough to hang you I fancy!' cried the old gentleman, snatching
it out of my hand. 'So now, my lady, you must march to the magistrate.' I wept, knelt, entreated, all was in vain: his son, the young man who
had paid my face the compliment, took charge of my person, and
accompanied by the servant who had seized me, set off with me to the
magistrate's. During our walk, he tried to discover how I had got possession of the
picture, but I was on my guard, and merely replied that time would tell
my innocence. On a sudden, he desired the servant to go back for an
umbrella, and take it to the magistrate's after him. The man having left us:

'Now,' said the 'squire, 'whether you are a pilferer of pictures I know
not, but this I know, that you are a pilferer of hearts, and that I am
determined to keep you in close custody, till you return mine, which
you have just stolen. To be plain, I will extricate you from your
present difficulty, and conceal you in a cottage just at hand, if you
will allow me to support and visit you. You understand me.' The blood gushed into my cheeks as he spoke; but however indignant I
felt at the proposal, I likewise felt that it would be prudent to
dissemble; and as other heroines in similar predicaments do not
hesitate to hint that they will compromise their honours, I too
determined to give my tempter some hope; and thus make him my friend
till I could extricate myself from this emergency. I therefore replied that I trusted he would not find me deficient in
gratitude. 'Thank you, love,' said he. 'And now here is the cottage.' He then tapped at a door: an elderly woman opened it, and within I
perceived a young woman, with a bold, but handsome face, hastily
adjusting her cap at a glass. 'I have brought a wretched creature,' said he, 'whom I found starving
on the road. Pray take care of her, and give her some refreshment. You
must also contrive a bed for her.' The women looked earnestly at me, and then significantly at each other. 'She shall have no bed in my house,' said the elder, 'for I warrant
this is the hussey who has been setting you against poor Susan, in
order to get you herself, and telling you lies about Tommy Hicks's
visiting here--poor girl!' 'Ay, and Bob Saunders,' cried the daughter. 'Sweet innocent!' cried the mother. 'And the three Hawkins's,' cried
the daughter. 'Tender lamb!' cried the mother, 'and a girl too that never looked at
mortal man but the 'squire.' 'And John Mullins, and Jacob Jones, and Patrick O'Brien,' cried the
daughter. 'Think of that!' cried the mother. 'Yes, think of that!' cried the daughter. 'Patrick O'Brien! the
broad-shouldered abominable man! Oh! I will cut my throat--I will--so I
will!' 'Alas!' said I, 'behold the fatal effects of licentious love. Here is a
girl, whom your money, perhaps, allured from the paths of virtue.' 'Oh! no,' cried Susan, 'it was his honour's handsome face, and his fine
words, so bleeding and so sore, and he called me an angel above the
heavens!' 'Yes,' said I, 'it is the tenderness of youth, the smile of joy, the
blush of innocence, which kindle the flame of the seducer; and yet
these are what he would destroy. It is the heart of sensibility which
he would engage, and yet in that heart he would plant every rankling
pang, every bitter misery. Detestable passion! which accomplishes the
worst of purposes, through the medium of the best and sweetest
affections. She whose innocent mind ascribes to others the motives that
actuate itself, she who confides, because she would not deceive, she
who has a tear for real grief, and who melts at the simulated miseries
of her lover, she soonest falls a sacrifice to his arts; while the cold
vestal, who goes forth into the world callous to feeling, and armed
with austerity, repulses his approaches with indignation, and calls her
prudence virtue.' The young man gazed on me with surprise, and the mother had come
closer; but Susan was peeping at her face in the glass. 'Look on that beautiful girl before you,' cried I. 'Heaven itself is
not brighter than her brow; the tints of the morning cannot rival her
blushes.' Susan held down her head, but cast an under glance at the 'squire. 'Such is she now,' continued I, 'but too soon you may behold her pale,
shivering, unsteady of step, and hoarse with nocturnal curses, one of
those unhappy thousands, who nightly strew our streets with the
premature ruins of dilapidated beauty.' 'Yes, look at her, look at her!' cried the mother, who flushing even
through her wrinkles, and quivering in every limb, now rushed towards
her daughter, and snatching off her cap, bared her forehead. 'Look at
her! she was once my lovely pride, the blessing of my heart; and see
what he has now made her for me; while I, miserable as I am, must wink
at her guilt, that I may save her from disgrace and ruin!' 'Oh! then,' cried I, turning to the 'squire, 'while still some portion
of her fame remains, fly from her, fly for ever!' 'I certainly mean to do so,' replied he, 'so pray make your mind easy. You see, Susan, by this young woman's sentiments, that she cannot be
what you suspected her.' 'And I am convinced, Susan,' said I, 'that you feel grateful for the
pains I have taken to reclaim the 'squire from a connection so fatal to
you both.' 'I am quite sure I do,' sobbed Susan, 'and I will pray for your health
and happiness ever while I live. So, dear Miss, since I must lose him,
I hope you will coax him to leave me some money first; not that I ever
valued him for his money, but you know I could not see my mother go
without her tea o'nights.' 'Amiable creature!' cried I. 'Yes, I will intercede for you.' 'My giving you money,' said the 'squire, 'will depend on my finding,
when I return to-morrow morning, that you have treated this girl well
to-night.' 'I will treat her like a sister,' said Susan. The 'squire now declared that he must be gone; then taking me aside, 'I
shall see you early to-morrow,' whispered he, 'and remove you to a
house about a mile hence, and I will tell my father that you ran away. Meantime, continue to talk virtue, and these people will think you a
saint.' He then bade us all good-night, and departed. Instantly I set my wits at work, and soon hit upon a plan to accomplish
my escape. I told the women that I had an old mother, about a mile from
the cottage, who was almost starving; and that if I could procure a
little silver, and a loaf of bread, I would run to her hut with the
relief, and return immediately. To describe the kind solicitude, the sweet goodnature that mother and
daughter manifested, in loading me with victuals and money, were
impossible. Suffice it, that they gave me half-a-crown, some bread,
tea, and sugar; and Susan herself offered to carry them; but this I
declined; and now, with a secret sigh at the probability that I might
never see them again, I left their house, and hastened towards the
cottage of the poor woman. Having reached it, I made the hungry
inhabitants happy once more, while I solaced myself with some tea, and
the pleasing reflection, that I had brought comfort to the distressed,
and had reclaimed a deluded girl from ruin and infamy. Adieu,





After my last letter, I spent two tedious days in employments that I
now blush to relate;--no less than doing all the dirty work of the
cottage, such as sweeping the room, kindling the fire, cooking the
victuals; and trying, by dint of comb and soap, to make cherubs of the
children. What bewitched me, I cannot conceive, for the humanity of
other heroines is ever clean, elegant, and fit for the reader. They
give silver and tears in abundance, but they never descend to the
bodily charity of working, like wire-drawers, for withered old women
and brats with rosy noses. I can only say, in vindication of myself,
that those who sheltered me were poor and helpless themselves, and that
they deserved some recompense on my part for their hospitality to me. So you must not condemn me totally; for I do declare to you, that I
would much rather have relieved them with my purse, and soothed them
with my sympathy, than have fried their herrings and washed their
faces. At the same time, take notice, I was not totally forgetful of my nobler
destiny; for I dedicated part of this period to the composition of a
poem, which I reserve for my memoirs. My biographer can say that it was
suggested by the story of Susan; and even if it should still appear to
be somewhat forced into my book, I would rather have this the case,
than suffer posterity to go without it altogether. Here it is. CAROLINE

        Beneath a thatch, where gadding woodbine flower'd,
    About the lattice and the porch embower'd,
    An aged widow lived, whose calm decline,
    Clung on one hope, her lovely Caroline. Her lovely Caroline, in virtue blest,
    As morning snow, was spotless and unprest. Her tresses unadorn'd a braid controll'd,
    Her pastoral russet knew no civic gold. In either cheek an eddying dimple play'd,
    And blushes flitted with a rosy shade. Her airy step seem'd lighting from the sky,
    And joy and frolic sparkled in her eye. Yet would she weep at sorrows not her own,
    And love foredoom'd her heart his panting throne. For her the rustics strove a homely grace,
    Clipped their redundant locks, and smooth'd their pace;
    Lurk'd near her custom'd path, in trimmest guise,
    And talk'd the simple praises of her eyes. But fatal hour, when she, by swains unmov'd,
    Beheld the master of the vale, and loved. Long had he tempted her reserve in vain,
    Till one luxuriant eve that sunn'd the plain;
    On the bent herbage, where a gushing brook,
    Blue harebells and the tufted violet shook;
    Where hung umbrageous branches overhead,
    And the rain'd roses lay in fragments red,
    He found the slumbering maid. Prophane he press'd
    Her virgin lip, then first by man carest. She starts, and like a ruddy cloud bestrewn,
    At brake of morning, o'er the paly moon;
    Or as on Alpine cliffs, a wounded doe
    Sheds all its purple life upon the snow;
    So the maid blushes, while her humble eyes
    Fear from a knot of primroses to rise;
    And mute she sits, affecting to repair
    The discomposed meanders of her hair. Need I his arts unfold? The accomplish'd guile
    That glosses poisonous words with gilded smile? The tear suborned, the tongue complete to please;
    Eyes ecstasied, idolatry of knees? These and his oaths I pass. Enough to tell,
    The virgin listen'd, and believ'd, and fell. And now from home maternal long decoy'd
    She dwells with him midst pleasures unenjoy'd;
    Till the sad tidings that her parent dear
    To grief had died a victim reach her ear. Pale with despair, 'At least, at least,' she cries,
    'Stretch'd on her ashes, let me close these eyes. Short shelter need the village now bestow,
    Ere by her sacred grave they lay me low.' Then, without nurture or repose, she hastes
    Her journey homeward over rocks and wastes;
    Till, as her steps a hill familiar gain,
    Bursts on her filling eyes her native plain. She pants, expands her arms, 'Ah, peaceful scene!' Exclaiming: 'Ah, dear valley, lovely green,
    Still ye remain the same; your hawthorn still,
    All your white cottages, the little mill;
    Its osiered brook, that prattles thro' the meads,
    The plat where oft I danced to piping reeds. All, all remain unalter'd. 'Tis but thine
    To suffer change, weak, wicked Caroline!' The setting sun now purples hill and lake,
    And lengthen'd shadows shadows overtake. A parting carol larks and throstles sing,
    The swains aside their heated sickles fling. Now dairies all arrang'd, the nymphs renew
    The straggling tress, and tighten'd aprons blue;
    And fix some hasty floweret, as they run
    In a blithe tumult to the pipe begun. And now, while dance and frolic shake the vale,
    Sudden the panting girl, dishevell'd, pale,
    Stands in the midst. All pausing gather round,
    And gaze amaz'd. The tabors cease to sound. 'Yes, ye may well,' the faltering suppliant cries,
    'Well may ye frown with those repulsive eyes. Yet pity one not vicious but deceiv'd,
    Who vows of marriage, ere she fell, believ'd. Without a mother, sire, or fostering home,
    Save, save me, leave me not forlorn to roam. Not now the gifts ye once so fondly gave,
    Not now the verse and rural wreath I crave;
    Not now to lead your festive sports along,
    Queen of the dance, and despot of the song;
    One shed is all, oh, just one wretched shed,
    To lay my weary limbs and aching head. Then will I bless your bounty, then inure
    My frame to toil, and earn a pittance poor. Then, while ye mix in mirth, will I, forlorn,
    Beside my murder'd parent sit and mourn.' She paus'd, expecting answer. None replied. 'And have ye children, have ye hearts?' she cried. 'Save me now, mothers, as from future harms
    Ye hope to save the babies in your arms! See, to you, maids, I bend on abject knee;
    Youths, even to you, who bent before to me. O, my companions, by our happy plays,
    By dear remembrance of departed days;
    By pity's self, your cruel parents move;
    By sacred friendship; Oh! by those ye love! Oft when ye trespassed, I for pardon pray'd;
    Oft on myself your little mischiefs laid. Did I not always sooth the wounded mind? Was I not called the generous and the kind? Still silent? What! no word, no look to cheer? No gentle gesture? What, not even a tear? Go then, ye pure! to heights of virtue climb;
    Let none plead for me, none forgive my crime. Go--yet the culprit, by her God forgiven,
    May plead for you before the throne of heaven! Ye simple pleasures of my rural hours,
    Ye skies all sunshine, and ye paths all flowers;
    Home, where no more a soothing friend I see,
    Dear happy home, a last farewell to thee!' Claspt are her hands, her features strewn with hair,
    And her eyes sparkle with a keen despair. But as she turns, a sudden burst of tears,
    And struggles, as of one withheld, she hears. 'Speak!' she conjures, 'ere yet to phrenzy driven,
    Tell me who weeps? What angel sent from heaven?' 'I, I your friend!' exclaims, with panting charms,
    A rosy girl, and darts into her arms. 'What! will you leave me? Me, your other heart,
    Your favourite Ellen? No, we must not part;
    No, never! come, and in our cottage live;
    Come, for the cruel village shall forgive. O, my own darling, come, and unreproved,
    Here on this heart rest ever, ever lov'd;
    Here on this constant heart!' While thus she spoke,
    Her furious sire the linkt embraces broke. Borne in his arms, she wept, entreated, rav'd;
    Then fainted, as a mute farewell she wav'd. But now the wretch, with low and wildered cries,
    Round and around revolving vacant eyes:
    Slow from the green departs, and pauses now,
    And gnaws her tresses and contracts her brow. Shock'd by the change, the matrons, stern no more,
    Pursue her steps and her return implore:
    Soon a poor maniac, innocent of ill,
    She wanders unconfined, and drinks the rill,
    And plucks the simple cress. A hovel near
    Her native vale defends her from the year. With tender feet to flint and thistle bare,
    And faded willows weeping in her hair,
    She climbs some rock at morn, and all alone,
    Chaunts hasty snatches of harmonious moan. When moons empearl the leafy locks of bowers,
    With liquid grain, and light the glistening flowers,
    She gathers honeysuckle down the dells,
    And tangled eglantine, and slumbering bells;
    And with moist finger, painted by the leaves,
    A coronet of roses interweaves;
    Then steals unheard, and gliding thro' the yews,
    The odorous offering on her mother strews. At morn with tender pause, the nymphs admire,
    How recent chaplets still the grave attire;
    And matrons nightly tell, how fairies seen,
    Danc'd roundelays aslant its cowslipped green. Even when the whiten'd vale is bleak with snows,
    That verdant spot the little Robin knows;
    And sure to find the flakes at dawn remov'd,
    Alights and chirps upon its turf belov'd. Such her employ; till now, one wintry day,
    Some shepherds hurrying by the haunted clay,
    Find the pale ruin, life for ever flown,
    With her cheek pillow'd on its dripping stone. The turf unfinish'd wreaths of ivy strew,
    And her lank locks are dim with misty dew. Poor Ellen hymns her requiem. Willows pine
    Around her grave. Fallen, fallen Caroline! This morning, having resumed my muslins, I repaired to my castle, and
seated on the stump of a withered oak, began an accurate survey of its
strength, for the purpose of ascertaining whether it could stand a
siege, in case Lady Gwyn should attempt to dispossess me of it. I must
now describe it to you. It is situated about a quarter of a mile from the road, on a waste
tract of land, where a few decayed trunks of trees are all that remain
of a former forest. The castle itself, which I fear is rather too small
for long corridors and suites of apartments, forms a square, with a
turret at each corner, and with a large gateway, now stopped up with
stones, at the southern side. While I surveyed its roofless walls,
over-topt with briony, grass, and nettles, and admired the gothic
points of the windows, where mantling ivy had supplied the place of
glass, long suffering and murder came to my thoughts. As I sat planning, from romances, the revival of the feudal customs and
manners in my castle, and of the feudal system among my tenantry (all
so favourable to heroines), I saw a magnificent barouche, turning from
the road into the common, and advancing towards me. My heart beat high:
the carriage approached, stopt; and who should alight from it, but
Higginson and Jerry! After Higginson, with reverence, and Jerry, with familiarity, had
congratulated me on my good fortune, the latter looked hard at the
castle. 'The people told us that this was Monkton Castle,' said he; 'but where
is the Monkton Castle that your ladyship is to live in?' 'There it is, my friend,' answered I. 'What? there!' cried he. 'Yes, there,' said I. 'What, there, there!' 'Yes, there, there.' 'Oh! murder! murder!' 'How far are we from your ladyship's house?' said the postilion,
advancing with his hat off. 'This castle is my house,' answered I. 'Begging your ladyship's pardon,' said he; 'what I mean, is, how far
are we from where your ladyship lives?' 'I live in this castle,' answered I.

Jerry began making signs to me over the fellow's shoulder, to hold my
tongue. 'What are you grimacing about there, Mr. Sullivan?' said I. 'Nothing at all, Ma'am,' answered he. ''Tis a way I have got; but your
ladyship, you know, is only come down to this castle on a sort of a
country excursion, to see if it wants repairing, you know: you don't
mean to live in it, you know.' And he put his finger on his nose, and
winked at me. 'But I know I do mean to live in it,' cried I, 'and so I request you
will cease your grinning.' 'Oh, murder, murder!' muttered he, swinging round on his heel. The postilion now stood staring at the venerable edifice, with an
expression of the most insolent ridicule. 'And what are _you_ looking at?' cried Jerry. 'At the sky through the castle window,' said the fellow, reddening, and
shaking with smothered laughter. 'Why then mind your own business,' cried Jerry, 'and that is, to take
the horses from the carriage, and set off with yourself as fast as you
can.' 'Not till I am paid for their journey down,' said the postilion. 'So
will your ladyship have the goodness to pay me?' 'Certainly,' said I. 'Jerry, pay the fellow.' 'Deuce a rap have I,' answered Jerry. 'I laid out my last farthing in
little things for your ladyship.' 'Higginson,' said I, 'shall I trouble you to pay him?' 'It irks me to declare,' answered Higginson, 'that in equipments for
this expedition;--a nice little desk, a nice little comb, a nice little
pocket-glass, a nice little----'

'In short you have no money,' cried I. 'Not a farthing,' answered he. 'Neither have I,' said I; 'so, postilion, you must call another time.' 'Here is a pretty to do!' cried the postilion. 'Damme, this is a shy
sort of a business. Not even the price of a feed of oats! Snuff my
eyes, I must have the money. I must, blow me.' ''Tis I that will blow you,' cried Jerry, 'if you don't unloose your
horses this moment, and pack off.' The postilion took them from the carriage, in silence; then having
mounted one of them, and ridden a few paces from us, he stopped. 'Now you set of vagabonds and swindlers,' cried he, 'without a roof
over your heads, or a penny in your pockets, to go diddle an honest man
out of his day's labour; wait till master takes you in hand: and if I
don't tell the coachmaker what a blockhead he was to give you his
barouche on tick, may I be particularly horsewhipt! Ladyship! a rummish
sort of a tit for a Ladyship! And that is my Lord, I suppose. And this
is the Marquis. Three pickpockets from Fleet-street, I would bet a whip
to a wisp. Ladyship! Oh, her Ladyship!' and away he cantered,
ladyshipping it, till he was out of hearing. 'That young person deserves a moral lecture,' said Higginson. 'He deserves a confounded drubbing,' cried Jerry. 'But now, 'pon your
conscience, does your ladyship intend to live in this old castle?' 'Upon my honour I do,' replied I. 'And is there no decent house on the estate, that one of your tenants
could lend you?' said he. 'Why you must know,' replied I, 'that though Lady Gwyn, the person who
has withheld my property from me so long, acknowledged my right to it
but a few days since, still, as she has not yet yielded up the title
deeds, in consequence of a quarrel which obliged me to quit her house,
it is improbable that the tenantry would treat me as their mistress. All I can do, is, to seize this uninhabited castle which lies on my own
estate. But I can tell you, that a heroine of good taste, and who
wishes to rise in her profession, would infinitely prefer the
desolation of a castle to the comforts of a villa.' 'Well, of all the wise freaks----' cried Jerry, standing astride,
sticking his hands in his ribs, and nodding his head, as he looked up
at the castle. 'I tell you what, Mr. Sullivan,' interrupted I, 'if you have the
slightest objection to remaining here, you are at perfect liberty to
depart this moment.' 'And do you think I would leave you?' cried he. 'Oh then, oh then, 'tis
I that wouldn't!