how! what! think so
at your peril.' --'I must think so, as we usually judge of others
by ourselves.' --'Go to--go, miss mal-a-pert.--Well, but, drive on,
coachman--this taking leave is plaguey disagreeable, so shake hands and
be off.' They gave him their hands, which he pressed very affectionately, and the
carriage drove on. 'I am an old fool,' cried the doctor, wiping his eyes as the carriage
disappeared. 'Well: Heaven grant, sweet innocent, that you may return to
me as happy and spotless as you now are!' Mrs Mowbray had been married at a very early age, and had accepted in Mr
Mowbray the first man who addressed her: consequently that passion for
personal admiration, so natural to women, had in her never been gratified,
nor even called forth. But seeing herself, at the age of thirty-eight,
possessed of almost undiminished beauty, she recollected that her charms
had never received that general homage for which nature intended them;
and she who at twenty had disregarded, even to a fault, the ornaments
of dress, was now, at the age of thirty-eight, eager to indulge in the
extremes of decoration, and to share in the delights of conquest and
admiration with her youthful and attractive daughter. Attractive, rather than handsome, was the epithet best suited to
describe Adeline Mowbray. Her beauty was the beauty of expression of
countenance, not regularity of feature, though the uncommon fairness and
delicacy of her complexion, the lustre of her hazel eyes, her long dark
eye-lashes, and the profusion of soft light hair which curled over the
ever-mantling colour of her cheek, gave her some pretensions to what is
denominated beauty. But her own sex declared she was plain--and perhaps
they were right--though the other protested against the decision--and
probably they were right also: but women criticize in detail, men admire
in the aggregate. Women reason, and men feel, when passing judgment
on female beauty: and when a woman declares another to be plain, the
chances are that she is right in her opinion, as she cannot, from her
being a woman, feel the charm of that power to please, that 'something
than beauty dearer,' which often throws a veil over the irregularity of
features and obtains, for even a plain woman, from men at least, the
appellation of pretty. Whether Adeline's face were plain or not, her form could defy even the
severity of female criticism. She was indeed tall, almost to a masculine
degree; but such were the roundness and proportion of her limbs, such
the symmetry of her whole person, such the lightness and gracefulness
of her movements, and so truly feminine were her look and manner, that
superior height was forgotten in the superior loveliness of her figure. It is not to be wondered at, then, that Miss Mowbray was an object of
attention and admiration at Bath, as soon as she appeared, nor that her
mother had her share of flattery and followers. Indeed, when it was
known that Mrs Mowbray was a rich widow, and Adeline dependent upon her,
the mother became, in the eyes of some people, much more attractive than
her daughter. It was impossible, however, that, in such a place as Bath, Mrs Mowbray
and Adeline could make, or rather retain, a general acquaintance. Their
opinions on most subjects were so very different from those of the world,
and they were so little conscious, from the retirement in which they
lived, that this difference existed, or was likely to make them enemies,
that not a day elapsed in which they did not shock the prejudices of
some, and excite the contemptuous pity of others; and they soon saw
their acquaintance coolly dropped by those who, as persons of family
and fortune, had on their first arrival sought it with eagerness. But this was not entirely owing to the freedom of their sentiments on
politics, or on other subjects; but, because they associated with a
well-known but obnoxious author;--a man whose speculations had delighted
the inquiring but ignorant lover of novelty, terrified the timid idolater
of ancient usages, and excited the regret of the cool and rational
observer:--regret, that eloquence so overwhelming, powers of reasoning
so acute, activity of research so praise-worthy, and a love of
investigation so ardent, should be thrown away on the discussion of
moral and political subjects, incapable of teaching the world to build
up again with more beauty and propriety, a fabric, which they were
perhaps, calculated to pull down: in short, Mrs Mowbray and Adeline
associated with Glenmurray, that author over whose works they had long
delighted to meditate, and who had completely led their imagination
captive, before the fascination of his countenance and manners had come
in aid of his eloquence. Frederic Glenmurray was a man of family, and of a small independent
estate, which, in case he died without children, was to go to the next
male heir; and to that heir it was certain it would go, as Glenmurray on
principle was an enemy to marriage, and consequently not likely to have
a child born in wedlock. It was unfortunate circumstance for Glenmurray, that, with the ardour of
a young and inexperienced mind, he had given his eccentric opinions to
the world as soon as they were conceived and arranged,--as he, by so
doing, prejudiced the world against him in so unconquerable a degree,
that to him almost every door and heart was shut; and he by that means
excluded from every chance of having the errors of his imagination
corrected by the arguments of the experienced and enlightened--and
corrected, no doubt, they would have been, for he had a mild and candid
spirit, and mind open to conviction. 'I consider myself,' he used to say, 'as a sceptic, not as a man really
certain of the truth of any thing which he advances. I doubt of all
things, because I look upon doubt as the road to truth; and do but
convince me what is the truth, and at what risk, whatever sacrifice, I
am ready to embrace it.' But, alas! neither the blamelessness of his life, nor even his active
virtue, assisted by the most courteous manners, were deemed sufficient
to counteract the mischievous tendency of his works; or rather, it was
supposed impossible that his life could be blameless and his seeming
virtues sincere:--and unheard, unknown, this unfortunate young man was
excluded from those circles which his talents would have adorned, and
forced to lead a life of solitude, or associate with persons unlike to
him in most things, except in a passion for the bold in theory, and the
almost impossible in practice. Of this description of persons he soon became the oracle--the head of a
sect, as it were; and those tenets which at first he embraced, and put
forth more for amusement than from conviction, as soon as he began to
suffer on their account, became as clear to him as the cross to the
Christian martyr: and deeming persecution a test of truth, he considered
the opposition made to him and his doctrines, not as the result of
dispassionate reason striving to correct absurdity, but as selfishness
and fear endeavouring to put out the light which showed the weakness of
the foundation on which were built their claims to exclusive respect. When Mrs Mowbray and Adeline first arrived at Bath, the latter had
attracted the attention and admiration of Colonel Mordaunt, an Irishman
of fortune, and an officer in the guards; and Adeline had not been
insensible to the charms of the very fine person and engaging manners,
united to powers of conversation which displayed an excellent
understanding improved by education and reading. But Colonel Mordaunt
was not a _marrying man_, as it is called: therefore, as soon as he
began to feel the influence of Adeline growing too powerful for his
freedom, and to observe that his attentions were far from unpleasing to
her,--too honourable to excite an attachment in her which he resolved to
combat in himself, he resolved to fly from the danger, which he knew he
could not face and overcome; and after a formal but embarrassed adieu to
Mrs Mowbray and Adeline, he suddenly left Bath. This unexpected departure both surprised and grieved Adeline; but, as
her feelings of delicacy were too strong to allow her to sigh for a
man who, evidently, had no thoughts of sighing for her, she dismissed
Colonel Mordaunt from her remembrance, and tried to find as much
interest still in the ball-rooms, and the promenades, as his presence
had given them: nor was it long before she found in them an attraction
and an interest stronger than any which she had yet felt. It is naturally to be supposed that Adeline had often wished to
know personally an author whose writings delighted her as much
as Glenmurray's had done, and that her fancy had often portrayed
him: but though it had clothed him in a form at once pleasing and
respectable,--still, from an idea of his superior wisdom, she had
imagined him past the meridian of life, and not likely to excite warmer
feelings than those of esteem and veneration: and such continued to be
Adeline's idea of Glenmurray, when he arrived at Bath, having been sent
thither by his physicians for the benefit of his health. Glenmurray, though a sense of his unpopularity had long banished him
from scenes of public resort in general, was so pleased with the
novelties of Bath, that, though he walked wholly unnoticed except by the
lovers of genius in whatsoever shape it showed itself, he frequented
daily the pump-room, and the promenades; and Adeline had long admired
the countenance and dignified person of this young and interesting
invalid, without the slightest suspicion of his being the man of all
others whom she most wished to see. Nor had Glenmurray been slow to admire Adeline: and so strong, so
irresistible was the feeling of admiration which she had excited in
him, that, as soon as she appeared, all other objects vanished from his
sight; and as women are generally quick-sighted to the effect of their
charms, Adeline never beheld the stranger without a suffusion of
pleasurable confusion on her cheek. One morning at the pump-room, when Glenmurray, unconscious that Adeline
was near, was reading the newspaper with great attention, and Adeline
for the first time was looking at him unobserved, she heard the name of
Glenmurray pronounced, and turned her head towards the person who spoke,
in hopes of seeing Glenmurray himself; when Mrs Mowbray, turning round
and looking at the invalid, said to a gentleman next her, 'Did you say,
Sir, that that tall, pale, dark, interesting-looking young man is Mr
Glenmurray, the celebrated author?' 'Yes, ma'am,' replied the gentleman with a sneer: 'that is Mr
Glenmurray, the celebrated author.' 'Oh! how I should like to speak to him!' cried Mrs Mowbray. 'It will be no difficult matter,' replied her informant: 'the gentleman
is always quite as much at leisure as you see him now; for _all_ persons
have not the same taste as Mrs Mowbray.' So saying, he bowed and departed, leaving Mrs Mowbray, to whom the sight
of a great author was new, so lost in contemplating Glenmurray, that the
sarcasm with which he spoke entirely escaped her observation. Nor was Adeline less abstracted: she too was contemplating Glenmurray,
and with mixed but delightful feelings. 'So then he is young and handsome too!' said she mentally: 'it is a pity
he looks so _ill_,' added she _sighing_: but the sigh was caused rather
by his looking so _well_--though Adeline was not conscious of it. By this time Glenmurray had observed who were his neighbours, and the
newspaper was immediately laid down. 'Is there any news to-day?' said Mrs Mowbray to Glenmurray, resolved to
make a bold effort to become acquainted with him. Glenmurray, with a bow
and a blush of mingled surprise and pleasure, replied that there was a
great deal,--and immediately presented to her the paper which he had
relinquished, setting chairs at the same time for her and Adeline. Mrs Mowbray, however, only slightly glanced her eye over the paper:--her
desire was to talk to Glenmurray; and in order to accomplish this point,
and prejudice him in her favour, she told him how much she rejoiced
in seeing an author whose works were the delight and instruction of
her life. 'Speak, Adeline,' cried she, turning to her blushing daughter;
'do we not almost daily read and daily admire Mr Glenmurray's
writings?' --'Yes, certainly,' replied Adeline, unable to articulate
more, awed no doubt by the presence of so superior a being; while
Glenmurray, more proud of being an author than ever, said internally,
'Is it possible that that sweet creature should have read and admired my
works?' But in vain, encouraged by the smiles and even by the blushes of
Adeline, did he endeavour to engage her in conversation. Adeline was
unusually silent, unusually bashful. But Mrs Mowbray made ample amends
for her deficiency; and Mr Glenmurray, flattered and amused, would
have continued to converse with her and look at Adeline, had he not
observed the impertinent sneers and rude laughter to which conversing so
familiarly with him exposed Mrs Mowbray. As soon as he observed this, he
arose to depart; for Glenmurray was, according to Rochefoucault's maxim,
so exquisitely selfish, that he always considered the welfare of others
before his own; and heroically sacrificing his own gratification to save
Mrs Mowbray and Adeline from further censure, he bowed with the greatest
respect to Mrs Mowbray, sighed as he paid the same compliment to
Adeline, and, lamenting his being forced to quit them so soon, with
evident reluctance left the room. 'What an elegant bow he makes!' exclaimed Mrs Mowbray. Adeline had
observed nothing but the sigh; and on that she did not choose to make
any comment. The next day Mrs Mowbray, having learned Glenmurray's address, sent him
a card for a party at her lodgings. Nothing but Glenmurray's delight
could exceed his astonishment at this invitation. He had observed Mrs
Mowbray and Adeline, even before Adeline had observed him; and, as he
gazed upon the fascinating Adeline, he had sighed to think that she too
would be taught to avoid the dangerous and disreputable acquaintance of
Glenmurray. To him, therefore, this mark of attention was a source both
of consolation and joy. But, being well convinced that it was owing to
her ignorance of the usual customs and opinions of those with whom she
associated, he was too generous to accept the invitation, as he knew
that his presence at a rout at Bath would cause general dismay, and
expose the mistress to disagreeable remarks at least: but he endeavoured
to make himself amends for his self-denial, by asking leave to wait on
them when they were alone. A day or two after, as Adeline was leaning on the arm of a young lady,
Glenmurray passed them, and to his respectful bow she returned a most
cordial salutation. 'Gracious me! my dear,' said her companion, 'do you
know who that man is?' 'Certainly:--it is Mr Glenmurray.' 'And do you speak to him?' 'Yes:--why should I not?' 'Dear me! Why, I am sure! Why--don't you know what he is?' 'Yes, a celebrated writer, and a man of genius.' 'Oh, that may be, Miss Mowbray: but they say one should not notice him,
because he is--'

'He is what?' said Adeline eagerly. 'I do not exactly know what; but I believe it is a French spy, or a
Jesuit.' 'Indeed?' replied Adeline laughing. 'But I am used to have better
evidence against a person than a _they say_ before I neglect an
acknowledged acquaintance: therefore, with your leave, I shall turn back
and talk a little to poor Mr Glenmurray.' It so happened that _poor Mr Glenmurray_ heard every word of this
conversation; for he had turned round and followed Adeline and her fair
companion, to present to the former the glove which she had dropped; and
as they were prevented from proceeding by the crowd on the parade, which
was assembled to see some unusual sight, he, being immediately behind
them, could distinguish all that passed; so that Adeline turned round
to go in search of him before the blush of grateful admiration for her
kindness had left his cheek. 'Then she seeks me because I am shunned by others!' said Glenmurray
to himself. In a moment the world to him seemed to contain only two
beings, Adeline Mowbray and Frederic Glenmurray; and that Adeline,
starting and blushing with joyful surprise at seeing him so near her,
was then coming in search of him!--of him, the neglected Glenmurray! Scarcely could he refrain catching the lovely and ungloved hand next him
to his heart; but he contented himself with keeping the glove that he
was before so eager to restore, and in a moment it was lodged in his
bosom. Nor could 'I can't think what I have done with my glove,' which every
now and then escaped Adeline, prevail on him to own that he had found
it. At last, indeed, it became unnecessary; for Adeline, as she glanced
her eye towards Glenmurray, discovered it in the hiding-place: but,
as delicacy forbade her to declare the discovery which she had made,
he was suffered to retain his prize; though a deep and sudden blush
which overspread his cheek, and a sudden pause which she made in her
conversation, convinced Glenmurray that she had detected his secret. Perhaps he was not sorry--nor Adeline; but certain it is that Adeline
was for the remainder of the morning more lost in reverie than ever her
mother had been; and that from that day every one, but Adeline and
Glenmurray, saw that they were mutually enamoured. Glenmurray was the first of the two lovers to perceive that they were
so; and he made the discovery with a mixture of pain and pleasure. For
what could be the result of such an attachment? He was firmly resolved
never to marry; and it was very unlikely that Adeline, though she had
often expressed to him her approbation of his writings and opinions,
should be willing to sacrifice everything to love, and become his
mistress. But a circumstance took place which completely removed his
doubts on this subject. Several weeks had elapsed since the first arrival of the Mowbrays at
Bath, and in that time almost all their acquaintances had left them one
by one; but neither Mrs Mowbray nor Adeline had paid much attention to
this circumstance. Mrs Mowbray's habits of abstraction, as usual, made
her regardless of common occurrences; and to these were added the more
delightful reverie occasioned by the attentions of a very handsome and
insinuating man, and the influence of a growing passion. Mrs Mowbray,
as we have before observed, married from duty, not inclination; and to
the passion of love she had remained a total stranger, till she became
acquainted at Bath with Sir Patrick O'Carrol. Yes; Mrs Mowbray was in
love for the first time when she was approaching her fortieth year! and
a woman is never so likely to be the fool of love, as when it assails
her late in life, especially if a lover be as great a novelty to her as
the passion itself. Though not, alas! restored to a second youth, the
tender victim certainly enjoys a second childhood, and exhibits but too
openly all the little tricks and _minaudieres_ of a love-sick girl,
without the youthful appearance that in a degree excuses them. This was
the case with Mrs Mowbray; and while, regardless of her daughter's
interest and happiness, she was lost in the pleasing hopes of marrying
the agreeable baronet, no wonder the cold neglect of her Bath associates
was not seen by her. Adeline, engrossed also by the pleasing reveries of a first love, was
as unconscious of it as herself. Indeed she thought of nothing but love
and Glenmurray; else, she could not have failed to see, that, while Sir
Patrick's attentions and flatteries were addressed to her mother, his
ardent looks and passionate sighs were all directed to herself. Sir Patrick O'Carrol was a young Irishman, of an old family but an
encumbered estate; and it was his wish to set his estate free by
marrying a rich wife, and one as little disagreeable as possible. With
this view he came to Bath; and in Mrs Mowbray he not only beheld a woman
of large independent fortune, but possessed of great personal beauty,
and young enough to be attractive. Still, though much pleased with the
wealth and appearance of the mother, he soon became enamoured of the
daughter's person; and had he not gone so far in his addresses to Mrs
Mowbray as to make it impossible she should willingly transfer him to
Adeline, and give her a fortune at all adequate to his wants, he would
have endeavoured honourably to gain her affections, and entered the
lists against the favoured Glenmurray. But, as he wanted the mother's wealth, he resolved to pursue his
advantage with her, and trust to some future chance for giving him
possession of the daughter. In his dealings with men, Sir Patrick was
a man of honour; in his dealings with women, completely the reverse:
he considered them as a race of subordinate beings, and that if, like
horses, they were well lodged, fed, and kept clean, they had no right to
complain. Constantly therefore did he besiege Mrs. Mowbray with his conversation,
and Adeline with his eyes; and the very libertine gaze with which he
often beheld her, gave a pang to Glenmurray which was but too soon
painfully increased. Sir Patrick was the only man of fashion who did not object to visit at
Mrs. Mowbray's on account of her intimacy with Glenmurray; but he had
his own private reasons for going thither, and continued to visit at Mrs
Mowbray's though Glenmurray was generally there, and sometimes he and
the latter gentleman were the whole of their company. One evening they and two ladies were drinking tea at Mrs Mowbray's
lodgings, when Mrs Mowbray was unusually silent and Adeline unusually
talkative. Adeline scarcely ever spoke in her mother's presence, from
deference to her abilities; and whatever might be Mrs Mowbray's defects
in other respects, her conversational talents and her uncommon command
of words were indisputable. But this evening, as I before observed,
Adeline, owing to her mother's tender abstractions, was obliged to exert
herself for the entertainment of the guests. It so happened, also, that something was said by one of the party which
led to the subject of marriage, and Adeline was resolved not to let so
good an opportunity pass of proving to Glenmurray how sincerely she
approved his doctrine on that subject. Immediately, with an unreserve
which nothing but her ignorance of the world, and the strange education
which she had received, could at all excuse, she began to declaim
against marriage, as an institution at once absurd, unjust, and immoral,
and to declare that she would never submit to so contemptible a form, or
profane the sacred ties of love by so odious and unnecessary a ceremony. This extraordinary speech, though worded elegantly and delivered
gracefully, was not received by any of her hearers, except Sir Patrick,
with any thing like admiration. The baronet, indeed, clapped his hands,
and cried 'Bravo! a fine spirited girl, upon my word!' in a manner so
loud, and so offensive to the feelings of Adeline, that, like the orator
of old, she was tempted to exclaim, 'What foolish thing can I have said,
that has drawn forth this applause?' But Mrs Mowbray, though she could not help admiring the eloquence which
she attributed to her example,--was shocked at hearing Adeline declare
that her practice should be consonant to her theory; while Glenmurray,
though Adeline had only expressed his sentiments, and his reason
approved what she had uttered, felt his delicacy and his feelings
wounded by so open and decided an avowal of her opinions, and intended
conduct in consequence of them; and he was still more hurt, when he
saw how much it delighted Sir Patrick, and offended the rest of the
company; who, after a silence, the result of surprise and disgust,
suddenly arose, and, coldly wishing Mrs Mowbray good night, left the
house. By Mrs Mowbray the cause of this abrupt departure was unsuspected: but
Adeline, who had more observation, was convinced that she was the cause
of it; and sighing deeply at the prejudices of the world, she sought to
console herself by looking at Glenmurray, expecting to find in his eyes
an expression of delight and approbation. To her great disappointment,
however, his countenance was sad; while Sir Patrick, on the contrary,
had an expression of impudent triumph in his look, which made her turn
blushing from his ardent gaze, and indignantly follow her mother, who
was then leaving the room. As she passed him, Sir Patrick caught her hand rapturously to his lips
(an action which made Glenmurray start from his chair), and exclaimed,
'Really you are the only honest little woman I ever knew! I always was
sure that what you just now said was the opinion of all your sex, though
they were so confounded coy they would not own it.' 'Own what Sir?' asked the astonished Adeline. 'That they thought marriage a cursed bore, and preferred leading the
life of honour, to be sure.' 'The life of honour! What is that?' demanded Adeline, while Glenmurray
paced the room in agitation. 'That life, my dear girl, which you mean to lead;--love and liberty with
the man of your heart.' 'Sir Patrick,' cried Glenmurray impatiently, 'this conversation is--'

'Prodigiously amusing to me,' returned the baronet, 'especially as I
never could hold it to a modest woman before.' 'Nor shall you now, Sir,' fiercely interrupted Glenmurray. 'Shall not, Sir?' vociferated Sir Patrick. 'Pray, gentlemen, be less violent,' exclaimed the terrified and
astonished Adeline. 'I can't think what could offend you, Mr Glenmurray,
in Sir Patrick's original observation: the life of honour appears to me
a very excellent name for the pure and honourable union which it is my
wish to form; and--'

'There; I told you so;' triumphantly interrupted Sir Patrick: 'and I
never was better pleased in life:--sweet creature! at once so lovely, so
wise, and so liberal!' 'Sir,' cried Glenmurray, 'this is a mistake: your life of honour and
Miss Mowbray's are as different as possible; you are talking of what
you are grossly ignorant of.' 'Ignorant! I ignorant! Look you, Mr Glenmurray, do you pretend to tell
me I know not what the life of honour is, when I have led it so many
times with so many different women?' 'How, Sir!' replied Adeline: 'many times? and with many different women? My life of honour can be led with one only.' 'Well, my dear soul, I only led it with one at a time.' 'O Sir! you are indeed ignorant of my meaning,' she rejoined: 'It is the
individuality of an attachment that constitutes its purity; and--'

'Ba-ba-bu, my lovely girl! which has purity to do in the business?' 'Indeed, Sir Patrick,' meekly returned Adeline, 'I--'

'Miss Mowbray,' angrily interrupted Glenmurray, 'I beg, I conjure you to
drop this conversation: your innocence is no match for--'

'For what, Sir?' furiously demanded Sir Patrick. 'Your licentiousness,' replied Glenmurray. 'Sir, I wear a sword,' cried the baronet.--'And I a cane,' said
Glenmurray calmly, 'either to defend myself or chastise insolence.' 'Mr Glenmurray! Sir Patrick!' exclaimed the agitated Adeline: 'for my
sake, for pity's sake desist!' 'For the present I will, madam,' faltered out Sir Patrick;--'but I know
Mr Glenmurray's address, and he shall hear from me.' 'Hear from you! Why, you do not mean to challenge him? you can't suppose
Mr Glenmurray would do so absurd a thing as fight a duel? Sir, he has
written a volume to prove the absurdity of the custom.--No, no! you
threaten his life in vain,' she added, giving her hand to Glenmurray;
who, in the tenderness of the action and the tone of her voice, forgot
the displeasure which her inadvertency had caused, and pressing her hand
to his lips, secretly renewed his vows of unalterable attachment. 'Very well, madam,' exclaimed Sir Patrick in a tone of pique: 'then, so
as Mr Glenmurray's life is safe, you care not what becomes of mine!' 'Sir,' replied Adeline, 'the safety of a fellow-creature is always of
importance in my eyes.' 'Then you care for me as a fellow-creature only,' retorted Sir
Patrick, 'not as Sir Patrick O'Carrol?--Mighty fine, truly, you dear
ungrateful--' seizing her hand; which he relinquished, as well as the
rest of his speech, on the entrance of Mrs Mowbray. Soon after Adeline left the room, and Glenmurray bowed and retired;
while Sir Patrick, having first repeated his vows of admiration to the
mother, returned home to muse on the charms of the daughter, and the
necessity of challenging the moral Glenmurray. Sir Patrick was a man of courage, and had fought several duels: but as
life at this time had a great many charms for him, he resolved to defer
at least putting himself in the way of getting rid of it; and after
having slept late in the morning, to make up for the loss of sleep in
the night, occasioned by his various cogitations, he rose, resolved to
go to Mrs Mowbray's, and if he had an opportunity, indulge himself in
some practical comments on the singular declaration made the evening
before by her lovely daughter. Glenmurray meanwhile had passed the night in equal watchfulness and
greater agitation. To fight a duel would be, as Adeline observed,
contrary to his principles; and to decline one, irritated as he was
against Sir Patrick, was repugnant to his feelings. To no purpose did he peruse and re-peruse nearly the whole of his
own book against duelling; he had few religious restraints to make
him resolve on declining a challenge, and he felt moral ones of little
avail: but in vain did he sit at home till the morning was far advanced,
expecting a messenger from Sir Patrick;--no messenger came:--he
therefore left word with his servant, that, if wanted, he might be found
at Mrs Mowbray's, and went thither, in hopes of enjoying an hour's
conversation with Adeline; resolving to hint to her, as delicately as he
could, that the opinions which she had expressed were better confined,
in the present dark state of the public mind, to a select and
discriminating circle. Sir Patrick had reached Mrs Mowbray's some time before him, and had,
to his great satisfaction, found Adeline alone; nor did it escape his
penetration that her cheeks glowed, and her eyes sparkled with pleasure,
at his approach. But he would not have rejoiced in this circumstance, had he known
that Adeline was pleased to see him merely because she considered his
appearance as a proof of Glenmurray's safety; for, in spite of his
having written against duelling, and of her confidence in his firmness
and consistency, she was not quite convinced that the reasoning
philosopher would triumph over the feeling man. 'You are welcome, Sir Patrick!' cried Adeline, as he entered, with a
most winning smile: 'I am very glad to see you: pray sit down.' The baronet, who, audacious as his hopes and intentions were, had not
expected so kind a reception, was quite thrown off his guard by it, and
catching her suddenly in his arms, endeavoured to obtain a still kinder
welcome. Adeline as suddenly disengaged herself from him, and, with the
dignity of offended modesty, desired him to quit the room, as, after
such an insolent attempt, she could not think herself justified in
suffering him to remain with her. But her anger was soon changed into pity, when she saw Sir Patrick lay
down his hat, seat himself, and burst into a long deliberate laugh. 'He is certainly mad!' she exclaimed; and, leaning against the
chimney-piece, she began to contemplate him with a degree of fearful
interest. 'Upon my soul! now,' cried the baronet, when his laugh was over, 'you
do not suppose, my dear creature, that you and I do not understand one
another! Telling a young fellow to leave the house on such occasions,
means, in the pretty no meaning of your sex, "Stay, and offend again,"
to be sure.' 'He is certainly mad!' said Adeline, more confirmed than before in her
idea of his insanity, and immediately endeavoured to reach the door: but
in so doing she approached Sir Patrick, who, rather roughly seizing her
trembling hand, desired her to sit down, and hear what he had to say to
her. Adeline, thinking it not right to irritate him, instantly obeyed. 'Now, then, to open my mind to you,' said the baronet, drawing his chair
close to hers: 'From the very first moment I saw you, I felt that we
were made for one another; though, being bothered by my debts, I made up
to the old duchess, and she nibbled the bait directly,--deeming my clean
inches (six feet one, without shoes) well worth her dirty acres.' 'How dreadfully incoherent he is!' thought Adeline, not suspecting for a
moment that, by the old duchess, he meant her still blooming mother. 'But, my lovely dear!' continued Sir Patrick, most ardently pressing her
hand, 'so much have your sweet person, and your frank and liberal way of
thinking, charmed me, that I here freely offer myself to you, and we will
begin the life of honour together as soon as you please.' Still Adeline, who was unconscious how much her avowed opinions, had
exposed her to insult, continued to believe Sir Patrick insane; a belief
which the wildness of his eyes confirmed.