oh, divinity, that presidest over the
constellations, the meteors, and the ocean! how was your pupil fallen! how the awestruck and ardent worshipper of the God who shrowds himself in darkness,
changed into the drinker and the debauchee, the manufacturer of "a fool-born jest," and the shameless roarer of a licentious catch! I did not however entirely depart from the dispositions which had characterised

me in Wales. My poetical and contemplative character was gone; all that refinement which distinguished me from the grosser sons of earth. My understanding was
brutified; I no longer gave free scope to the workings of my own mind, but became an artificial personage, formed after a wretched and contemptible model. But
my benevolence and humanity were still the same. Among the various feats of a college-buck I attempted, there was none in which I came off with so little
brilliancy, as that of "quizzing a fresh-man," and making a fellow-creature miserable by a sportive and intemperate brutality. What scenes of this sort I
have
witnessed! There is no feature of man, by which our common nature is placed in so odious and despicable a light, as the propensity we feel to laugh at and
accumulate the distresses of our fellow-creatures, when those distresses display themselves

with tokens of the ungainly and uncouth. I engaged in a project of this sort once or twice, and then abjured the ambition for ever. Thenceforward it was my
practice to interfere in behalf of the sufferers by such hostilities; and my manner carried with it that air of decision, that, though the interference was
unwelcome, it was successful; and the dogs of the caustic hunt let go their hold of the bleeding game. Another motive actuated me in this plan of proceeding. Though I had assumed an impudent and licentious character, I despised it; and I made conscience of debauching new converts into the inglorious school, which

was usually the object and end of these brutal jests. I was contented to associate with those whose characters I judged to be finished already, and whom I
persuaded myself my encouragement would not make worse; and thus with wretched sophistry I

worked my mind into the belief that, while I yielded to a vicious course, I was doing no harm. In the midst of all this, my heart entered with prompt
liberality into the difficulties and distresses of others; and, as in Wales I was assiduous to relieve the wants of the industrious and the poor, so in
Oxford
the embarrassments of those young men, whose funds, derived from their families, did not keep pace with the demands of their situation, excited in me
particular sympathy, and received frequent and sometimes secret relief from the resources with which my father's bounty supplied me. In this place I feel inclined to relate one of those stories of ingenious intellectual victory, as they considered them, of dull and unfeeling brutality, as
they really were, in which too many of my college-contemporaries prided themselves. A young man, during my residence at the university, entered himself of
our
college, who was judged by the gayer Oxonians singularly well-formed to be the butt of their ridicule. The dress in which he made his appearance among us was

ungainly and ludicrous: the flaps of his waistcoat extended to his knees, and those of his coat almost to his heels: his black, coarse, shining hair, parted
on
the forehead, was every where of equal length, and entirely buried his ears beneath

its impervious canopy. He had hitherto been brought up in solitude under the sole direction of his father, a country clergyman; but he was an excellent classic
scholar and a mathematician, and his manners were the most innocent and unsuspecting that it is possible to imagine. In addition to these qualities, he had
an
exalted opinion of his own intellectual accomplishments; and he had brought with him among his other treasures, the offspring of his stripling meditations, a

tragedy, founded on the story of the Fifth Labour of Hercules. In this performance the contents of the Augean stable were set out in great pomp of description; the ordure which had accumulated in thirty years from the
digestion and dejection of three thousand oxen, was amplified and spread out to the fancy; and Withers (this was the name of the poet) might be said, like

Virgil, to "fling about his dung with an air of majesty." The tragedy opened with a pathetic lamentation between the groom and the herdsman of the king,
respecting the melancholy condition of the stable, and the difficulty of keeping the cattle which were so unroyally lodged in any creditable appearance. A
herald then entered with a proclamation, declaring that three hundred of the king's oxen should be the prize of him who should restore the stable to a
wholsome
and becoming state. The chorus next sang an ode, in which they exposed the miseries of procrastination, and declared that none but a demigod could accomplish

the task which had so long been postponed. In the second act Hercules appeared, and offered to undertake the arduous operation. He has an audience of the
king,
who dwells upon the greatness of the effort, and exposes in a loftier style, what had already been

described by his servants in familiar verse, the filth the hero would have to encounter. Hercules answers modestly, and enters into the history of the four
labours he had already accomplished. The bargain is struck; and the chorus admire the form and port of the hero, and pray for his success. The third act
begins
with expressing the general terror and astonishment. Hercules removes the oxen from their stalls; and then a mighty rushing sound is heard of the river
leaving
its ancient bounds, and pouring its tide through the noisome and infectious walls. The rest of the play consisted of the arguments on the part of the king
and
of the hero, as to whether Hercules had fulfilled his engagement; and the punishment of the tyrant. Here many hints were borrowed from the contention of Ajax

and Ulysses in Ovid, respecting the preference of wisdom and ingenuity over

brute force: king Augeas insisting that the nuisance should have been displaced with shovel and wheel-barrow; while Hercules with great eloquence maintained
that to remove the whole evil at once, by changing the course of a river, was a more wonderful and meritorious achievement. This tragedy soon became a source of inexhaustible amusement to the wits and satirists of our college. One of the drollest and demurest of the set had first
wormed himself into the confidence of Withers, and extorted from him his secret, and then, under the most solemn engagements not to name the matter to a
living
creature, obtained the loan of this choice morsel of scenic poetry. He had no sooner gained possession of it, than he gave notice to four or five of his
associates; and they assembled the same evening to enjoy over a bottle the treasure they had purloined. It must be

owned that the subject of the drama was particularly calculated to expose the effusions of its author to their ridicule. The solemn phrases and the lofty
ornaments with which every thing was expressed, afforded a striking contrast to the filth and slime which constituted the foundation of the piece. A topic of

this sort, however slightly mentioned, must appear low and absurd; but, when the dung, accumulated in thirty years by three thousand oxen, together with the

solemn engagement between a demigod and a king for its removal, is set out in all the pomp of verse, the man must be more sad than Heraclitus, and more
severe
than Cato, who could resist the propensity to laughter at the hearing such a tale. In the present case, where every joyous companion was predetermined to
find
materials for merriment, the peals of laughter were obstreperous and innumerable; many passages

were encored by the unanimous voice of the company; and in conclusion the scoffer who had obtained for them their present amusement, was deputed to procure
them the higher and more exquisite gratification of hearing the piece gravely declaimed to them by its author. Accordingly in a few days he waited on Withers with a grave and melancholy face, manuscript in hand, and confessed that by a very culpable neglect he had
fallen into a breach of the engagement he had made to the author on receiving it. He then named a young man of ingenuity and fancy in the same college, who
had
obtained considerable notoriety, by several pieces of fugitive poetry, which were much admired at Oxford. Withers had heard of him, and felt that respect
which
might naturally be expected for a brother of his own vocation. Morrison, the

jester, added, that this votary of the muses and himself were upon so intimate terms, that each had a key to the other's chamber; that he, not recollecting
this at the moment, had left the manuscript, being called away by a particular occasion, open upon his desk, had locked the door, and departed; and that the

poet, arriving soon after, had discovered, and seized with avidity the Fifth Labour of Hercules. Withers was greatly distressed at this tale. He had those feelings of modesty, which, under certain modifications, are most incident to such persons as are
pervaded with an anticipation of their future eminence. He did not pretend however to blame his friend for a fault, into which he seemed so innocently to
have
fallen, and which he so ingenuously confessed. On the other hand Morrison soothed the dramatist by describing to him the transports of admiration

with which the poet had been impressed in the perusal of this virgin tragedy. While they were yet in conversation, the poet knocked at the chamber-door. The verses of this young man, Frewen by name, were not deficient in merit, or even
in delicacy; but his features were harsh, and his manners coarse. He began with saying, that he could by no means deny himself the pleasure of soliciting the

acquaintance and friendship of a youth, to whose mind he had the vanity to believe his own was in so many respects congenial. He then launched out in
rapturous
praise of the Fifth Labour of Hercules. Seeing the manuscript on the table, he requested permission to open it, and point out to the author one or two places

which had struck him as particularly excellent. He then read part of a speech from king Augeas's groom, and that with such emphasis

of delivery, and seeming enthusiasm of intonation, as might have persuaded the most sceptical bystander that he was really smitten with approbation of the
verses he pronounced. The eyes of Withers glistened with joy. His self-love had never experienced so rich a treat. Frewen then proceeded to descant with
great
ingenuity upon certain metaphors and ornaments of style interspersed through the composition, showing how happily they were chosen, how skilfully adapted,
how
vigorously expressed, and how original they were in the conception: and, though some of the clauses he fixed upon were to such a degree absurd, that the poet

himself, when he heard them thus insulated from their connection, began to suspect that all was not right, yet the remarks of his panegyrist were so subtle,

and above all were delivered with an air

of such perfect sincerity, that he finished with being completely the dupe his false friends had purposed to make him. In conclusion, Mr. Frewen observed that
he had a select party of friends, whom he was accustomed to make judges of his own productions, and he earnestly intreated Withers, that he would no longer
conceal his talent, but would condescend to recite the tragedy he had written, to the same circle. Withers unaffectedly shrunk back, with the diffidence of a young man, who had never yet in so striking a manner burst the bounds of modesty; but, urged
alternately by the solicitations and the encomiums of his tempters, he suffered them to "wring from him his slow consent." A day was then to be fixed. He
refused to make it the same evening: he confessed to his visitors that it would be an unprecedented exertion to him,

and that he must string up his mind to the task: it was ultimately fixed for the day following. In the interval Withers had many qualms. Between the acting of a dreadful thing,
And the first motion, all the interim is
Like a phantasma, or a hideous dream. He felt the sort of arrogance which was implied, in the seating himself in the chair of honour, fixing the eyes of different persons, strangers, upon him, and
calling their attention to the effusions of his brain, as to something worthy of their astonishment. He recollected the faults of his poem, the places where
he
had himself doubted whether he had not embraced a Sycorax instead of an angel. He recollected his youth and inexperience, and the temerity of which he had in

reality been guilty, in undertaking

in his first essay to celebrate perhaps the most prodigious of the labours of the immortal Hercules. He remembered what he had somewhere heard of the satirical
and malicious turn of the elder Oxonians, and feared to become their butt. On the other hand, he called to mind the beauties of his poem, and was encouraged. Above all, he considered his character and fortitude as at stake in the engagement he had contracted, and was determined at every hazard to complete it. The evening arrived; the company assembled; the unhappy poet, the victim of their ridicule, was introduced. Mr. Frewen, at his entrance, took him by the hand,
led him into the middle of the room, made a short oration in his praise, and in the name of the company thanked him for his condescension in admitting them
to
such a pleasure as they were about to receive. After a variety

of grimaces on the part of the persons present, the manuscript was laid on the table. The poet took it up to read; but, in the first line, his voice failed
him, he turned pale, and was obliged to desist. Morrison, his original seducer, and another, had so placed their chairs that their countenances and action
could not be perceived by the reader, they being partly behind him: they winked the eye, and pointed the finger, to each other, and by various gestures
endeavoured to heighten the entertainment of the party. The table was covered with bottles and glasses. Frewen, when he saw the unaffected marks of Withers's

distress, began to feel an impulse of compunction; but he know that such an impulse would render him for ever contemptible to the present society, and he
suppressed it. He filled Withers a bumper, which he obliged him to take off; he snatched the play from his hand,

and read with much gravity and articulation the opening speech from the stable-keeper to the herdsman, in which the former bewails the miserable state of the
stalls, and, not knowing what to quarrel with, shows himself ready to quarrel with his fellow-officer, laments that there are such animals as oxen, or that
oxen cannot live but by food and digestion. This speech was received with bursts of applause, and Frewen particularly commended the "long majestic march and

energy divine" of the concluding verse. The poet was encouraged; he had had time to reason with himself, and recover his fortitude; Frewen restored to him
his
manuscript, filled him another bumper, and the scene commenced. That my readers may more exactly understand the spirit of the transaction, I will insert here a part of the chorus at the end of the third act, with which

the auditors pretended to be especially struck. 1
Illustrious hero, mighty Hercules! Much hast thou done, and wondrously achiev'd! Before thy strength,
The Neme�an lion fell subdued,
Clos'd in a worse than Cornish hug! The heads of Hydra, one by one, were crush'd
Beneath thy club of brass:
While little Iolas, thy gentle squire,
Stood by,
With red-hot salamander prompt,
And sear'd each streaming wound! The stag so swift of Oenoe the fair
Thou didst o'ertake,
Or, if not overtake,
Didst catch it in a trap! How glar'd the eyes of Erymanthus' boar! How fierce his tusks! How terrible his claws! His fire and fury calm thou didst survey,
And calm didst knock his brains out! 2
Oh, mighty man! Or rather shall I name thee God! A different labour now demands thy care:
No fangs now menace, and no tongues now hiss,

No rage now roars, nor swiftness flies thy grasp;
Terror no longer waits thee;
But strength is here requir'd;
Strength, patience, constancy, and endless resolution. 3
Behold these mountains, how they rise! The slow collections of three hundred moons;
Nay, almost four! Sleek were the oxen that produc'd them;
And royally were fed! Canst thou abate the nuisance? What gulph so wide, that would receive its bulk! Much likelier might'st thou seek,
With single strength,
To level Ossa, or to cast mount Athos
Down to the vasty deep! 4. Here too thou must encounter odours vile,
And stand begrim'd with muck:
Thy cheeks besmear'd,
Thy lineaments deform'd,
Beneath the loathsome load:
A guise how much unworthy such a hero! Ah, no! those godlike fingers ne'er were made
To ply the nightman's trade! Ah, cruel fate! Ah, step-dame destiny! Inflicting such disgrace
Upon the last-born son of mighty Jove! One apology may be made for the contrivers of this scene, that they by no means foresaw in the outset, how far they should be drawn in to go, and the serious
evils of which they might become authors. The purpose of the auditors was, under extravagant and tumultuous expressions of applause, to smother the
indications
of their ridicule and contempt. In this however they could not uniformly succeed. A phrase of a ludicrous nature in the piece, an abrupt fall from what was
elevated to something meanly familiar or absurd, would sometimes unexpectedly occur, and produce a laughter that could not be restrained. Nor would the
feelings allied to laughter always occur in the right place. Persons eager in search of the ludicrous, will often find it in an image, or a mode of
expression,

which by others, not debauched with this prepossession, would be found fraught with pleasing illustration and natural sentiment. The circle too, assembled on
this occasion, acted by sympathy upon each other, and pointed many a joke, and gave vigour to many a burlesque idea, which perhaps to any one of the
associates
in his retirement would have appeared unworthy to move a risible muscle. For a short time the jesters who had made Withers their prey, observed a certain degree of decorum. They bit their lips, affectedly raised their eyes, applied
the finger to the mouth, the nose, or the forehead, and thus pacified and appeased their propensities to ridicule. One and another incessantly showed
themselves lavish in commendation of the beauties of the poem; and with every compliment the glass of Withers was filled, and he was excited to drink. Presently the laugh, imperfectly suppressed, broke out in one solitary convulsion, and was then disguised in a cough, or an effort to sneeze. The dumb gestures
of the auditors were unperceived by the reader, who for the most part kept his eyes on the paper, and but rarely ventured, when he came to some bolder
flight,
to look round him for applause. Then the countenances of the hearers suddenly fell, and their limbs were at once composed into serenity. This transition
produced an effect singularly humorous, but which was wholly lost upon Withers, who had the misfortune to be purblind. By and by an outrageous laugh burst forth at once from one of the audience. The poor novice, their victim, started, as if he had trod on a serpent. Frewen,
making a motion to him to be tranquil, addressed the offender with much apparent gravity, and begged to know what

he could find ludicrous in the passage which had just been read, at the same time repeating the two last lines with a full and lofty voice. The culprit, as
soon as he could resume his seriousness, humbly sued for pardon, and declared that he laughed at nothing in the poem, of which no one could be a sincerer
admirer, but that his fancy had been tickled at the sight of a cork-screw (picking it up), which had just dropped from Jack Jones's pocket. This apology was

admitted. In a few minutes the same person broke out into an equally loud and clamorous fit of merriment, in which he was now joined by two or three others. Greater anger, as the tumult subsided, was expressed toward him; a more bungling and imperfect apology was tendered; and Frewen offered, if Mr. Withers
required it, to turn the culprit out of the room. In one or two instances the poet was requested to read again some passage

which the requester affected particularly to admire; and these repetitions were over attended with additional merriment, sometimes suppressed, and sometimes
ungovernable. In one or two of the choruses several of the auditors repeated the concluding verses after the reader, sometimes as nearly as possible keeping

pace with him, and at other times pursuing one another after the manner of a fuge in music; and, when the author expressed his surprise at this phenomenon,
they defended it, first from the enthusiastic admiration they felt, and next from the nature of a chorus, which was designed to be sung, or chanted, and not

spoken, and from their desire to enhance their pleasure, by bringing the tragedy they were hearing to as near a resemblance as they could, in this respect,
to
the state of actual exhibition. By this time the mind of Withers was

in a pitiable situation. That noviceship and total inexperience on his part, which made his torture, constituted the great pleasure of his remorseless
tormentors. He was unaccustomed to wine; and they had made him extremely inebriated. He was unaccustomed to high commendations and vociferous applause; and
they had raised his mind and purer feelings into a state of intoxication, little inferior to that of the more ponderous and corporeal particles of his nerves

and brain. All was confusion and tempest within him. Upon this state of the man were superinduced the demonstrations of ridicule and laughter which by
degrees
broke out in the audience. His brain was clouded; his understanding was in a maze; he apprehended nothing distinctly. Grave apologies were made to him; and
he
accepted them seriously; though, presently after, he was compelled to doubt whether they did not

wholly originate in the grossest hypocrisy. Had he possessed the smallest portion of knowledge of the world, he could not have harboured a moment's
uncertainty; but he was in all these respects a child. They nursed him, so to speak, in mistake, and rocked him in the cradle of delusion. By degrees they
persuaded him to mount upon the table, that he might recite some of the most brilliant passages with greater effect. They crowned him with wreaths of
parsley,
which happened to be the vegetable at hand; they anointed him with libations of wine; and by this time his apprehension was so completely subverted, that he

was unable to distinguish whether these things were done in mockery or honour, and willingly resigned himself to the more agreeable construction. At length
the
reading was finished; and the rioters (for all was now in a state of riot) burst

open the door, placed the poet, crowned with parsley, and trickling with wine, in a chair, and carried him triumphantly through the streets to his apartment,
with shouts, and vociferation, and uproar, enough to awake the dead. The deluded rioters, for they laboured under a state of delusion not less complete than their victim, persuaded themselves to look back with complacency upon
the diversion of the evening, and even agreed that they had not yet extracted amusement enough from so rich a subject as the unhappy Withers. The
ringleaders,
in their insatiate thirst after this species of gratification, planned a further scene to be grafted on what had passed in the evening of the reading. Morrison accordingly waited on Withers the next morning, and found him a prey to a miserable head-ache. The poet was also, now that the fumes of wine were
dissipated, full of melancholy

reflections on the incidents of the day, and extremely apprehensive that in all that had passed he had been an object of mockery to the assembly. Morrison put
the best gloss upon the whole, assured his dupe that all was done in sober sadness, apologised for the most extravagant particulars by observing that the
whole
party was nearly drunk, and declared on his honour that the manifestations, however uncouth, were those of genuine admiration, adding that, for the sake of
their sincerity and good meaning, the poet ought certainly to excuse the rudeness and ungraciousness of the form they had assumed. During the harangue of
this
buffoon, the eyes of Withers once or twice flashed fire; they were turned upon the speaker with a searching penetration as if they would look him through;
and
the poet swore a great oath, that he believed he was deceived,

and that, if it were so, he would die sooner than endure it. This subject having been discussed, Morrison informed Withers that he had a piece of bad news to communicate to him. The master of the college, he said, had
got information of the riot of the preceding night, and the disorder they had committed in the streets, and had hinted that he was determined to make an
example. While they were upon this painful topic, Frewen entered, and added to Morrison's intelligence, that by some unaccountable accident the master had
got
hold of the name of Withers, and that, as he had been carried in the chair, it was to be feared that he would be selected as the object of punishment. Withers
was a young man of great intrinsic modesty and sensibility, and he felt the utmost distress at this information. While his hollow-hearted

companions were pretending to console him, a young man, a stranger to Withers, entered, in the character of a messenger from the master, and summoned the poet
to make his appearance before his academical superior, the same evening, soon after sunset. Machinery, such as the malicious and riotous genius of the young men concerned in the plot suggested to their thoughts, was prepared for the occasion. In a
chair near the wall, at the upper end of a spacious room the use of which they procured, was seated a puppet, dressed up in a gown and wig similar to those
of
the master, which it was proposed to pass on the unfortunate Withers for the identical person of the superior whose reproof he dreaded. This image, by the
ingenuity of some of the parties to the plot, was so contrived, as to have its head and hands capable of being moved by one of the confederates,

who unseen held the springs for that purpose. Morrison, so much admired by his fellow-collegians for wit and humour, had among other accomplishments the art,
commonly called ventriloquism, of uttering articulate sounds without any visible motion of the lips, and of causing his voice to appear to come from whatever

quarter he pleased; added to which, he was an excellent mimic, and could copy the peculiarities of speech in almost any one he pleased, to a supreme degree. The fame of these qualities would no doubt in a short time have reached the ears of Withers; but he was newly come to the university, and had as yet no
suspicion that Morrison was even considered as a wit. In the evening, just after the shut of the day, Withers was introduced into the apartment which had previously been prepared. He was accompanied by
Morrison,

Frewen and the other offenders; some having thrust themselves unauthorised into the list of offenders, that they might have an opportunity to be witnesses of
he expected sport. The figure which stood for the master of the college, then appeared to call over the names of the culprits; and a young person below him,

who seemed to officiate as his secretary, answered to each of the names that the person called upon was present. The master began his harangue. He addressed

himself first to Frewen, and after to Morrison; and each of these attempted a sort of excuse for the outrage, and professed great contrition. The address to

Morrison was particularly diverting to the spectators, every one of whom, except Withers, well knew that it was Morrison in person who thus pronounced a
severe
and apparently angry censure upon himself. The speech of the principal was then

directed toward Withers, whom he declared he felt himself obliged to treat as the ringleader, as he had been the person elevated in the chair; he added that
certain privileges were by long practice conceded to the senior students in the university, but that it was intolerable for a young man, not many weeks
entered
in this seat of learning, to be seen drunk in the streets, and to be complained of for a riot. Withers defended himself with more spirit than was expected. He protested that he was no drunkard, and was exceedingly chagrined that an unfortunate accident
had exhibited him under that character. He added that, so far from being the ringleader in the riot, he was made an unwilling tool in the hands of others. Name them! replied the master, in a strong and imperious voice. Name them! rejoined Withers: no,

I will not be an informer: consider me as the ringleader! He then proceeded to question the propriety of the rule just delivered, of punishing strictly in the juniors, what was winded at, or slightly animadverted on,
in those of longer standing. Sir, interrupted the master, you were not sent for to criticise our rules, and to teach me how to conduct myself; and you have just shown yourself refractory
to the first principles of academical discipline by refusing to become what you call an informer. What now remains is, that I should vindicate the decorum of

the college, by punishing you for the riot you have committed; and I accordingly order you to strip off your gown in my presence, and direct that you be
excluded from all academical privileges for one month; at the end of which term, upon your expressing a proper

degree of sorrow and humiliation, you may possibly be restored. Withers felt indignant at this censure, and was going to remonstrate; but was prevailed on by those who stood near him to submit. He however threw his gown to
the floor with some resentment, and could not refrain expressing in three or four words some contempt for such trappings, and the privileges annexed to them. At this moment, to his utter astonishment and confusion the figure lifted up its hand, as if in the intention of striking him. This indignity put Withers
beyond all patience, and worked him into a momentary insanity: he flew at the master, and positively began to cuff the image with violence the machine was
unable to resist this species of rudeness, and actually fell in pieces about the ears of its assailant. The candles were extinguished,

and the room left in utter darkness; and at the same moment a long, obstreperous and deafening peal of laughter burst out from every person in the assembly. Thus ended the scene plotted and conducted by these ingenious gentlemen; but not thus ended the consequences which resulted from it. The impression it made
upon the mind of Withers was indelible. He had given himself up passively from the beginning to the ideas which his deluders wished to excite in him; the
last
incident therefore of their comedy had taken him at once, like a thunderbolt. He slunk away in confusion and silence. His mind had been violently acted upon
by
the events before him, while the whole appeared to him as serious. He had been a stranger to any greater applause than that of having construed well an ode
in
Horace; and he now found

himself treated in one of our famous seats of learning as the foremost among the votaries of the muses. He had been a stranger to pointed rebuke under the
indulgent discipline of his father; and he now found himself called before the dignified master of a college, and treated with injustice and contumely. He
had
been acting, as he imagined, a high and conspicuous part before his fellow-collegians, acquiring laurels in the temple of Apollo, and asserting the cause of

justice against insolent and tyrannic authority. On a sudden all this was reversed; instead of honour he encountered disgrace; he found he had been made a
laughing-stock to all around him. The concluding moment of the business explained to him the whole; he saw that the applauses he had received were all
ironical, that he had been invited to the reading his play, only for contempt, that he had been treated as

the weakest, the absurdest, and the most despicable of mankind. The scene of the master, the affected reprimand he had received, the stripping of his gown, the
attempted blow, constituted a still deeper insult. It must be acknowledged that this was no flattering induction of an innocent and artless rustic into a
great
university. Withers lifted up his head no more. He could not bear to face any of his fellow-students; those, who had not been actors in the plot against him,

were, he nothing doubted, well acquainted with all that had passed; he shut himself up, as much as possible, in his own apartment. After a brief interval, it

was sufficiently visible that his intellects were impaired; a keeper was planted over him. He raved against poets and poetry; he seized with avidity every
scrap of written paper he could meet with, that he might commit

it to the flames. These excesses however were rare; the greater part of his time was spent in dejection and silence. One morning he escaped from the man who
was appointed to watch him, and was soon after found drowned in the Isis. The cause of his unhappy catastrophe became public; the particulars were enquired
into; and Frewen and Morrison were expelled from the university with a disgrace which pursued them for the rest of their lives. This may serve as one specimen of the sort of grave-faced trick and delusion which the choice spirits among us delighted to put upon the more innocent and
unsuspecting members of the university. The example here given was perhaps the most memorable, and attended with the most fatal effects, of any that occurred

in my time. But all the tricks which were played were of the

same class; all turned upon considering the simplicity displayed, and the anguish endured, by the sufferer, as a source of merriment. For myself, as I have
said, I had no relish for this amusement. Once or twice, inconsiderately and precipitately, I yielded to the importunity of my companions, and became
entangled
in such adventures; but I presently abjured every thing of the sort; and, having set my face against pleasures so criminal in their temper, was repeatedly
successful in delivering the bleeding prey from the jaws of its devourers. The adventure which I have here recorded may seem foreign to my object, of painting my own story: I know not where however I could have found a more apt
illustration, to set before my reader the character of the persons by whom I was now seduced, and with whom I at present associated. They

were such youths as Frewen, Morrison and the rest, whose applauses I sought, whose ridicule awed me, and whose judgment I looked to for the standard of my
actions. It is not my purpose to convert these honest pages into a record of dissipations; far less, of the rude and unseemly dissipations of an overgrown boy. There
are few characters more repulsive than that in which we find conjoined the fresh and ingenuous lineaments of a young man, in whom the down has scarcely yet
shaded his prosperous cheek, with the impudence of a practised libertine. I look back upon it with horror. Youth, if once it has broken through the
restraints
of decorum, is the minister of cruelty. Even in me, whose disposition was naturally kind and humane, there was too much of this. It is suffering only, that
can
inspire us with true

sympathy, that can render us alive to those trifles which constitute so large a portion of earthly misery or happiness, that can give us a feeling of that
anguish, which, sometimes in human beings, as most evidently in the brute creation, works inwardly, consuming the very principle of life, but has no tongue,

not the smallest sound, to signify its excess, and demand our pity. Over this, of which the soberest and most disciplined mind is scarcely prepared to make a

true estimate, youth, when flushed with convivial gaiety and high spirits, tramples without remorse, and unhesitatingly assures itself that "All is well." Among the manifold objects which shock our imperfect reason, and make us wish that the constitution of things was in certain respects other than it is, I
confess there is none which has at all times been more impressive with

me than this, the vast variety of speechless misery which is every where to be found. I passed through the usual period of education at the university, and then, by the liberality of my father, was sent to make a tour of other countries for my
improvement. My father had particularly an old and much valued friend in Switzerland, whose kindness he wished me to cultivate, and whose affectionate and
benevolent wisdom he thought would contribute much to the perfecting my character. To him I was furnished with a most exemplary letter of parental
introduction, as well as with letters of the usual description to several distinguished and honourable individuals in the courts and principal cities of
Europe. The day on which I quitted the university was an important era in my life, and might have been expected to redeem

me from the vices which I had there contracted. The necessities (such I was disposed to regard them) which had rendered me dissolute, were now removed. I had
become vicious by the operation of a populous and crowded residence (from a contact with the members of which I found it impossible to escape) upon a young
man, unwarned by experience against the rocks that awaited him, and stimulated to confidence and enterprise by the feeling that he was born to a considerable

estate. When I quitted Oxford, I had once more the globe of earth to move in. I had elbow-room, and could expatiate as I pleased. I was no longer cooped and

cabined in a sort of menagerie , in which I continually saw the same faces, knew the names and the little history of those I saw, and was conscious that I in

my turn became the subject of their comment, of their contempt or their approbation. I now saw once again the fairest and most glorious of all visages, the face of nature. If I passed to the continent, I should have the opportunity of viewing
her in new aspects; and, if I hastened, as my father wished me to do, to Switzerland, I should be led to the contemplation of a more admirable scenery than
my
eyes had ever yet beheld. If I sojourned for a short time in cities, my situation there would be very different from what it had been at Oxford. There would
be
no particular set of men appearing under such circumstances as in a manner extorted my confidence, but I might associate indifferently with any, or with what

persons I pleased. Another cause was favourable to the melioration of my character. The great disadvantage to which young men in a populous place of education are exposed,

is the freedom they enjoy from the established restraints of decorum and shame. They constitute a little empire of their own, and are governed by the laws of a
morality of their own devising. They are sufficient to keep each other in countenance; and, if any one of them can preserve the good opinion and esteem of
the
rest of the body, it is all of which he feels that he stands in need. The principles by which he is regulated are voted by an assembly, that is prompted by
turbulence, high spirits, convivial good-humour, and a factitious sense of generosity and honour; and, provided these principles are obeyed, he looks down
with
contempt on the sense of mankind in general. Even the soberer laws which are promulgated by his academical superiors, are canvassed in a mutinous temper, and

regarded as the decrees of froward age; obedience to them

is sometimes contemplated as a dire necessity, and sometimes as a yoke which it is gallant and liberal to disdain. But, when the same person goes out into the world, he becomes the member of a larger republic. He respects himself proportionably more, as he feels that he is
acting his part upon a wider theatre. He grows a graver character, and is conscious that tumult and frolic are not the business of human life. He demands,
not
a boisterous approbation, but a sober deference and respect, from those with whom he has intercourse. I grieve to say, that my character did not gain so much by this transplantation, as a person anxious for my reputation and welfare might have been willing to
hope. It was at sixteen that I had repaired to the university, and I had resided there four years. These four years are the period of the development of the

passions. When I looked back from

the close of this period, the years I had spent in Merionethshire appeared to me as a delightful dream, but only as a dream. It was a season of nonage, the
infancy of man. It was visionary, and idle, and unsubstantial. I had now risen (thus I understood it) to the reality of life. The scenes I had passed through

in Oxford were sensible, were palpable; those of my earlier and better years were the illusions as of a magic lanthorn. I clung, at least on the threshold,
and
during the novelty of life, to the realities, and could not bear to exchange them for shadows. I felt as if I could not so exchange them, if I would. I had
leaped the gulph; I had passed the bourne, from which, as it seemed to me, (in a different sense from that of Shakespear) "no traveller returns." Having once

plunged into the billows, and among the tumult of the passions, I must go on. It was thus I

reasoned, when the temptations, which presented themselves in the different stages of my travels, solicited my acceptance. I would not however be understood for worse than I was. My life at Oxford was a life of dissipation; but it was not all dissipation. That curiosity, which had
been one of my first seducers into vice, often assumed an ingenuous form. The various sciences which invited my attention at the university, did not always
solicit in vain. My nature was not yet so brutified, as to render me indifferent to the venerable achievements of human intellect in successive ages and in
different countries. My mode of passing my days had too much in it of the life of a gamesome and inebriated savage; but all my days were not so passed. The
same vanity that led me among the licentious to aspire to a licentious character, gave me the ambition

to show that I could be something more. I aspired to resemble the true Epicurean of ancient times, the more illustrious philosophers who had adorned that sect
in Greece, or Horace, the graceful and accomplished ornament of the court of Augustus. I had therefore my fits of study and severe application, as well as my

seasons which were exclusively devoted to pleasure. And, when I once secluded myself from my riotous companions, I may without vanity affirm that I effected

more, and made a more full and pregnant improvement of knowledge in a week, than many of the mere bookworms of the university, and some too of no mean
estimation among their fellows, did in months. At Paris I met with sir Charles Gleed, a young man who had been at Oxford at the same time that I was, and who had occasionally made one in the riotous

and dissolute parties that I frequented. Sir Charles had appeared with no great brilliancy in Oxford. His mind was slow and indocile. He had a tutor, who took
great pains with him, and who had occasionally persuaded sir Charles to take pains too. But, though the labour, and still more the apparatus and report had
been great, the produce had been little. There was a bluntness and hebetude in poor sir Charles's parts, that seemed to prove him adapted to an office like
that of the horse in a mill, rather than of the race-horse or the hunter. When this operose and hard-working student descended from his closet, and gained a

sort of tacit leave from his tutor to join in the circle of us gay and high-spirited fellows, the part he played was no more advantageous to him, than his
former exhibition had been among the learned. He wished for the character of a wit, and had thought that the

ample estate attached to his birth would be a sufficient indorsement to the repartees which he uttered. But in this he was deceived. We were too thoughtless
and frolic, perhaps I might say, too liberal and independent of soul, to decide on the talent of our companions from the length of their purses. Sir Charles

soon found that he was better qualified to be "the cause of wit in others," than to be a wit himself; and the asperity and indignation with which he bore
this,
and the awkward attempts by which he endeavoured to shake it off, fluctuating between resentment and a suspicion that what he suffered was not a fitting
ground
of resentment, only made the general effect upon bystanders the more irresistibly ludicrous. I observed with surprise that sir Charles was received upon a very different footing at Paris, from what he had been at Oxford. Here he performed

the part of an elegant , and was generally admitted as a man of breeding, amusement and fashion. No one laughed at, and almost every one courted him. It has frequently occurred to me to see this metamorphosis, and to remark persons, who in their boyish years had been thought dull and poor fellows, afterward
making a grave and no dishonoured figure upon the theatre of life. At school certainly the number of dunces is much beyond its due proportion (particularly
if
we have regard to the higher classes of society) to those who are ordinarily put down for such in maturer life. Perhaps scarcely more than one boy in an
hundred is clever; but, when these boys grow up to be men, the dullard will frequently play his part to the great satisfaction of the spectators; and not
only
outstrip his more ingenious competitor in the road of fortune, but even be more highly esteemed, and more respectfully

spoken of, by the majority of those who know him. I have often been desirous to ascertain in what manner we are to account for so curious a phenomenon; and I
have found that there are two ways in which it may happen. First, the man who plays his part upon the theatre of life, almost always maintains what may be called an artificial character. Gravity has been styled by the
satirist, "a mysterious carriage of the body to conceal the defects of the mind;" and young men educated together are scarcely ever grave. They appear in
simple and unvarnished colours; theirs is not the age of disguise; and, if they were to attempt it, the attempt, so far as related to their colleagues, would

be fruitless. The mind of a young man at college is tried in as many ways, and turned and essayed in as various attitudes, as the body of an unfortunate
captive in the slave-market of Algiers. The captive might, with as much probability of success endeavour to conceal his crooked back or misshapen leg, as the Oxonian or Cantab to hide his dulness,
his ill-temper or his cowardice. But, when the same persons are brought out into the world, there are certain decorums, and restrictions from good manners,
which operate most wonderfully to level the varying statures of mind: and (to pursue the idea suggested by the slave-market) the courtier, the professional
man, or the fine lady, do not more abound in advantages for concealing their bodily deformities, than for keeping out of sight those mental imbecilities,
which
the lynx-eyed sagacity and frolic malice of school-boy against school-boy are sure to discover and expose. Beside which, secondly, the part which a man has to play upon the theatre of life, is usually of much easier performance,

than that of a stripling among his fellows. The stripling is treated with a want of ceremony, which deters him from properly displaying many of his powers. It
has been remarked that the severity of criticism in ages of refinement suppresses those happier and more daring fruits of genius, which the dawn of science
and
observation warmed into life; and in these respects the entrance of the young man into the world operates in a way something similar to the transportation of

the poet to a period of primeval simplicity. He is no longer rudely stared out of countenance. To change the similitude, a college-life may be compared with
a
polar climate; fruits of a hardy vegetation only prosper in it, while those of a more delicate organisation wither and die. The young man, having attained
the
age of manhood, no longer suffers the liberties to which he was formerly subjected, and assumes

confidence in himself. This confidence is in many ways favourable to his reputation and success. It grows into a habit; and every day the probationer is better
enabled to act with propriety, to explain his meaning effectually, and to display that promptitude and firmness which may command approbation. I should
prefer
however, I must confess, the school-boy hero to the plausible and well-seeming man of the world. Mistakes may occur indeed respecting the former as well as
the
latter. A false taste may lead his fellow-pupils to give the palm to a wild, adventurous and boastful youth over his more tranquil competitor, though the
latter should be endowed with the most perspicacious intellect, the finest imagination, or the most generous temper. There is too a ready faculty, of little

depth, a rapid, mimetic, superficial memory, which will sometimes pass on inexperienced observers,

for a consummate genius. The judgment however which is formed on the phenomena of early youth, has two advantages; first, as this period of human life is free
from deception and false colours; and secondly, as qualities then discovered may be supposed more rooted and essential in the character, than such as
discover
themselves only in a season of maturity. To return to sir Charles Gleed.---I found him, as I have said, established on an unequivocal and honourable footing at Paris. He was received with distinction
by a minister of state, who invited him to his most select parties. He was a favoured guest in the coteries of ladies of fashion, and often spent his
mornings
in the ruelle of a duchess. Sir Charles was certainly a man of displeasing physiognomy. It was a picture so rudely sketched, that the spectator could
scarcely
guess what was designed to be

represented by it. The eyes were small and pinking; the nose colossal and gigantic, but ill-defined. The muscular parts were fleshy, substantial and
protuberant. His stature however was considerably above the middle size; and his form, at least to an ignorant observer, seemed expressive of animal force. Sir Charles was perhaps sensible how little he was indebted to the bounty of nature; and he was careful to compensate his personal defects, by the most minute
vigilance in conduct and demeanour. By some accident he had acquired, since he left the university, the happiest of all foundations for success in the world,
a
tranquil confidence in himself. His speech, his motions, were all slow; but, as no part was lost in false efforts, in something done that was afterward to be

done again, his slowness had to a certain degree the air and effect of haste. He continually approached to

the brink of enterprise, and was never enterprising. He perpetually advanced to the verge of wit and observation, and never said any thing that was absolutely
the one or the other. The man however must, I believe, be admitted to have had some portion of judgment and good sense, who could so speciously imitate
qualities, to the reality of which he was a stranger. If he committed a blunder, the bystander might look in his face, and would discern there such an
unsuspecting composure, as might lead him almost to doubt his opinion, and believe that there was no blunder. With the ladies he was attentive, officious and

useful, but never bustling or ridiculous; by which means his services never lost their just value. Nothing of a nature more weighty ever thrust the details
of
a gallant demeanour out of his thoughts; and the sex was flattered to see a man so ample in his dimensions,

and therefore, according to their reckoning, so manly, devoted to their pleasure. For the rest, whatever they observed, which would have been less acceptable
in a Frenchman, was attributed to, and forgiven in consideration of, his being a stranger to their language, and having a disposition and bent of mind,
appropriate, as they supposed, to the nation from which he came. Such was the man who generously performed for me the part of gentleman-usher, and introduced me to the society of the courtiers and belles of France. Our
characters were strikingly contrasted. He was set, disciplined and regular; I was quick, sensitive and variable. He had speciousness; I sensibility. He never

did a foolish thing; I was incessantly active, and therefore, though frequently brilliant and earning applause, yet not seldom falling into measures the most

injurious to the purposes I had in

view. Naturally I was too tremblingly alive, to be well adapted to the commerce of the world; I had worn off a part of this at Oxford; I had gained a certain
degree of self-possession and assurance; yet was my sensibility too great, not frequently to lead me into false steps, though I had afterward the fortitude
and
presence of mind to repair them. Sir Charles and I, having every reason to be satisfied with our reception in this celebrated metropolis, engaged amicably in similar pursuits, and succeeded
with persons of different predilections and tastes, without in the smallest degree interfering with each other. The court of Louis the Fifteenth, the then
reigning sovereign, was licentious and profligate, without decency, decorum and character, and the manners which prevailed within the walls of the palace,
were
greedily imitated by every one who laid claim to, or who aped, rank, refinement

or fashion. It were superfluous for me here to describe, what the reader may find in so many volumes amply and ambitiously detailed, the contempt for the
marriage-bond, and the universal toleration then extended to adultery and debauchery, with the condition only that they should be covered with a thin and
almost transparent veil, and not march entirely naked. Prepared, as I had been, by my adventures at Oxford, I fell but too easily into the maxims and manners then in vogue in the court of France. Could I have been
abruptly introduced to a scene like this, immediately after my departure from Merionethshire, I should have contemplated it with inexpressible horror.