But on a Saturday night, as I was on the eve of stepping into my
bed, I shall never forget it--Mrs Pawkie was already in, and as sound as
a door-nail--and I was just crooking my mouth to blow out the candle,
when I heard a rap. As our bed-room window was over the door, I looked
out. It was a dark night; but I could see by a glaik of light from a
neighbour's window, that there was a man with a cocked hat at the door. "What's your will?" said I to him, as I looked out at him in my nightcap. He made no other answer, but that he was one of his majesty's officers,
and had business with the justice. I did not like this Englification and voice of claim and authority;
however, I drew on my stockings and breeks again, and taking my wife's
flannel coaty about my shoulders--for I was then troubled with the
rheumatiz--I went down, and, opening the door, let in the lieutenant. "I come," said he, "to show you my warrant and commission, and to
acquaint you that, having information of several able-bodied seamen being
in the town, I mean to make a search for them." I really did not well know what to say at the moment; but I begged him,
for the love of peace and quietness, to defer his work till the next
morning: but he said he must obey his orders; and he was sorry that it
was his duty to be on so disagreeable a service, with many other things,
that showed something like a sense of compassion that could not have been
hoped for in the captain of a pressgang. When he had said this, he then went away, saying, for he saw my
tribulation, that it would be as well for me to be prepared in case of
any riot. This was the worst news of all; but what could I do? I
thereupon went again to Mrs Pawkie, and shaking her awake, told her what
was going on, and a terrified woman she was. I then dressed myself with
all possible expedition, and went to the town-clerk's, and we sent for
the town-officers, and then adjourned to the council-chamber to wait the
issue of what might betide. In my absence, Mrs Pawkie rose out of her bed, and by some wonderful
instinct collecting all the bairns, went with them to the minister's
house, as to a place of refuge and sanctuary. Shortly after we had been in the council-room, I opened the window and
looked out, but all was still; the town was lying in the defencelessness
of sleep, and nothing was heard but the clicking of the town-clock in the
steeple over our heads. By and by, however, a sough and pattering of
feet was heard approaching; and shortly after, in looking out, we saw the
pressgang, headed by their officers, with cutlasses by their side, and
great club-sticks in their hands. They said nothing; but the sound of
their feet on the silent stones of the causey, was as the noise of a
dreadful engine. They passed, and went on; and all that were with me in
the council stood at the windows and listened. In the course of a minute
or two after, two lassies, with a callan, that had been out, came flying
and wailing, giving the alarm to the town. Then we heard the driving of
the bludgeons on the doors, and the outcries of terrified women; and
presently after we saw the poor chased sailors running in their shirts,
with their clothes in their hands, as if they had been felons and
blackguards caught in guilt, and flying from the hands of justice. The town was awakened with the din as with the cry of fire; and lights
came starting forward, as it were, to the windows. The women were out
with lamentations and vows of vengeance. I was in a state of horror
unspeakable. Then came some three or four of the pressgang with a
struggling sailor in their clutches, with nothing but his trousers on--his
shirt riven from his back in the fury. Syne came the rest of the gang
and their officers, scattered as it were with a tempest of mud and
stones, pursued and battered by a troop of desperate women and weans,
whose fathers and brothers were in jeopardy. And these were followed by
the wailing wife of the pressed man, with her five bairns, clamouring in
their agony to heaven against the king and government for the outrage. I
couldna listen to the fearful justice of their outcry, but sat down in a
corner of the council-chamber with my fingers in my ears. In a little while a shout of triumph rose from the mob, and we heard them
returning, and I felt, as it were, relieved; but the sound of their
voices became hoarse and terrible as they drew near, and, in a moment, I
heard the jingle of twenty broken windows rattle in the street. My heart
misgave me; and, indeed, it was my own windows. They left not one pane
unbroken; and nothing kept them from demolishing the house to the ground-
stone but the exhortations of Major Pipe, who, on hearing the uproar, was
up and out, and did all in his power to arrest the fury of the tumult. It
seems, the mob had taken it into their heads that I had signed what they
called the press-warrants; and on driving the gang out of the town, and
rescuing the man, they came to revenge themselves on me and mine; which
is the cause that made me say it was a miraculous instinct that led Mrs
Pawkie to take the family to Mr Pittle's; for, had they been in the
house, it is not to be told what the consequences might have been. Before morning the riot was ended, but the damage to my house was very
great; and I was intending, as the public had done the deed, that the
town should have paid for it. "But," said Mr Keelivine, the town-clerk,
"I think you may do better; and this calamity, if properly handled to the
Government, may make your fortune," I reflected on the hint; and
accordingly, the next day, I went over to the regulating captain of the
pressgang, and represented to him the great damage and detriment which I
had suffered, requesting him to represent to government that it was all
owing to the part I had taken in his behalf. To this, for a time, he
made some scruple of objection; but at last he drew up, in my presence, a
letter to the lords of the admiralty, telling what he had done, and how
he and his men had been ill-used, and that the house of the
chief-magistrate of the town had been in a manner destroyed by the
rioters. By the same post I wrote off myself to the lord advocate, and likewise to
the secretary of state, in London; commanding, very properly, the prudent
and circumspect manner in which the officer had come to apprize me of his
duty, and giving as faithful an account as I well could of the riot;
concluding with a simple notification of what had been done to my house,
and the outcry that might be raised in the town were any part of the
town's funds to be used in the repairs. Both the lord advocate and Mr Secretary of State wrote me back by retour
of post, thanking me for my zeal in the public service; and I was
informed that, as it might not be expedient to agitate in the town the
payment of the damage which my house had received, the lords of the
treasury would indemnify me for the same; and this was done in a manner
which showed the blessings we enjoy under our most venerable
constitution; for I was not only thereby enabled, by what I got, to
repair the windows, but to build up a vacant steading; the same which I
settled last year on my dochter, Marion, when she was married to Mr
Geery, of the Gatherton Holme. The affair of the pressgang gave great concern to all of the council; for
it was thought that the loyalty of the burgh would be called in question,
and doubted by the king's ministers, notwithstanding our many assurances
to the contrary; the which sense and apprehension begat among us an
inordinate anxiety to manifest our principles on all expedient occasions. In the doing of this, divers curious and comical things came to pass; but
the most comical of all was what happened at the Michaelmas dinner
following the riot. The weather, for some days before, had been raw for that time of the
year, and Michaelmas-day was, both for wind and wet and cold, past
ordinar; in so much that we were obligated to have a large fire in the
council-chamber, where we dined. Round this fire, after drinking his
majesty's health and the other appropriate toasts, we were sitting as
cozy as could be; and every one the longer he sat, and the oftener his
glass visited the punch-bowl, waxed more and more royal, till everybody
was in a most hilarious temperament, singing songs and joining chorus
with the greatest cordiality. It happened, among others of the company, there was a gash old carl, the
laird of Bodletonbrae, who was a very capital hand at a joke; and he,
chancing to notice that the whole of the magistrates and town-council
then present wore wigs, feigned to become out of all bounds with the
demonstrations of his devotion to king and country; and others that were
there, not wishing to appear any thing behind him in the same, vied in
their sprose of patriotism, and bragging in a manful manner of what, in
the hour of trial, they would be seen to do. Bodletonbrae was all the
time laughing in his sleeve at the way he was working them on, till at
last, after they had flung the glasses twice or thrice over their
shoulders, he proposed we should throw our wigs in the fire next. Surely
there was some glammer about us that caused us not to observe his
devilry, for the laird had no wig on his head. Be that, however, as it
may, the instigation took effect, and in the twinkling of an eye every
scalp was bare, and the chimley roaring with the roasting of gude kens
how many powdered wigs well fattened with pomatum. But scarcely was the
deed done, till every one was admonished of his folly, by the laird
laughing, like a being out of his senses, at the number of bald heads and
shaven crowns that his device had brought to light, and by one and all of
us experiencing the coldness of the air on the nakedness of our upper
parts. The first thing that we then did was to send the town-officers, who were
waiting on as usual for the dribbles of the bottles and the leavings in
the bowls, to bring our nightcaps, but I trow few were so lucky as me,
for I had a spare wig at home, which Mrs Pawkie, my wife, a most
considerate woman, sent to me; so that I was, in a manner, to all
visibility, none the worse of the ploy; but the rest of the council were
perfect oddities within their wigs, and the sorest thing of all was, that
the exploit of burning the wigs had got wind; so that, when we left the
council-room, there was a great congregation of funny weans and misleart
trades' lads assembled before the tolbooth, shouting, and like as if they
were out of the body with daffing, to see so many of the heads of the
town in their night-caps, and no, maybe, just so solid at the time as
could have been wished. Nor did the matter rest here; for the generality
of the sufferers being in a public way, were obligated to appear the next
day in their shops, and at their callings, with their nightcaps--for few
of them had two wigs like me--by which no small merriment ensued, and was
continued for many a day. It would hardly, however, be supposed, that in
such a matter anything could have redounded to my advantage; but so it
fell out, that by my wife's prudence in sending me my other wig, it was
observed by the commonality, when we sallied forth to go home, that I had
on my wig, and it was thought I had a very meritorious command of myself,
and was the only man in the town fit for a magistrate; for in everything
I was seen to be most cautious and considerate. I could not, however,
when I saw the turn the affair took to my advantage, but reflect on what
small and visionary grounds the popularity of public men will sometimes
rest. Shortly after the affair recorded in the foregoing chapter, an event came
to pass in the burgh that had been for some time foreseen. My old friend and adversary, Bailie M'Lucre, being now a man well
stricken in years, was one night, in going home from a gavawlling with
some of the neighbours at Mr Shuttlethrift's, the manufacturer's, (the
bailie, canny man, never liket ony thing of the sort at his own cost and
outlay,) having partaken largely of the bowl, for the manufacturer was of
a blithe humour--the bailie, as I was saying, in going home, was
overtaken by an apoplexy just at the threshold of his own door, and
although it did not kill him outright, it shoved him, as it were, almost
into the very grave; in so much that he never spoke an articulate word
during the several weeks he was permitted to doze away his latter end;
and accordingly he died, and was buried in a very creditable manner to
the community, in consideration of the long space of time he had been a
public man among us.