"I am not a common visitor, the usual forms of the
world and the ceremonials observed in what is called society, are wholly disregarded by me,"
said the lady, advancing towards Mrs. Montgomery, seizing her hand, and pressing it
energetically to her lips, to her heart, and to her forehead. "I come to visit the afflicted!" said she, in a tone monotonous and sepulchral enough to
give just expression to the words which she uttered-"I come to mourn with the fatherless and
the widow!" The little children crept nearer to the door, as the lady raised her voice, and extended her
arms; and Arabella and Lucy instinctively advanced towards their mother, as if to guard her from
her strange guest. But, composed under every thing which could now assail her, Mrs.
Montgomery merely said, "May I ask the name of the lady who favours me with this visit?" "And has not my Frederic talked of his Corinna?" said Miss Moreton, (for so will our
readers have discovered the visitor to have been). Ah! tell me, tell me, where he is? Where is the
dear, the pious youth? Oh! let me strain him to my breast, and receive the fond sigh of affection;
let me speak comfort, happiness, and love to his sad soul!" Lucy Montgomery now led the
children out of the room, while Arabella, believing that the stranger was out of her senses,
looked out of the window, vainly trying to discover Frederic. "Say, Madam," asked Miss Moreton, taking the hand of Mrs. Montgomery, "has not my
Frederic revealed to you our mutual love? our fond regard?" "Never, Ma'am," said the surprised
Mrs. Montgomery-"Alas! my son has had duties to perform, which have exclusively and
painfully engrossed his whole thoughts, and his whole time, since his return to us! "-"I know, I
know it all; my Frederic wrote me the sad tale, and, eager to participate in his sufferings, and to
comfort every individual of his family, I flew to this place, immediately as I received the heartafflicting
recital. "But where is my Frederic? where is the partner of my heart, the beloved of my soul!" Arabella's face was suffused by the deepest crimson, at hearing these warm expressions issue
from the mouth of a female; even, though the object of them was a much beloved brother! She had heard of the unblushing profligacy of women who made a barter of their persons,
and she should have suspected Miss Moreton to have been one of these, could she for a moment
have imagined, that her brother had been the associate of such a character. But the strict morality
of his conduct, and the rectitude of his principles, forbade her entertaining a shadow of suspicion
against him. "My son has strolled out, Madam," said Mrs. Montgomery, with some formality of
manner; "he did not expect a visitor, I believe; and, though his meditations are much of a piece
with ours, yet he would rather indulge them alone; for it is not in his power to comfort and
relieve, and my Frederic cannot bear to augment our distress." "Oh! he is all that is good and tender; my heart has found him so; and I glory in my
choice," cried Miss Moreton. Then, hastily falling on one knee before Mrs. Montgomery, she
said, "Oh! crown our union with your blessing; what have we more to ask of Heaven?" Mrs.
Montgomery looked with fearful apprehension in the countenance of Miss Moreton, and said,
"Are you, then, the wife of my son, Madam?" "Not absolutely his wife," said Miss Moreton; "but
the monotonous repetition of the dull and lifeless words of that ceremonious observance, cannot
more closely cement a union like ours.-Ours, Madam, is the sweet reciprocity of kindred
souls!" "I doubt I do not perfectly understand you, Madam," said Mrs. Montgomery; now
looking at Miss Moreton with an expression of painful curiosity and embarrassment depicted on
her countenance. "Perhaps not," said the lady, "it has frequently been my destiny to be misunderstood; the
lofty feelings of my soul impose themselves on my expressions; and I cannot easily reduce them
to an ordinary level!" Montgomery had, during his lonely walk, been taking a retrospect of his situation; and,
though it was highly pleasing to the young lover, to dwell on the letter of Miss Moreton, and on
the image of the charming Mary Cuthbert, (an image rendered still more dear to his heart and his
imagination, by that attractive softness which her protectress had described), yet he tore himself
from the contemplation; how could he avail himself of the generosity of Miss Moreton? how
could he bear to receive obligations at her hands? and could it be any thing but the most selfish
passion, which should urge him to take advantage of the prepossession which Mary Cuthbert had
acknowledged for him. Alas! he could not be so ungenerous as to wish it; he could not be base
enough to desire it. A large, a distressed family, looking towards himself alone for comfort and support! He
must live for them alone; he must think only of them; he must drive the image of Mary Cuthbert
from his heart. He wished Miss Moreton had not betrayed the secret of her charge; a secret which
had, perhaps, originated in her fertile and chimerical brain, and that had no other foundation than
that universal benevolence and sweetness, which the interesting Mary evinced towards all the
world. In the midst of his most tender soliloquies, Montgomery had perceived the impropriety of
Miss Moreton's revealing her secret. He was sure the delicacy of Mary could never have
authorised it; and he felt jealous of that purity, which had been invaded by the disclosure. "But," sighed Montgomery, "Miss Moreton has no judgment, no discretion, no feeling. Oh! Mary, Mary! what a fate is thine, to live with such a woman! Oh! that I could but rescue
thee! insure thy safety, and my own honour!" After such a soliloquy, what were the feelings of Montgomery, when he opened the
parlour door, and beheld the figure of Miss Moreton! He retreated a few paces, at the first
moment of astonishment; but Miss Moreton hastily advanced, and, stretching out her arms, in an
attitude of recitation, she said, "Oh! Montgomery, thinkest thou that in the hour of thy distress,
thou couldest be forsaken by thy friend? When the tomb has closed over the parent of thine
infancy, it is the part of true regard to meliorate thy sufferings, to soothe thy griefs! Thy voice
called me from afar, and I hesitated not to obey the summons. It is in scenes like this, that a mind
like mine is wont to unfold its inmost recesses, and to show the strong workings of celestial
sympathy!" A deep vermillion covered the face of Montgomery, as he stood, in awkward confusion,
to hear this rhapsodic address. He had always felt an unconquerable aversion towards Miss
Moreton; he disliked her opinions and her sentiments; but her manners were disgusting in the
extreme, and, at this moment, he saw them through a most distorted vision. She had, in reality,
never before been so strangely eccentric in his presence; and his breast, aching with the
contrariety of feelings, which had followed his recent ruminations-Seeing in her the guardian of
his Mary, the would-be benefactress of himself; burning to gain some tidings of the gentle girl;
and fearing the construction which his mother (regular in her behaviour, and reserved in her
expressions) would put on the strange visit, and yet stranger address of Miss Moreton; reading in
the modest confusion of his sisters, that her manners were at once incomprehensible and
distressing to them, he stood, statue-like; words were for some minutes denied him, though the
pause of Miss Moreton, her extended arm, and her attentive countenance, plainly evinced that
she awaited his reply. He at length said, "To what lucky chance am I indebted for the honour of
Miss Moreton's visit?" "Chance!" repeated she, "You do not, cannot misunderstand me, Montgomery! know you
not that I came purposely to see you?" "I-I am very much obliged to you, Madam!" said Montgomery, twirling a chair, and
forcibly evincing to all but the lady in question, that it was the most painful obligation he had
ever received. "Talk not of obligation," said Miss Moreton; "an intimacy like our's, Montgomery,
expunges that word from the vocabulary of friendship!" A great deal more, in the same strain, was expressed by Miss Moreton before her
wondering hearers, and her astonished friend. Hurt and disgusted at her behaviour, Montgomery knew not what to do. He felt the
impropriety of her visit; he saw, by the countenance of his mother, that her heart ached in the
presence of her guest; that she wished to withdraw from the scene of mock sentiment, and mock
affection, to pour out her sorrows in private; and that she put a restraint on her inclinations, in
continuing one moment longer in the room; but that she thought her stay was a necessary
compliment to her son's visitor; and, in fact, the only sanction which that visit could receive. His
sisters, too, ingenuous, open-hearted girls! plainly expressed by their countenances, both
astonishment and disgust. Vexatious impatience filled his heart. He longed to undeceive his mistaken mother and
sisters-He longed to tell them, that Miss Moreton was more the object of his aversion than of
their's.-He longed to tell them, that a sense of obligation could alone keep him within the
bounds of common civility-He longed to draw the contrast in the picture of her whose image
was impressed on his faithful memory-He longed to inquire after that gentle maid; but timidity,
an unaccountable repugnance, prevented him. In vain did Montgomery try to rally his feelings; his presence of mind had forsaken him;
and he knew not how to start a subject, and scarcely to give an answer to a question. Mrs. Montgomery had heard of her son's accompanying Captain Walwyn on a visit to the
Attic Villa; the succeeding melancholy event in her family had prevented her hearing any
particulars concerning it; and, finding the conversation flag, notwithstanding the florid display of
Miss Moreton, she, turning towards her, said, "If I am not mistaken, Madam, it was Captain
Walwyn who introduced my son to your acquaintance?" Miss Moreton started. "That name is hateful to my ears!" cried she, shivering with
affected emotion. "How is this?" said Montgomery. "What can my friend Walwyn have done to
lose the favour of Miss Moreton?" "He is, at once, the most treacherous, and the most presumptuous of mortals! Montgomery, he would have supplanted thee in the object of thy love!" Montgomery was all attention; his agitation was apparent. "Ah!" thought he, "who would
not wish to gain an interest in that gentle breast? Presumptuous! No! the fortune, the connextions
of Walwyn are far, far superior to my own. No! I cannot call him so!" and he looked at Miss
Moreton with an expression of interest and curiosity, which was highly gratifying to her, and
which his countenance had never before displayed. It confirmed the painful suspicions of his
mother and sisters; and the interchange of their looks seemed to express their mutual opinion on
a lost case. "I see thy doubts-I mark thy trembling fears," said the undaunted heroine. "Be calm, be
composed, Montgomery; his unheard of temerity was punished by the loss of my friendship!" A doubt of he knew not what, now pervaded the breast of Montgomery. He had seen
enough of Miss Moreton, to know that she eagerly prosecuted any eccentricity which occurred to
her imagination; but he had also seen during his stay at the Villa, that there existed nothing more
in her intercourse with Mary Cuthbert than a general politeness. Was it, then, likely that she
should thus warmly espouse her cause? that she should go such lengths to facilitate the wishes of
a girl, for whom she had neither professed or displayed regard? and would not the delicate soul
of Mary Cuthbert have revolted from her cousin's strange visit, and yet stranger avowal? "Did you take this journey alone, Madam," asked Mrs. Montgomery, willing once more
to try to relieve her son. "I wanted not a companion," replied Miss Moreton; "my own thoughts supplied me with
subjects of meditation, at once profound and sublime!" For such sublime flights, neither the taste or the experience of Mrs. Montgomery had
prepared her; but she found that her guest could not descend to the common and ordinary topics
of conversation. Montgomery could bear the warring feelings of his bosom no longer; and, in a sort of
wild eagerness, and averting his eye from Miss Moreton, as if to know his doom at once, he said,
"Is Miss Cuthbert at the Villa?" "No," said Miss Moreton, advancing towards him, and, as if to give greater force to her
words, altering her voice, "I left poor Mary at H--; she is stretched on the bed of sickness."