Mony a fat
mart they hae left i' my hire. I hope ye hae brought a bonny kane the
night." "Ay, by my certie, lad, an' that we hae; here's nae less a kane than
Jock's Marion hersel." "Ye scawed like bog-stalker! skrinkit, skraeshankit skebeld! dare ye to
speak that gate to me at my ain door stane? I shall lend you a clout an
ye were the king's cousin, an' see if ye dare return the compliment. Wife, bring the buet an' my piked rung here." "Peace, in the king's name!" cried Charlie Scott. "And in the name of St David!" cried the friar, returning to the charge
on hearing Charlie's voice. "And in my name!" cried Tam Craik;" an' Gibby Jordan o' the
Peatstacknowe's name; and the name o' Jock's Marion, the sow-sticker's
wife o' Jeddart. I say unto thee, look here. Here is the kane will
please a brave yeoman. Look if this be nae Marion hersel"--and with that
he led Delany's palfrey up to the light. Robson lifted his eyes and saw her, and was so much struck with her
dazzling beauty, that he had not power to address even his beloved
friend Charlie Scott, far less any other of his guests, but lifting the
maiden down in his arms, he led her in to his dame, and said to one of
his lads, "Rin out wi' a light, callant, an' help the troopers to put up
their horses." The horses were soon put up, for every one seemed more anxious than
another to get first in to the cheek of Jock Robson's ingle, and have
his seat placed next to that of Delany; but the poet being the most
agile, and not the least amorous of the group, effected this greatly to
his satisfaction. The youngest turned him in a path,
      And drew a buirdly brande,
    And fifteen of the foremost slewe,
      Till back the lave couthe stande. Then he spurred the grey unto the path,
      Till baith her sides they bledde;
    "Now, grey, if thou carry nae me away
      My life it lies in wedde." _Ballad of Auld Maitland._

We must pass over a great part of the conversation that evening, in
order to get forward to the more momentous part of the history of our
embassy. Suffice it to say, that the poet was in high glory, and not
only delivered himself in pure iambics, but sung several love ditties,
and one song of a foray, that pleased Charlie Scott mightily. But Isaac,
the curate, has only given a fragment of it, which runs thus:

    If you will meet me on the Dirdam waste,
      Merry man mint to follow;
    I'll start you the deer, and lead you the chace,
      With a whoop, and a whoo, and a hollo! The deer that you'll see, has horns enow, &c.
    Marked wi' red and merled wi' blue, &c.
    And that deer he will not turn his tail
    For the stoutest hinds that range the dale. Come then, driver, in gear bedight;
    Come bold yeoman, and squire, and knight;
    The wind soughs loud on craig and heuch,
    And the linn rowts loud in the Crookside cleuch;
    Nor tramp of steed, nor jingle of spear,
    Will ever be heard by the southern deer:
    The streamer is out, and the moon away,
    And the morning starn will rise or day. Then mount to the stirrup, and scour the fell,
      Merry man mint to follow;
    And over the muir, and the dean, and the dell,
      With a whoop, and a whoo, and a hollo! * * * * * * * * * *

"Thy words and thy song, young man," said the friar, "are like sounding
brass and a tinkling cymbal; if laid in the balance, they are lighter
than vanity." "Yours will not prove so," said the poet, "provided you are laid in with
them; for, as the old song says,--

    'His wit is but weak, father;
      His gifts they are but sma';
    But the bouk that's under his breast bane,
      It grieves me warst of a.'" "If thou singest this nonsense of me," said the friar, "lo, I will
smite thee upon the mouth; yea, upon the cheek-bone will I smite thee,
till thine eyes shall gush out like two fountains of waters." And so
saying, he began to look about him for some missile weapon to throw at
the bard's face, his breast burning with indignation,--for he loved not
the tenor of the poet's conversation to the maid. Tam and Jordan encouraged the friar to make the assault, in hopes that
the poet might be dislodged or affronted; but Yardbire restrained the
warmth of the friar, not being aware of his real sentiments, and ordered
peace and good fellowship. Dame Robson covered the hearth with a huge fire; and her husband
bringing in a leg of beef, set it upon the table, and bade every one
help himself. "The words of thy mouth are exceeding good, and sweet unto the ear,"
said the friar, "as doubtless thy food is to the taste." With that he
rose and helped himself to three nice and extensive slices of raw beef,
and these he roasted on the tongs which he had just lifted to smite the
poet on the head. In good truth, though every one cooked his own supper, as was the
fashion of that iron time, there was none did it half so nicely as the
friar, nor so bunglingly as Jordan, whose supper, though long behind the
others in being ready, was so unshapely a piece, and so raw on the one
side, that the friar observed, "it was like Ephraim of old, as a cake
unturned." Some roasted their meat on old swords, some on spindles, for
their hosts took no heed how they were fitted, or in what manner they
shifted in these respects; seemingly satisfied that they had plenty for
the cooking, and leaving them to cook it or eat it raw, as they chose. The poet made haste, and, first of all, cooked two or three nice slices
for the maiden, giving her what she would take before he would taste a
morsel himself. Some commended him for this, and others jeered him;
but the friar, in his grave moral style, said the severest things
of all. From the very commencement of the journey, a jealousy or
misunderstanding began to subsist between these two, which never again
subsided till they came to blows. The poet answered him again with a song:

    "Keep ye to your books and your beads, goodman,
    Your Ave Marias and creeds, goodman;
        For gin ye end as ye're begun,
    There will be some crack of your deeds, goodman." At length the party retired to rest, all save Jordan and their worthy
host. The latter never slept in the night; he had always some watching,
walking, or work in hand that suited that season best: and as for Gibby,
he determined to sit up all night to watch that the poet made no
encroachments on the place of Delany's repose. Robson encouraged his
purpose, joined him heartily in conversation, listened to his
long-winded stories with apparent delight, and, when all the rest were
asleep, wormed the whole business of the embassy out of the shallow
laird, who unfortunately testified his fears that they were carrying the
lovely maiden and boy to the old warlock to be a sacrifice to the devil. Robson appeared terribly confounded at this peace of intelligence,--for
from the time that he heard it he conversed no more with Jordan. About
one in the morning he began to put on his snow-boots, as if preparing
for a journey. "Where are ye going at this time of night?" enquired the laird. "I maun gang out an' see how the night wears," said Robson; "I hae sax
score o' Scots queys that are outlyers. If I let the king's ellwand ower
the hill, I'll hae them to seek frae the kips o' Kale." Gibby accompanied him to the door, hoping the king's ellwand would not
be over the hill, for he had no good will to part with his companion. But as soon as Robson turned his eye to the sky, "Ha, gude faith, I maun
post away!" said he, "Yonder's the king's ellwand already begun to bore
the hill; ay, there's ane o' the goud knobs out o' sight already, an' I
hear the queys rowting ower the waterfa' o' the height. Gude morrow
t'ye, laird, I'm ower lang here." Gibby returned in to the blazing fire; and hearing so many persons all
snoring in sleep, he caught the infection, stretched himself upon a
divot seat, and joined the chorus with as much zeal as any of them. Morning came, and our embassy made ready for proceeding on their
journey; but Robson still was wanting, at which both his dame and
household lads seemed to wonder, otherwise the rest would have taken no
notice of it. Gibby told her about the queys that were outlyers, but she
only answered him with a hem! and a slight shake of the head. Charlie,
who knew his man well, began to smell a rat; and, calling Gibby to the
door, he inquired if he had hinted ought of their business to their
host. The laird at first denied; but Charlie questioned him till he
confessed the whole, at which Charlie was exceedingly angry; and hearing
that he had informed him all about the maiden, and of what family she
was sprung, he called Gibby a worthless inconsiderate being, and said he
had ruined their expedition, for that he knew Robson kept up a
correspondence with the Halls, who were broken men, and many of them
skulking about the border; that Delany had uncles, cousins, and a
brother living, if she was the man's daughter she was supposed to be,
and that these would without fail waylay them, and kill them every man,
for the sake of rescuing her. "Robson," said he, "is altogether selfish,
and has some end to serve; perhaps to get the maid into his own hands,
for he seemed mightily taken with her beauty; and I calculate widely
amiss if we are not watched from this house, and whether we return or
proceed we shall be attacked in the first strait or lonely place that we
come at." Jordan looked exceedingly out of countenance, and every
feature of his face altered. "What had I ado to tell the rascal?" exclaimed he, "or wha wad hae thought o' him playing us sic a trick? Twa-faced dog that he is! It wad be weel done to let his liver pree the
taste o' steel!" Charlie made him promise that he would not mention the circumstance to
one of the party, as it was only a surmise, and might impede their
progress to no purpose; and forthwith they mounted, armed with such
armour as they had, and all, save Gibby Jordan, as cheerful and as
jealous of one another as they were on the preceding day. That worthy
kept close by the side of muckle Charlie, and looked so sharp about him,
that he perceived every shepherd, traveller, and cairn that appeared on
the border fells, always testifying his alarm to his friend that perhaps
yon was one of the Halls watching. Charlie had resolved to go by Jedburgh straight for Oakwood castle; but
his suspicions of Robson made him resolve to hold more to the eastward,
in order to keep the open road. He knew that if they were watching him,
it would be at the fords of Kale or Oxnam, on the Jedburgh road; and by
taking the east path, he would not only elude them, but, in case of a
pursuit, be near the outposts of the Scottish army. For a good way they saw nothing, and began to think themselves in
safety; but, in coming down Sowerhope-Middle, a little from the point of
the debated land, three horsemen appeared to the westward of them. "His
presence be about us," said Gibby,--"yonder _are_ the Halls now!" Charlie said nothing, but kept watch. One of the yeomen vanished in a
twinkling at full speed, the other two came at a brisk canter to our
notable embassy. "What do they mean?" said Jordan: "Do these two fellows propose to
conquer us all?" "It wad appear that they do," said Charlie, "for they come on us without
halt or hesitation." "I hardly think they'll succeed," added Gibby, "although they're twa
dangerous looking chaps. For Godsake, Yardbire, tak care o' their back
strokes; if they bring you down, our chance will be the waur." Charlie then called to the rest of his cavalcade, "Friends, here are
some strangers come to join us. Tell them nothing either good or bad,
but keep on at a round trot. See, we are not far from the towers of
Roxburgh. Whatever these men may say to you, make them nothing the
wiser." "I will not so much as say unto them, whence comest thou, or whither art
thou going?" said the friar. "I'll sing them a ditty of beauty and love,
    Of the wing of the raven, the eye of the dove,
    And beings all purer than angels above." said the poet. "Sic a rhame o' nonsense is there!" said Tam Craik: "If ony o' the dogs
say an impertinent thing to me I'll gar his teeth gang down his throat
like bristled beans." It was not long before the two moss-troopers joined the party. They were
tall athletic men, armed at all points, and their manner had a dash of
insulting impertinence in it. "A good morning, and fair grace to you, noble and worthy gentlemen!" said the foremost: "May we presume to be of the party?" "You may _presume_," said the deil's Tam, "for that is what befits you;
if you are willing to put up with the presumer's reward." "You are witty, sir, I suppose," said the trooper; "and pray what may
that reward be?" "Yes, I am witty," said Tam; "and my wit is sharp when it is not in its
sheath. Do you understand me? As for the reward of presumption, it is in
Scotland to be crankit before and kicked behind." "The road is at least as free to us as it is to you," said the
mosstrooper; "and of that we intend to avail ourselves for the present. We go to join the army before Roxburgh, whither are you bound?" "We follow our noses," said Tam; "but they guide us not to the army
before Roxburgh, and into your rearward they caution us not to enter. Raw hides and rank bacon, keep your distance." While Tam Craik and the trooper were thus jangling on before, Charlie
said to Jordan, "Laird, what do think o' yoursel' now? Ye hae played us
a fine pliskie wi' your ill tackit tongue! It is my thought that ere we
ride a mile and a half we'll be attacked by a hale troop o' horse. That
chap that disna speak is ane o' the wale o' the Ha's: I ken him weel for
a' his half visor. The other horseman that left them on the height is
ower to the fords of Kale, and, if I guess right, he'll appear at yon
scroggy bush wi' sae mony at his back that we wad hardly be a mouthfu'
to them, an' that in less time than ane wad gang a mile." "It is an ill business this," said Gibby: "It brings me in mind o'--o'
mair than I's name. But, gudesake, Yardbire, an ye be sure he is ane o'
the Halls, what for do nae ye rin your sword in at the tae side o' him
an' out at the tither? The sooner a knave like that is put down the
better." "Fair occasion, an' face to face, Peatstacknowe, an' ye sanna see
Charlie Scott slack; but ye wadna hae me stick a man, or cleave him down
ahint his back, an' that without fair warning and fair arming?" "Ay, honour an' generosity are braw things, but life's a brawer thing
an' a better thing than ony o' the twa. For my part, I wad never stop. My very heart flighters when I look at him, an' I amaist think I find
his steel quivering at my midriff. I wish I had a drive at him, wi' a
chance o' a hale head." --And from that time Gibby leaned himself forward
on his saddle, and fixed his large grey eyes on the mosstrooper like a
pointer going to fly on his game; and, in that attitude, he rode
several times close up to his side, or very nearly opposite to him,
laying his hand now and then on his hilt; but Charlie observed that he
never looked his foe in the face with threatening aspect, and, perplexed
as he was, could not help laughing at Gibby. Yardbire now putting the spurs to Corby, galloped aslant the brae to a
rising ground, whence he could see if any enemy was approaching by the
swire from the fords of Kale, as he suspected. He had not well gained
the height before he saw a dozen horsemen coming at the light gallop,
but one part of the cavalcade considerably behind the others, owing to
their being either worse mounted or worse horsemen. By this time Charlie's own friends were coming round the bottom of the
hill below him, quarrelling with the strangers so loudly, that Charlie
heard their voices ascending on the gale in most discordant notes. The
deil's Tam and the English trooper had never since their meeting ceased
the jibe and the keen retort; but Tam's words were so provokingly
severe, that the moss-man was driven beyond all further forbearance. Just when they were at the hottest, the helmets of the front men of the
Northumberland cavalcade began to appear in the swire; a circumstance
that was well noted by their offended kinsman, but of which Tam was
perfectly unconscious. "Well, now, thou jaundiced looking thief," said the moss-trooper,
turning his horse's head towards Tam's left hand, and making him amble
and curvette with his side foremost; "thou lean, nerveless, and
soul-less jabberer, all tongue and nothing else--I say, what hast thou
to say more?" The alteration in the man's key of voice somewhat astounded Tam; but his
perverse nature would not let him soften his reply, although he liked as
well to see others fall into a mischief as himself. "Eh? what do I say?" said he; and with that he turned his horse's head to that of the other,
making their two noses to meet; and caricaturing the Englishman's
capers, he laughed sneeringly and triumphantly in his face. "What do I
say? Eh? what do I say? I say I thought I heard wind, and smelled it a
wee too. Hagg-hiding fox that thou art!