Why dost thou howl thus, O wind? By day and by night for four long months thy roarings have not
ceased-the shores of the sea are strewn with wrecks, its keel-welcoming surface has become
impassable, the earth has shed her beauty in obedience to thy command; the frail balloon dares no
longer sail on the agitated air; thy ministers, the clouds, deluge the land with rain; rivers forsake their
banks; the wild torrent tears up the mountain path; plain and wood, and verdant dell are despoiled
of their loveliness; our very cities are wasted by thee. Alas, what will become of us? It seems as if the
giant waves of ocean, and vast arms of the sea, were about to wrench the deep-rooted island from
its centre; and cast it, a ruin and a wreck, upon the fields of the Atlantic. What are we, the inhabitants of this globe, least among the many that people infinite space? Our
minds embrace infinity; the visible mechanism of our being is subject to merest accident. Day by day
we are forced to believe this. He whom a scratch has disorganized, he who disappears from apparent
life under the influence of the hostile agency at work around us, had the same powers as I-I also am
subject to the same laws. In the face of all this we call ourselves lords of the creation, wielders of the
elements, masters of life and death, and we allege in excuse of this arrogance, that though the
individual is destroyed, man continues for ever. Thus, losing our identity, that of which we are chiefly conscious, we glory in the continuity of our
species, and learn to regard death without terror. But when any whole nation becomes the victim of
the destructive powers of exterior agents, then indeed man shrinks into insignificance, he feels his
tenure of life insecure, his inheritance on earth cut off. I remember, after having witnessed the destructive effects of a fire, I could not even behold a small
one in a stove, without a sensation of fear. The mounting flames had curled round the building, as it
fell, and was destroyed. They insinuated themselves into the substances about them, and the
impediments to their progress yielded at their touch. Could we take integral parts of this power, and
not be subject to its operation? Could we domesticate a cub of this wild beast, and not fear its
growth and maturity? Thus we began to feel, with regard to many-visaged death let loose on the chosen districts of our fair
habitation, and above all, with regard to the plague. We feared the coming summer. Nations,
bordering on the already infected countries, began to enter upon serious plans for the better keeping
out of the enemy. We, a commercial people, were obliged to bring such schemes under
consideration; and the question of contagion became matter of earnest disquisition. That the plague was not what is commonly called contagious, like the scarlet fever, or extinct small-
pox, was proved. It was called an epidemic. But the grand question was still unsettled of how this
epidemic was generated and increased. If infection depended upon the air, the air was subject to
infection. As for instance, a typhus fever has been brought by ships to one sea-port town; yet the
very people who brought it there, were incapable of communicating it in a town more fortunately
situated. But how are we to judge of airs, and pronounce-in such a city plague will die
unproductive; in such another, nature has provided for it a plentiful harvest? In the same way,
individuals may escape ninety-nine times, and receive the death-blow at the hundredth; because
bodies are sometimes in a state to reject the infection of malady, and at others, thirsty to imbibe it. These reflections made our legislators pause, before they could decide on the laws to be put in force. The evil was so wide-spreading, so violent and immedicable, that no care, no prevention could be
judged superfluous, which even added a chance to our escape. These were questions of prudence; there was no immediate necessity for an earnest caution. England was still secure. France, Germany, Italy and Spain, were interposed, walls yet without a
breach, between us and the plague. Our vessels truly were the sport of winds and waves, even as
Gulliver was the toy of the Brobdignagians; but we on our stable abode could not be hurt in life or
limb by these eruptions of nature. We could not fear-we did not. Yet a feeling of awe, a breathless
sentiment of wonder, a painful sense of the degradation of humanity, was introduced into every
heart. Nature, our mother, and our friend, had turned on us a brow of menace. She shewed us
plainly, that, though she permitted us to assign her laws and subdue her apparent powers, yet, if she
put forth but a finger, we must quake. She could take our globe, fringed with mountains, girded by
the atmosphere, containing the condition of our being, and all that man's mind could invent or his
force achieve; she could take the ball in her hand, and cast it into space, where life would be drunk
up, and man and all his efforts for ever annihilated. These speculations were rife among us; yet not the less we proceeded in our daily occupations, and
our plans, whose accomplishment demanded the lapse of many years. No voice was heard telling us
to hold! When foreign distresses came to be felt by us through the channels of commerce, we set
ourselves to apply remedies. Subscriptions were made for the emigrants, and merchants bankrupt by
the failure of trade. The English spirit awoke to its full activity, and, as it had ever done, set itself to
resist the evil, and to stand in the breach which diseased nature had suffered chaos and death to
make in the bounds and banks which had hitherto kept them out. At the commencement of summer, we began to feel, that the mischief which had taken place in
distant countries was greater than we had at first suspected. Quito was destroyed by an earthquake. Mexico laid waste by the united effects of storm, pestilence and famine. Crowds of emigrants
inundated the west of Europe; and our island had become the refuge of thousands. In the mean time
Ryland had been chosen Protector. He had sought this office with eagerness, under the idea of
turning his whole forces to the suppression of the privileged orders of our community. His measures
were thwarted, and his schemes interrupted by this new state of things. Many of the foreigners were
utterly destitute; and their increasing numbers at length forbade a recourse to the usual modes of
relief. Trade was stopped by the failure of the interchange of cargoes usual between us, and
America, India, Egypt and Greece. A sudden break was made in the routine of our lives. In vain our
Protector and his partizans sought to conceal this truth; in vain, day after day, he appointed a period
for the discussion of the new laws concerning hereditary rank and privilege; in vain he endeavoured
to represent the evil as partial and temporary. These disasters came home to so many bosoms, and,
through the various channels of commerce, were carried so entirely into every class and division of
the community, that of necessity they became the first question in the state, the chief subjects to
which we must turn our attention. Can it be true, each asked the other with wonder and dismay, that whole countries are laid waste,
whole nations annihilated, by these disorders in nature? The vast cities of America, the fertile plains
of Hindostan, the crowded abodes of the Chinese, are menaced with utter ruin. Where late the busy
multitudes assembled for pleasure or profit, now only the sound of wailing and misery is heard. The
air is empoisoned, and each human being inhales death, even while in youth and health, their hopes
are in the flower. We called to mind the plague of 1348, when it was calculated that a third of
mankind had been destroyed. As yet western Europe was uninfected; would it always be so? O, yes, it would-Countrymen, fear not! In the still uncultivated wilds of America, what wonder that
among its other giant destroyers, Plague should be numbered! It is of old a native of the East, sister
of the tornado, the earthquake, and the simoon. Child of the sun, and nursling of the tropics, it would
expire in these climes. It drinks the dark blood of the inhabitant of the south, but it never feasts on
the pale-faced Celt. If perchance some stricken Asiatic come among us, plague dies with him,
uncommunicated and innoxious. Let us weep for our brethren, though we can never experience their
reverse. Let us lament over and assist the children of the garden of the earth. Late we envied their
abodes, their spicy groves, fertile plains, and abundant loveliness. But in this mortal life extremes are
always matched; the thorn grows with the rose, the poison tree and the cinnamon mingle their
boughs. Persia, with its cloth of gold, marble halls, and infinite wealth, is now a tomb. The tent of the
Arab is fallen in the sands, and his horse spurns the ground unbridled and unsaddled. The voice of
lamentation fills the valley of Cashmere; its dells and woods, its cool fountains, and gardens of roses,
are polluted by the dead; in Circassia and Georgia the spirit of beauty weeps over the ruin of its
favourite temple-the form of woman. Our own distresses, though they were occasioned by the fictitious reciprocity of commerce,
encreased in due proportion. Bankers, merchants, and manufacturers, whose trade depended on
exports and interchange of wealth, became bankrupt. Such things, when they happen singly, affect
only the immediate parties; but the prosperity of the nation was now shaken by frequent and
extensive losses. Families, bred in opulence and luxury, were reduced to beggary. The very state of
peace in which we gloried was injurious; there were no means of employing the idle, or of sending
any overplus of population out of the country. Even the source of colonies was dried up, for in New
Holland, Van Diemen's Land, and the Cape of Good Hope, plague raged. O, for some medicinal vial to
purge unwholesome nature, and bring back the earth to its accustomed health! Ryland was a man of strong intellects and quick and sound decision in the usual course of things, but
he stood aghast at the multitude of evils that gathered round us. Must he tax the landed interest to
assist our commercial population? To do this, he must gain the favour of the chief land-holders, the
nobility of the country; and these were his vowed enemies-he must conciliate them by abandoning
his favourite scheme of equalization; he must confirm them in their manorial rights; he must sell his
cherished plans for the permanent good of his country, for temporary relief. He must aim no more at
the dear object of his ambition; throwing his arms aside, he must for present ends give up the
ultimate object of his endeavours. He came to Windsor to consult with us. Every day added to his
difficulties; the arrival of fresh vessels with emigrants, the total cessation of commerce, the starving
multitude that thronged around the palace of the Protectorate, were circumstances not to be
tampered with. The blow was struck; the aristocracy obtained all they wished, and they subscribed to
a twelvemonths' bill, which levied twenty per cent on all the rent-rolls of the country. Calm was now
restored to the metropolis, and to the populous cities, before driven to desperation; and we
returned to the consideration of distant calamities, wondering if the future would bring any
alleviation to their excess. It was August; so there could be small hope of relief during the heats. On
the contrary, the disease gained virulence, while starvation did its accustomed work. Thousands died
unlamented; for beside the yet warm corpse the mourner was stretched, made mute by death. On the eighteenth of this month news arrived in London that the plague was in France and Italy. These tidings were at first whispered about town; but no one dared express aloud the soul-quailing
intelligence. When any one met a friend in the street, he only cried as he hurried on, "You know! "-
while the other, with an ejaculation of fear and horror, would answer,- "What will become of us?" At length it was mentioned in the newspapers. The paragraph was inserted in an obscure part: "We
regret to state that there can be no longer a doubt of the plague having been introduced at Leghorn,
Genoa, and Marseilles." No word of comment followed; each reader made his own fearful one. We
were as a man who hears that his house is burning, and yet hurries through the streets, borne along
by a lurking hope of a mistake, till he turns the corner, and sees his sheltering roof enveloped in a
flame. Before it had been a rumour; but now in words uneraseable, in definite and undeniable print,
the knowledge went forth. Its obscurity of situation rendered it the more conspicuous: the
diminutive letters grew gigantic to the bewildered eye of fear: they seemed graven with a pen of
iron, impressed by fire, woven in the clouds, stamped on the very front of the universe. The English, whether travellers or residents, came pouring in one great revulsive stream, back on
their own country; and with them crowds of Italians and Spaniards. Our little island was filled even to
bursting. At first an unusual quantity of specie made its appearance with the emigrants; but these
people had no means of receiving back into their hands what they spent among us. With the advance
of summer, and the increase of the distemper, rents were unpaid, and their remittances failed them. It was impossible to see these crowds of wretched, perishing creatures, late nurslings of luxury, and
not stretch out a hand to save them. As at the conclusion of the eighteenth century, the English
unlocked their hospitable store, for the relief of those driven from their homes by political
revolution; so now they were not backward in affording aid to the victims of a more wide-spreading
calamity. We had many foreign friends whom we eagerly sought out, and relieved from dreadful
penury. Our Castle became an asylum for the unhappy. A little population occupied its halls. The
revenue of its possessor, which had always found a mode of expenditure congenial to his generous
nature, was now attended to more parsimoniously, that it might embrace a wider portion of utility. It
was not however money, except partially, but the necessaries of life, that became scarce. It was
difficult to find an immediate remedy. The usual one of imports was entirely cut off. In this
emergency, to feed the very people to whom we had given refuge, we were obliged to yield to the
plough and the mattock our pleasure-grounds and parks. Live stock diminished sensibly in the
country, from the effects of the great demand in the market. Even the poor deer, our antlered
proteges, were obliged to fall for the sake of worthier pensioners. The labour necessary to bring the
lands to this sort of culture, employed and fed the offcasts of the diminished manufactories. Adrian did not rest only with the exertions he could make with regard to his own possessions. He
addressed himself to the wealthy of the land; he made proposals in parliament little adapted to
please the rich; but his earnest pleadings and benevolent eloquence were irresistible. To give up
their pleasure-grounds to the agriculturist, to diminish sensibly the number of horses kept for the
purposes of luxury throughout the country, were means obvious, but unpleasing. Yet, to the honour
of the English be it recorded, that, although natural disinclination made them delay awhile, yet when
the misery of their fellow-creatures became glaring, an enthusiastic generosity inspired their
decrees. The most luxurious were often the first to part with their indulgencies. As is common in
communities, a fashion was set. The high-born ladies of the country would have deemed themselves
disgraced if they had now enjoyed, what they before called a necessary, the ease of a carriage. Chairs, as in olden time, and Indian palanquins were introduced for the infirm; but else it was nothing
singular to see females of rank going on foot to places of fashionable resort. It was more common,
for all who possessed landed property to secede to their estates, attended by whole troops of the
indigent, to cut down their woods to erect temporary dwellings, and to portion out their parks,
parterres and flower-gardens, to necessitous families. Many of these, of high rank in their own
countries, now, with hoe in hand, turned up the soil. It was found necessary at last to check the spirit
of sacrifice, and to remind those whose generosity proceeded to lavish waste, that, until the present
state of things became permanent, of which there was no likelihood, it was wrong to carry change so
far as to make a reaction difficult. Experience demonstrated that in a year or two pestilence would
cease; it were well that in the mean time we should not have destroyed our fine breeds of horses, or
have utterly changed the face of the ornamented portion of the country. It may be imagined that things were in a bad state indeed, before this spirit of benevolence could
have struck such deep roots. The infection had now spread in the southern provinces of France. But
that country had so many resources in the way of agriculture, that the rush of population from one
part of it to another, and its increase through foreign emigration, was less felt than with us. The panic
struck appeared of more injury, than disease and its natural concomitants. Winter was hailed, a general and never-failing physician. The embrowning woods, and swollen rivers,
the evening mists, and morning frosts, were welcomed with gratitude. The effects of purifying cold
were immediately felt; and the lists of mortality abroad were curtailed each week. Many of our
visitors left us: those whose homes were far in the south, fled delightedly from our northern winter,
and sought their native land, secure of plenty even after their fearful visitation. We breathed again. What the coming summer would bring, we knew not; but the present months were our own, and our
hopes of a cessation of pestilence were high. I HAVE lingered thus long on the extreme bank, the wasting shoal that stretched into the stream of
life, dallying with the shadow of death. Thus long, I have cradled my heart in retrospection of past
happiness, when hope was. Why not for ever thus? I am not immortal; and the thread of my history
might be spun out to the limits of my existence. But the same sentiment that first led me to pourtray
scenes replete with tender recollections, now bids me hurry on. The same yearning of this warm,
panting heart, that has made me in written words record my vagabond youth, my serene manhood,
and the passions of my soul, makes me now recoil from further delay. I must complete my work. Here then I stand, as I said, beside the fleet waters of the flowing years, and now away! Spread the
sail, and strain with oar, hurrying by dark impending crags, adown steep rapids, even to the sea of
desolation I have reached. Yet one moment, one brief interval before I put from shore- once, once
again let me fancy myself as I was in 2094 in my abode at Windsor, let me close my eyes, and imagine
that the immeasurable boughs of its oaks still shadow me, its castle walls anear. Let fancy pourtray
the joyous scene of the twentieth of June, such as even now my aching heart recalls it. Circumstances had called me to London; here I heard talk that symptoms of the plague had occurred
in hospitals of that city. I returned to Windsor; my brow was clouded, my heart heavy; I entered the
Little Park, as was my custom, at the Frogmore gate, on my way to the Castle. A great part of these
grounds had been given to cultivation, and strips of potatoe-land and corn were scattered here and
there. The rooks cawed loudly in the trees above; mixed with their hoarse cries I heard a lively strain
of music. It was Alfred's birthday. The young people, the Etonians, and children of the neighbouring
gentry, held a mock fair, to which all the country people were invited. The park was speckled by
tents, whose flaunting colours and gaudy flags, waving in the sunshine, added to the gaiety of the
scene. On a platform erected beneath the terrace, a number of the younger part of the assembly
were dancing. I leaned against a tree to observe them. The band played the wild eastern air of Weber
introduced in Abon Hassan; its volatile notes gave wings to the feet of the dancers, while the lookers-
on unconsciously beat time. At first the tripping measure lifted my spirit with it, and for a moment
my eyes gladly followed the mazes of the dance. The revulsion of thought passed like keen steel to
my heart. Ye are all going to die, I thought; already your tomb is built up around you. Awhile, because
you are gifted with agility and strength, you fancy that you live: but frail is the "bower of flesh" that
encaskets life; dissoluble the silver cord than binds you to it. The joyous soul, charioted from
pleasure to pleasure by the graceful mechanism of well-formed limbs, will suddenly feel the axle-tree
give way, and spring and wheel dissolve in dust. Not one of you, O! fated crowd, can escape-not
one! not my own ones! not my Idris and her babes! Horror and misery! Already the gay dance
vanished, the green sward was strewn with corpses, the blue air above became fetid with deathly
exhalations. Shriek, ye clarions! ye loud trumpets, howl! Pile dirge on dirge; rouse the funereal
chords; let the air ring with dire wailing; let wild discord rush on the wings of the wind! Already I hear
it, while guardian angels, attendant on humanity, their task achieved, hasten away, and their
departure is announced by melancholy strains; faces all unseemly with weeping, forced open my lids;
faster and faster many groups of these woe-begone countenances thronged around, exhibiting every
variety of wretchedness-well known faces mingled with the distorted creations of fancy. Ashy pale,
Raymond and Perdita sat apart, looking on with sad smiles. Adrian's countenance flitted across,
tainted by death-Idris, with eyes languidly closed and livid lips, was about to slide into the wide
grave. The confusion grew-their looks of sorrow changed to mockery; they nodded their heads in
time to the music, whose clang became maddening. I felt that this was insanity-I sprang forward to throw it off; I rushed into the midst of the crowd. Idris saw me: with light step she advanced; as I folded her in my arms, feeling, as I did, that I thus
enclosed what was to me a world, yet frail as the waterdrop which the noon-day sun will drink from
the water lily's cup; tears filled my eyes, unwont to be thus moistened. The joyful welcome of my
boys, the soft gratulation of Clara, the pressure of Adrian's hand, contributed to unman me. I felt that
they were near, that they were safe, yet methought this was all deceit;-the earth reeled, the firm-
enrooted trees moved-dizziness came over me-I sank to the ground. My beloved friends were alarmed-nay, they expressed their alarm so anxiously, that I dared not
pronounce the word plague, that hovered on my lips, lest they should construe my perturbed looks
into a symptom, and see infection in my languor. I had scarcely recovered, and with feigned hilarity
had brought back smiles into my little circle, when we saw Ryland approach. Ryland had something the appearance of a farmer; of a man whose muscles and full grown stature
had been developed under the influence of vigorous exercise and exposure to the elements. This was
to a great degree the case: for, though a large landed proprietor, yet, being a projector, and of an
ardent and industrious disposition, he had on his own estate given himself up to agricultural labours. When he went as ambassador to the Northern States of America, he, for some time, planned his
entire migration; and went so far as to make several journies far westward on that immense
continent, for the purpose of choosing the site of his new abode. Ambition turned his thoughts from
these designs-ambition, which labouring through various lets and hindrances, had now led him to
the summit of his hopes, in making him Lord Protector of England. His countenance was rough but intelligent-his ample brow and quick grey eyes seemed to look out,
over his own plans, and the opposition of his enemies. His voice was stentorian: his hand stretched
out in debate, seemed by its gigantic and muscular form, to warn his hearers that words were not his
only weapons. Few people had discovered some cowardice and much infirmity of purpose under this
imposing exterior. No man could crush a "butterfly on the wheel" with better effect; no man better
cover a speedy retreat from a powerful adversary. This had been the secret of his secession at the
time of Lord Raymond's election. In the unsteady glance of his eye, in his extreme desire to learn the
opinions of all, in the feebleness of his hand-writing, these qualities might be obscurely traced, but
they were not generally known. He was now our Lord Protector. He had canvassed eagerly for this
post. His protectorate was to be distinguished by every kind of innovation on the aristocracy. This his
selected task was exchanged for the far different one of encountering the ruin caused by the
convulsions of physical nature. He was incapable of meeting these evils by any comprehensive
system; he had resorted to expedient after expedient, and could never be induced to put a remedy in
force, till it came too late to be of use. Certainly the Ryland that advanced towards us now, bore small resemblance to the powerful,
ironical, seemingly fearless canvasser for the first rank among Englishmen. Our native oak, as his
partisans called him, was visited truly by a nipping winter. He scarcely appeared half his usual height;
his joints were unknit, his limbs would not support him; his face was contracted, his eye wandering;
debility of purpose and dastard fear were expressed in every gesture. In answer to our eager questions, one word alone fell, as it were involuntarily, from his convulsed
lips: The Plague.-"Where? "-"Every where-we must fly-all fly-but whither? No man can tell-
there is no refuge on earth, it comes on us like a thousand packs of wolves-we must all fly-where
shall you go? Where can any of us go?" These words were syllabled trembling by the iron man. Adrian replied, "Whither indeed would you
fly? We must all remain; and do our best to help our suffering fellow-creatures." "Help!" said Ryland, "there is no help!-great God, who talks of help! All the world has the plague!" "Then to avoid it, we must quit the world," observed Adrian, with a gentle smile. Ryland groaned; cold drops stood on his brow. It was useless to oppose his paroxysm of terror: but
we soothed and encouraged him, so that after an interval he was better able to explain to us the
ground of his alarm. It had come sufficiently home to him. One of his servants, while waiting on him,
had suddenly fallen down dead. The physician declared that he died of the plague. We endeavoured
to calm him-but our own hearts were not calm. I saw the eye of Idris wander from me to her
children, with an anxious appeal to my judgment. Adrian was absorbed in meditation. For myself, I
own that Ryland's words rang in my ears; all the world was infected;-in what uncontaminated
seclusion could I save my beloved treasures, until the shadow of death had passed from over the
earth? We sunk into silence: a silence that drank in the doleful accounts and prognostications of our
guest. We had receded from the crowd; and ascending the steps of the terrace, sought the Castle. Our change of cheer struck those nearest to us; and, by means of Ryland's servants, the report soon
spread that he had fled from the plague in London. The sprightly parties broke up-they assembled
in whispering groups. The spirit of gaiety was eclipsed; the music ceased; the young people left their
occupations and gathered together. The lightness of heart which had dressed them in masquerade
habits, had decorated their tents, and assembled them in fantastic groups, appeared a sin against,
and a provocative to, the awful destiny that had laid its palsying hand upon hope and life. The
merriment of the hour was an unholy mockery of the sorrows of man. The foreigners whom we had
among us, who had fled from the plague in their own country, now saw their last asylum invaded;
and, fear making them garrulous, they described to eager listeners the miseries they had beheld in
cities visited by the calamity, and gave fearful accounts of the insidious and irremediable nature of
the disease. We had entered the Castle. Idris stood at a window that over-looked the park; her maternal eyes
sought her own children among the young crowd. An Italian lad had got an audience about him, and
with animated gestures was describing some scene of horror. Alfred stood immoveable before him,
his whole attention absorbed. Little Evelyn had endeavoured to draw Clara away to play with him;
but the Italian's tale arrested her, she crept near, her lustrous eyes fixed on the speaker. Either
watching the crowd in the park, or occupied by painful reflection, we were all silent; Ryland stood by
himself in an embrasure of the window; Adrian paced the hall, revolving some new and
overpowering idea-suddenly he stopped and said: "I have long expected this; could we in reason
expect that this island should be exempt from the universal visitation? The evil is come home to us,
and we must not shrink from our fate. What are your plans, my Lord Protector, for the benefit of our
country?" "For heaven's love! Windsor," cried Ryland, "do not mock me with that title. Death and disease level
all men. I neither pretend to protect nor govern an hospital-such will England quickly become." "Do you then intend, now in time of peril, to recede from your duties?" "Duties! speak rationally, my Lord!-when I am a plague-spotted corpse, where will my duties be? Every man for himself! the devil take the protectorship, say I, if it expose me to danger!" "Faint-hearted man!" cried Adrian indignantly-"Your countrymen put their trust in you, and you
betray them!" "I betray them!" said Ryland, "the plague betrays me. Faint-hearted! It is well, shut up in your castle,
out of danger, to boast yourself out of fear. Take the Protectorship who will; before God I renounce
it!" "And before God," replied his opponent, fervently, "do I receive it! No one will canvass for this
honour now-none envy my danger or labours. Deposit your powers in my hands. Long have I fought
with death, and much" (he stretched out his thin hand) "much have I suffered in the struggle. It is not
by flying, but by facing the enemy, that we can conquer. If my last combat is now about to be fought,
and I am to be worsted-so let it be!" "But come, Ryland, recollect yourself! Men have hitherto thought you magnanimous and wise, will
you cast aside these titles? Consider the panic your departure will occasion. Return to London. I will
go with you. Encourage the people by your presence. I will incur all the danger. Shame! shame! if the
first magistrate of England be foremost to renounce his duties." Meanwhile among our guests in the park, all thoughts of festivity had faded. As summer-flies are
scattered by rain, so did this congregation, late noisy and happy, in sadness and melancholy murmurs
break up, dwindling away apace. With the set sun and the deepening twilight the park became nearly
empty. Adrian and Ryland were still in earnest discussion. We had prepared a banquet for our guests
in the lower hall of the castle; and thither Idris and I repaired to receive and entertain the few that
remained. There is nothing more melancholy than a merry-meeting thus turned to sorrow: the gala
dresses-the decorations, gay as they might otherwise be, receive a solemn and funereal
appearance. If such change be painful from lighter causes, it weighed with intolerable heaviness from
the knowledge that the earth's desolator had at last, even as an arch-fiend, lightly over-leaped the
boundaries our precautions raised, and at once enthroned himself in the full and beating heart of our
country. Idris sat at the top of the half-empty hall. Pale and tearful, she almost forgot her duties as
hostess; her eyes were fixed on her children. Alfred's serious air shewed that he still revolved the
tragic story related by the Italian boy. Evelyn was the only mirthful creature present: he sat on Clara's
lap; and, making matter of glee from his own fancies, laughed aloud. The vaulted roof echoed again
his infant tone. The poor mother who had brooded long over, and suppressed the expression of her
anguish, now burst into tears, and folding her babe in her arms, hurried from the hall. Clara and
Alfred followed. While the rest of the company, in confused murmur, which grew louder and louder,
gave voice to their many fears. The younger part gathered round me to ask my advice; and those who had friends in London were
anxious beyond the rest, to ascertain the present extent of disease in the metropolis. I encouraged
them with such thoughts of cheer as presented themselves. I told them exceedingly few deaths had
yet been occasioned by pestilence, and gave them hopes, as we were the last visited, so the calamity
might have lost its most venomous power before it had reached us. The cleanliness, habits of order,
and the manner in which our cities were built, were all in our favour. As it was an epidemic, its chief
force was derived from pernicious qualities in the air, and it would probably do little harm where this
was naturally salubrious. At first, I had spoken only to those nearest me; but the whole assembly
gathered about me, and I found that I was listened to by all. "My friends," I said, "our risk is common;
our precautions and exertions shall be common also. If manly courage and resistance can save us, we
will be saved. We will fight the enemy to the last. Plague shall not find us a ready prey; we will
dispute every inch of ground; and, by methodical and inflexible laws, pile invincible barriers to the
progress of our foe. Perhaps in no part of the world has she met with so systematic and determined
an opposition. Perhaps no country is naturally so well protected against our invader; nor has nature
anywhere been so well assisted by the hand of man. We will not despair. We are neither cowards nor
fatalists; but, believing that God has placed the means for our preservation in our own hands, we will
use those means to our utmost. Remember that cleanliness, sobriety, and even good-humour and
benevolence, are our best medicines." There was little I could add to this general exhortation; for the plague, though in London, was not
among us. I dismissed the guests therefore; and they went thoughtful, more than sad, to await the
events in store for them. I now sought Adrian, anxious to hear the result of his discussion with Ryland. He had in part
prevailed; the Lord Protector consented to return to London for a few weeks; during which time
things should be so arranged, as to occasion less consternation at his departure. Adrian and Idris
were together. The sadness with which the former had first heard that the plague was in London had
vanished; the energy of his purpose informed his body with strength, the solemn joy of enthusiasm
and self-devotion illuminated his countenance; and the weakness of his physical nature seemed to
pass from him, as the cloud of humanity did, in the ancient fable, from the divine lover of Semele. He
was endeavouring to encourage his sister, and to bring her to look on his intent in a less tragic light
than she was prepared to do; and with passionate eloquence he unfolded his designs to her. "Let me, at the first word," he said, "relieve your mind from all fear on my account. I will not task
myself beyond my powers, nor will I needlessly seek danger. I feel that I know what ought to be
done, and as my presence is necessary for the accomplishment of my plans, I will take especial care
to preserve my life. "I am now going to undertake an office fitted for me. I cannot intrigue, or work a tortuous path
through the labyrinth of men's vices and passions; but I can bring patience, and sympathy, and such
aid as art affords, to the bed of disease; I can raise from earth the miserable orphan, and awaken to
new hopes the shut heart of the mourner. I can enchain the plague in limits, and set a term to the
misery it would occasion; courage, forbearance, and watchfulness, are the forces I bring towards this
great work. "O, I shall be something now! From my birth I have aspired like the eagle -but, unlike the eagle, my
wings have failed, and my vision has been blinded. Disappointment and sickness have hitherto held
dominion over me; twin born with me, my would, was for ever enchained by the shall not, of these
my tyrants. A shepherd-boy that tends a silly flock on the mountains, was more in the scale of society
than I. Congratulate me then that I have found fitting scope for my powers. I have often thought of
offering my services to the pestilence-stricken towns of France and Italy; but fear of paining you, and
expectation of this catastrophe, withheld me. To England and to Englishmen I dedicate myself. If I
can save one of her mighty spirits from the deadly shaft; if I can ward disease from one of her smiling
cottages, I shall not have lived in vain." Strange ambition this! Yet such was Adrian. He appeared given up to contemplation, averse to
excitement, a lowly student, a man of visions- but afford him worthy theme, and-
  Like to the lark at break of day arising,
  From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate. so did he spring up from listlessness and unproductive thought, to the highest pitch of virtuous
action. With him went enthusiasm, the high-wrought resolve, the eye that without blenching could look at
death. With us remained sorrow, anxiety, and unendurable expectation of evil. The man, says Lord
Bacon, who hath wife and children, has given hostages to fortune. Vain was all philosophical
reasoning-vain all fortitude-vain, vain, a reliance on probable good. I might heap high the scale
with logic, courage, and resignation-but let one fear for Idris and our children enter the opposite
one, and, over-weighed, it kicked the beam. The plague was in London! Fools that we were not long ago to have foreseen this. We wept over the
ruin of the boundless continents of the east, and the desolation of the western world; while we
fancied that the little channel between our island and the rest of the earth was to preserve us alive
among the dead. It were no mighty leap methinks from Calais to Dover. The eye easily discerns the
sister land; they were united once; and the little path that runs between looks in a map but as a
trodden footway through high grass. Yet this small interval was to save us: the sea was to rise a wall
of adamant-without, disease and misery-within, a shelter from evil, a nook of the garden of
paradise-a particle of celestial soil, which no evil could invade-truly we were wise in our
generation, to imagine all these things! But we are awake now. The plague is in London; the air of England is tainted, and her sons and
daughters strew the unwholesome earth. And now, the sea, late our defence, seems our prison
bound; hemmed in by its gulphs, we shall die like the famished inhabitants of a besieged town. Other
nations have a fellowship in death; but we, shut out from all neighbourhood, must bury our own
dead, and little England become a wide, wide tomb.