The figure neither moved nor threatened, but stood
nodding its head on the height at every motion of the steed; yet our
party were arrested on their way, nor knew they exactly in what place
they were: But from the length of the way they had come, they were sure
they were near the Scottish army on one side or other, and free from
any danger of the foes they had left behind them on the Border. None of
them were good guides in any case, and a man in fear is neither a fit
guide for himself nor others. Fear had the sway, and fear gave the word
of command without being disputed. The poet was the first to strike from
the beaten path, and it was at no easy pace that he rode. He turned
westward, and the rest all followed with main speed. Their progress was
soon interrupted by a strong cattle fence made of stakes and the
branches of trees interwoven, bespeaking the vicinity of some village,
or place of human habitation. They soon broke through the fence, but by
bad luck did not take time to make up the breach, which they left open,
and posting forward came to a large house amid a number of smaller ones. The poet called for admittance in a moving and earnest stile, and at
once resolved to take no denial. Before ever he paused, he told them he
and his party had lost their way, and that they had seen a ghost. "Then you must be some murderers," said the men of the house,--"and here
you remain not to-night." "We belong to the warden of the marches, the brave baron of Mountcomyn,"
said the poet, "and go on an errand of great import to the army. In that
case we might demand what we only ask as a boon, namely, such lodging as
the house affords." "You had better keep that part to yourself," said the men of the house:
"Though Sir Ringan is supreme in the middle marches, he is no favourite
here. Our master's name is Ker. He is with the Douglas, but may be home
to-night. Calm sough and kitchen fare, or ride on." "It brings me in mind o' an auld proverb," said Gibbie, "that beggars
should nae be choisers; sae, honest lads, bring us a light, for our
horses are sair tired an' maun be weel put up." The party, it will be remembered, consisted only of five, exclusive of
Charlie and the friar. They had draw up their horses close to the hall
door, and were still on horseback when the men turned into the house
for a light. The poet, whose eager eyes were still on the watch,
chancing to look at the heads of his associates between him and the sky,
thought he discovered one too many. "Surely there are six of us,'said he in a hurried tremulous voice. "Six
of us!" said Tam, as doubting the statement. "Six of us? No, surely?" said Delany. At that instant a lad came out with a lanthorn, and held it up to look
at the party. The poet was nearest the door, and the light shone full on
him and the rider that was next him. He cast his eyes on that
rider,--but one glance was enough to bedim his eye-sight, if not to
scare away his reason. It had the appearance of a warrior sheathed in
steel, but all encrusted in a sheet of blood. His mouth was wide open,
and his jaws hanging down upon his breast, while his head seemed to be
cleft asunder. The poet uttered a loud yell of horror, and, flinging
himself from his horse on the side opposite to that on which the phantom
stood, he fell among the mud and stones at the door, yet ceased not to
reiterate his loud cries like one in distraction. Every one jumped from
his horse, and hurried in at the door; the man with the lanthorn also
fled, and with the noise and uproar the horses galloped off, saddled and
bridled as they were. As the guests ran into the hall, every one asked
at all the rest what it was? "What is it?" was all that could be heard;
all asking the question, but none answering it. Even the people of the
house joined in the query, and came all round the strangers, crying,
"What is it?--What is it?" --"I do not know--I do not know, Sir--I do not
know upon my word." "The people are all delirious," said the housekeeper:"--Can no one tell
us what it was that affrighted you?--St Magdalene be with us! whom have
we here?" This was no other than the poor bard coming toward the light, creeping
slowly on all-four, and still groaning as he came. "Here's the chap that began the fray," said Tam, "you may speer at him. He rather looks as he were at ane mae wi't. For my part, I just did as
the rest did,--ran an' cried as loud as I could. When a dust is fairly
begun, I think aye the mair stour that is raised the better. I'll try
wha will cry loudest again, an ye like,--or rin round the fire wi' ony
o' you, or out through the mids o't either, at a pinch." Tam turned round his long nose to see if his jest had taken, for he
always fixed his eyes stedfastly on one object when he spoke; but he
found that his jargon had been ill-timed, for no one laughed at it but
himself. The rest were gathered round the bard; some pitying, but more
like to burst with laughter at his forlorn state. He fetched two or
three long-drawn moans, and then raising himself up on his knees, with
his eyes fixed on the light, he rolled over, and fainted. Delany first stooped to support his head, and was soon assisted by every
female in the house, while the men only stood and looked on. By bathing
his hands and temples with cold water, they soon brought him out of his
faint, but not to his right senses. His looks continued wild and
unstable, and ever and anon they were turned to the door, as if he
expected some other guest to enter. A sober conference at last ensued;
and as no one had seen or heard any thing at this last encounter, save
the man that was taken ill, who a few moments before had been heard to
say _there were six of them_, all began to agree that he had been seized
with some sudden frenzy or delirium; till the lad, who had carried out
the light, thrust in his pale face among the rest, and said,--"Na, na,
my masters, it is nae for naething that the honest man's gane away in a
kink; for, when I held up the bouet, I saw a dead man riding on a horse
close at his side. He was berkened wi' blood off at the taes; and his
mouth was open, and I saw his tongue hinging out." It may well be conceived what an icy chillness these words distilled
round the heart of every one present. The effect on our travellers was
particularly appalling, from the idea that they were haunted by a
phantom from which they could not escape. The whole group closed around
the fire, and the strangers recounted to the family the singular
occurrence of their having lost two of their number by the way, and
been pursued and overtaken by a phantom resembling one of them, and that
the hideous spectre was, as it seemed, haunting them still. As they all
agreed in the same story, it was not of a nature to be disregarded at a
period when superstition swayed the hearts of men with irresistible
power. The stoutest heart among them was daunted, and no one durst go
out to the vaults to look after his master's cattle, nor to take in our
travellers' horses, that were left to shift for themselves during the
long winter night. The next morning, between day-light and the sun-rising, the men began to
peep abroad, and the first things they observed were some of the horses
of our travellers going about in a careless, easy manner. This they
looked on as a good omen, knowing that horses were terrified for
spirits; and the men joining in a body, they sallied out to reconnoitre. The horses had fared well, for they had fed at the laird's stacks of hay
and corn all night; but as the men were going round to see how matters
stood, they perceived a phenomenon, that, if it had not been open
day-light, would have scared them from the habitation. This was the
identical phantom-warrior still sitting unmoved on his horse, that was
helping itself full liberally out of one of the laird's corn-ricks. The
eye of day expels the films of superstition from the human eye. The men,
after a short consultation, ventured to surround the phantom,--to seize
his horse,--(who had given full proof that he at least was flesh and
blood;)--and, after a good deal of trembling astonishment, they found
that he was actually rode by a dead warrior, whose head was cleft
asunder, and his whole body, both within and without the harness,
encrusted in blood. The mystery was soon cleared up; but none then knew who he was. It had
become customary in that age for warriors, who went to engage others, on
horseback, to lock themselves to the saddle, for fear of being borne out
of their seats by the spears of their opponents in the encounter. This
was the individual trooper who had come foremost in the pursuit of our
party, he whom the friar jostled, and whom Charlie, encountering the
moment after, had slain; but his suit of armour having kept him nearly
upright in his saddle, his horse had run off with him, and followed
after those of our travellers, as every horse will do that is let go on
a high-way and gets his will. Glad were our travellers at an eclaircissement so fairly within the
bounds of their comprehension; and when the poet saw the gash made in
the helmet, he shook his head, and exclaimed, "Ha! well I wot the mighty
hand of Charlie has been here!" Gibbie remarked that he himself had "killed one very like him, only he
was sure his wad never mount horse again." But seeing Tam's ill-set eye
fixed on him, he was afraid of something coming out relating to that
encounter which he did not wish to hear blabbed; so he changed his tone,
and, looking wise, said, "The hale business brings me a-mind of a very
good story that happened aince at Allergrain; an' if it be nae true it
is behadden to the maker, for the sin o' the lie lyes nae at my door. The story, you see, is this.--There was a man, an' he had a wife; an'
they had a son, an' they ca'ed him Jock--"

"Now, d--n your particularity!" said Tam Craik: "think you we have
nought else to do but stand beside the bloody man and listen to a
long-winded tale like that?" The poet muttered over some old rhyme in unison with what he heard. If
one word spoken chanced to occur in any old rhyme or song that he knew,
he went over the sentence to himself, though it had no farther
connection with it, or resemblance to it, than merely that word. This
made his conversation altogether incomprehensible to those not
acquainted with him, but it was always delightful to himself; a chance
old rhyme brought to his remembrance, would have pleased him almost in
any circumstances, while his words chimed naturally into measure. Leaving the dead warrior at the house where they lodged for the people
to bury as they liked, they proceeded to the army, in hopes of finding
Charlie and the friar there; for without them they did not know how to
accomplish their mission. These two heroes finding, on asking at a
hamlet, that their friends had not passed on the road to Roxburgh,
suspected what way they had gone, and turning to the south-east they
followed them on the track to Yetholm, but misled them at the house into
which they had been chased by the dead man, and rode searching for them
the greater part of the night. Next morning they again went in search of
them, and came up behind them at the convent of Maisondieu near to the
Teviot, where a detachment of the army was stationed; and, after
conversing two or three hours on the state of the army and garrison,
they proceeded on their journey, and reached the abbey of Melrose that
night. There they were welcomed by the brethren, and lodged comfortably. There also they got many strange stories told to them about Master
Michael Scott, which made the very hairs of their heads stand on end,
and the hearts of the boldest to palpitate. When the friar heard them,
he seemed wrapt in deep thought; and he opened his mouth, and said: "If
the things that thou hast spoken be according to the light that is in
thee, and the truth that is told among men, then this man is not as
other men, for the spirit of the immortals is in him, and he communeth
with the prince of the power of the air. Nevertheless, I will go unto
him, and I will speak to him face to face, as a man speaketh to his
friend. Peradventure I shall tell him that which he knoweth not." When it was told to the abbot Lawrence, that the servants of the warden
were come, and that they were accompanied by his chaplain and bedesman,
a learned man in all holy things, the father came to bestow upon them
his benediction,--for the baron of Mountcomyn had conferred many rich
benefices on the abbey. At the first sound of the friar's voice, the
abbot started, as if recollecting him; but on looking at the man his
hope seemed to die away. Every time, however, that he spoke in his
eastern style, the abbot fixed a look on him, as if he would fain have
claimed acquaintance, which the friar perceiving, urged their departure
with all the interest he had; and accordingly, about mid-day, they set
out for Aikwood-castle, the seat of the renowned magician Master Michael
Scott. Ever since the stern encounter with the English moss-troopers on the
Thief-road, Charlie had attached himself close to the friar, imagining
that he saw his character in a new light, and that he was one who might
either be roused to desperate courage, or impressed with notorious
dread; and when he heard him say that he would speak to the enchanter
face to face, he admired him still the more; for the business of
addressing the Master was that which stuck sorest on the stomach of the
doughty Yardbire. As for the poet, he scarcely seemed himself all that
day. He looked at the mountains, and the wild romantic rivers branching
among them in every direction, with looks of which it was hard to say
whether they were looks of vacancy or affection, for he looked sometimes
as at objects which he was never to see again. His tongue muttered long
rhymes in which his heart had little share; so that Delany was obliged
to detach herself from his society, and make up to the friar, whom she
now addressed with much affection, and some degree of coquetry:--

"Dearest father, why have you neglected me so much on our journey? Ever
since our first stage was got over, you have not deigned to take any
notice of me. What have you seen in my conduct that you have thus
shunned me? It is in sincerity that I assure you there is no man in
whose conversation I so much delight." "Fairest among maidens!" said the friar, putting his arm gently around
her neck, as her palfrey came close up by his side, "say not so, but
come near me, I will kiss thee with the kisses of my mouth, for thy love
is sweeter to me than the vintage. Behold thou art even like a tower of
alabaster shining from among the cedars of Lebanon. Thy bosom resembleth
two young roes that are twins, and feed among the lilies of the
valley." "Hold, dear father!" said she, "and do not let your gallantry run away
with your good common sense. Yet would I love to hear that language
spoken to another, for though it be nonsense it is still beautiful. Tell
me, for I long to hear, where, or in what country, you learned to speak
in that stile." "Daughter of my people," said he, "I have learned that language at home
and in a far country. In youth and in age hath it been my delight. At
noon-tide when the sun shone in his strength, and in the silent watches
of the night hath it been my meditation. In adversity hath it been my
comfort, and in prosperity my joy; so that now it hath become unto me as
my mother tongue, and other language have I none." "Is it the language of the convent and the priory alone?" said the maid. "No, thou rose of the desart," said the friar;--"it is not the language
indeed, but the stile of language over one half of the habitable world. It is the language of all the kingdoms and countries of the east, from
India even unto Ethiopia; and all the way as thou goest down towards
the rising of the sun, yea from the river to the ends of the earth it
prevaileth. But, O thou fairest among the daughters of women! that
language did I not learn in the lands that are watered by the great
river, even the river Euphrates. In Ur of the Chaldees have I not
sojourned; nor on the mountains of Palestine have I lifted up my eyes. But I learned it from one little book; a book that is of more value to
the children of men than all the gold of Ophir. O maiden, could I but
make known unto thee the treasures of that book, the majesty of its
stile, and the excellency of its precepts, it would make thine heart to
sing for joy. If all the writings of this world, yea, if the world
itself were to be laid in the balance with that book, they would be
found wanting. The mountains may depart, and the seas may pass away, the
stars, and the heavens in which they shine, may be removed, but the
words of that book shall remain for ever and ever! And this language
that I now speak to thee resembleth the words written therein; and I
speak them unto thee that thou mayest hear and love them." "Dear friar, teach me to read and understand that book, for my breast
yearneth to know more about it. I am, it is true, not my own at present
to give, but I have some forebodings here that tell me I soon shall;
and, father, I will serve thee, and be thy handmaid, if thou wilt teach
me the words and the mysteries of that little book." "Alas! and wo is me, for the ignorance of my people!" said he, with the
tears streaming over his grim cheek; "they are troubled about that which
availeth them nothing, while the way of life is hid from their eyes. Their leaders have caused them to err; and I, even I, have been a
dweller in the tabernacles of sin! But the day-star hath shone upon my
soul and my spirit: For that have I been persecuted, and hunted as a
partridge upon the mountains, chased from the habitations of my
brethren, and forced to dwell among a strange and savage people. Yet
there are among them whom I love; and could I be the mean of opening
thine eyes, and turning thee from darkness unto light, then would I know
for what purpose the finger of heaven had pointed out my way to this
barren wilderness. Thou can'st not be a servant or a handmaiden unto one
who is little better than an outcast and a vagabond on the earth. But
better days may come to us both: I am not what I seem; but, maiden, thou
mayest trust me. My love for thee surpasseth the love of women, for it
is with more than an earthly love that I behold and delight in thee. Come unto me this night, and I will tell thee things that shall make
thine ears tingle.