Savanna, who was conscious enough to know what passed, though too much
weakened from her own sufferings and anxieties to be able to struggle
with this new affliction, started up on hearing these words, and
screamed out 'Does she live? Blessed man! but say so, dat's all,' in
a tone so affecting, and with an expression of agonized curiosity so
overwhelming to the feelings, that Colonel Mordaunt, whose spirits were
not very high, was so choked that he could not immediately answer her;
and when at last he faltered out, 'She lives, and is quite well,' the
frantic joy of the mulatto overcame him still more. She jumped about his
neck, she hugged the tawny boy; and her delight was as extravagant as
her grief had been; till exhausted and silent she sunk upon the bed, and
was unable for some minutes to listen quietly to the story which Colonel
Mordaunt came to relate. When she was composed enough to listen to it, she did not long remain
so; for as soon as she heard that Colonel Mordaunt had met Adeline in
her phrensy, and conveyed her to a place of safety, she fell at his
feet, embraced his knees, and, making the tawny boy kneel down by her,
invoked the blessing of God on him so fervently and so eloquently that
Colonel Mordaunt wept like a child, and, exclaiming, 'Upon my soul, my
good woman, I cannot bear this,' was forced to run out of the house to
recover his emotion. When he returned, Savanna said 'Well--now, blessed sir, take me to my
dear lady.' 'Indeed,' replied he, 'I must not; you are forbidden to see her.' 'Forbidden!' replied she, her eyes flashing fire; 'and who dare to keep
Savanna from her own mistress?--I will see her.' 'Not if she forbids it, Savanna; and if her child's life should be
endangered by it?' 'O, no, to be sure not,' cried the tawny boy, who doted upon Editha,
and, having fetched her back from the next house, was lulling her to
sleep in his arms. Colonel Mordaunt started at sight of the child, and, stooping down to
kiss its rosy cheek, sighed deeply as he turned away again. 'Well,' cried Savanna, 'you talk very strange--me no understand.' 'But you shall, my excellent creature,' replied the colonel,
'immediately.' He then entered on a full explanation to Savanna; who
had no sooner heard that her mistress feared that she had been so much
exposed to the infection of the small-pox, as to make her certain of
giving it to her child, than she exclaimed, 'Oh, my good God! save and
protect her own self! She never have it, and she may get it and die!' 'Surely you must be mistaken,' replied the colonel, 'Mrs Berrendale must
have recollected and mentioned her own danger if this be the case.' 'She!' hastily interrupted the mulatto, 'she tink of herself! Never--she
only mind others' good. Do you tink, if she be one selfish beast like
her husban, Savanna love her so dear? No, Mr Colonel, me know her, and
me know though we may save the child we may lose the mother.' Here she
began to weep bitterly; while the colonel, more in love than ever with
Adeline from these proofs of her goodness, resolved to lose no time in
urging her to undergo herself the operation which she desired for
Editha. Then, begging the mulatto to send for a surgeon directly, in spite
of the tears of the tawny boy, who thought it cruel to run the risk
of spoiling Miss Editha's pretty face, he took his leave, saying
to himself, 'What a heart has this Adeline! how capable of feeling
affection! for no one can inspire it who is not able to feel it: and
this creature is thrown away on a man undeserving her, it seems!' On this intelligence he continued to muse till he arrived at Adeline's
lodgings, to whom he communicated all that had passed; and from whom
he learned, with great anxiety, that it was but too true that she had
never had the small-pox; and that, therefore, she should probably show
symptoms of the disease in a few days: consequently, as she considered
it too late for her to be inoculated, she should do all that now
remained to be done for her security, by low living and good air. That same evening Colonel Mordaunt returned to Savanna, in hopes of
learning from her some further particulars respecting Adeline's husband;
as he felt that his conscience would not be much hurt by inducing
Adeline to leave the protection of a man who was unworthy of possessing
her. Fortunately for his wishes, he could not wish to hear more than
Savanna wished to tell every thing relating to her adored lady: and
Colonel Mordaunt heard with generous indignation of the perfidious
conduct of Berrendale; vowing, at the same time, that his time, his
interest, and his fortune, should all be devoted to bring such a villain
to justice, and to secure to the injured Editha her rightful
inheritance. The mulatto was in raptures:--she told Colonel Mordaunt that he was a
charming man, and infinitely handsomer than Berrendale, though she must
own he was very good to look at; and she wished with all her soul that
Colonel Mordaunt was married to her lady; for then she believed she
would have never known sorrow, but been as happy as the day was long. Colonel Mordaunt could not hear this without a secret pang. 'Had I
followed,' said he mentally, 'the dictates of my heart when I saw
Adeline at Bath, I might now, perhaps, instead of being a forlorn
unattached being, have been a happy husband and father; and Adeline,
instead of having been the mistress of one man, the disowned wife of
another, might have been happy and beloved, and as respectable in the
eyes of the world as she is in those of her grateful mulatto.' However, there was some hope left for him yet.--Adeline, he thought, was
not a woman likely to be over-scrupulous in her ideas; and might very
naturally think herself at liberty to accept the protection of a lover,
when, from no fault of hers, she had lost that of her husband. It is natural to suppose that, while elevated with these hopes, he did
not fail to be very constant in his visits to Adeline; and that at
length, more led by passion than policy, he abruptly, at the end of ten
days, informed Adeline that he knew her situation, and that he trusted
that she would allow him to hope that in due time his love, which had
been proof against time, absence, and disdain, would meet with reward;
and that, on his settling a handsome income on her and her child for
their joint lives, she would allow him to endeavour to make her as happy
as she, and she only, could make him. To this proposal, which was in form of a letter, Colonel Mordaunt did
not receive an immediate answer; nor was it at first likely that he
should ever receive an answer to it at all, as Adeline was at the moment
of its arrival confined to her bed, according to her expectations, with
the disease which she had been but too fearful of imbibing: while the
half-distracted mulatto was forced to give up to others the care of the
sickening Editha, to watch over the delirious and unconscious Adeline. But the tawny boy's generous benefactress gave him leave to remain at
Adeline's lodgings, in order to calm his fears for Editha, and assist
in amusing and keeping her quiet; and if attention had any share in
preserving the life and beauty of Editha, it was to the affectionate
tawny boy that she owed them; and he was soon rewarded for all his care
and anxiety by seeing his little charge able to play about as usual. Colonel Mordaunt and the mulatto meanwhile did not obtain so speedy a
termination to their anxieties: Adeline's recovery was for a long time
a matter of doubt; and her weakness so great after the crisis of the
disorder was past, that none ventured to pronounce her, even then, out
of danger. But at length she was in a great measure restored to health, and able to
determine what line of conduct it was necessary for her to pursue.--To
return an answer to Colonel Mordaunt's proposals was certainly her first
business; but as she felt that the situation in which he had once
known her made his offer less affronting than it would have been under
other circumstances, she resolved to speak to him on the subject with
gentleness, not severity; especially as during her illness, to amuse the
anxiety that had preyed upon him, he had taken every possible step to
procure evidence of the marriage, and gave into Savanna's hands, the
first day that he was permitted to see her, an attested certificate of
it. The first question which Adeline asked on her recovery was, Whether any
letter had come by the general-post during her illness; and Savanna gave
one to her immediately. It was the letter so ardently desired; for the direction was in her
mother's hand-writing! and she opened it full of eager expectation,
while her whole existence seemed to depend on the nature of its contents. What then must have been her agony on finding that the _enveloppe_
contained nothing but her own letter returned! For some time she spoke
not, she breathed not; while Savanna mixed with expressions of terror,
at sight of her mistress's distress, poured execrations on the unnatural
parent who had so cruelly occasioned it. After a few days' incessant struggle to overcome the violence of her
sorrow, Adeline recovered the shock, in appearance at least: yet to
Savanna's self-congratulations she could not help answering (laying her
hand on her heart) 'The blow is here, Savanna, and the wound incurable.' Soon after she thought herself well enough to see Colonel Mordaunt,
and to thank him for the recent proof of his attention to her and her
interest. But no obligation, however great, could shut the now vigilant
eyes of Adeline to the impropriety of receiving further visits from him,
or to the guilt of welcoming to her house a man who made open
professions to her of illicit love. She however thought it her duty to see him once more, in order to try
to reconcile him to the necessity of the rule of conduct which she was
going to lay down for herself; nor was she without hope that the yet
recent traces of the disease, to which she had so nearly fallen a
victim, would make her appearance so unpleasing to the eyes of her
lover, that he would be very willing to absent himself from the house,
for some time at least, and probably give up all thoughts of her. But she did neither herself nor Colonel Mordaunt justice.--She was
formed to inspire a real and lasting passion--a passion that no external
change could destroy--since it was founded on the unchanging qualities
of the heart and mind: and Colonel Mordaunt felt for her such an
attachment in all its force. He had always admired the attractive person
and winning graces of Adeline, and felt for her what he denominated
love; but that rational though enthusiastic preference, which is
deserving of the name of true love, he never felt till he had had an
opportunity to appreciate justly the real character of Adeline: still
there were times when he felt almost gratified to reflect that she could
not legally be his; for, whatever might have been the cause and excuse
of her errors, she had erred, and the delicacy of his mind revolted at
the idea of marrying the mistress of another. But when he saw and heard Adeline, this repugnance vanished; and he knew
that, could he at those moments lead her to the altar, he should not
have hesitated to bind himself to her for ever by the sacred ties which
the early errors of her judgment had made her even in his opinion almost
unworthy to form. At length a day was fixed for his interview with Adeline, and with a
beating heart he entered the apartment; nor was his emotion diminished
when he beheld not only the usual vestiges of her complaint, but
symptoms of debility, and a death-like meagreness of aspect, which
made him fear that though one malady was conquered, another, even more
dangerous, remained. The idea overcame him; and he was forced to turn
to the window to hide his emotion: and his manner was so indicative of
ardent yet respectful attachment, that Adeline began to feel in spite of
herself that her projected task was difficult of execution. For some minutes neither of them spoke: Mordaunt held the hand which she
gave him to his heart, kissed it as she withdrew it, and again turned
away his head to conceal a starting tear: while Adeline was not sorry to
have a few moments in which to recover herself, before she addressed him
on the subject at that time nearest to the heart of both. At length she
summoned resolution enough to say:--

'Much as I have been mortified and degraded, Colonel Mordaunt, by
the letter which I have received from you, still I rejoice that I did
receive it:--in the first place, I rejoice, because I look on all the
sufferings and mortifications which I meet with as merciful chastisements,
as expiations inflicted on me in mercy by the Being whom I adore, for
the sins of which I have been guilty; and, in the second place, because
it gives me an opportunity of proving, incontrovertibly, my full
conviction of the fallacy of my past opinions, and that I became a wife,
after my idle declamations against marriage, from change of principle,
on assurance of error, and not from interest, or necessity.' Here she paused, overcome with the effort which she had made; and
Colonel Mordaunt would have interrupted her, but, earnestly conjuring
him to give her a patient hearing, she proceeded thus:--

'Had the change in my practice been the result of any thing but rational
conviction, I should now, unfortunate as I have been in the choice of a
husband, regret that ever I formed so foolish a tie, and perhaps be
induced to enter into a less sacred connexion, from an idea that that
state which forced me to drag out existence in hopeless misery was
contrary to reason, justice, and the benefit of society; and that, the
sooner its ties were dissolved, the better it would be for individual
happiness and for the world at large.' 'And do you not think so?' cried Colonel Mordaunt; 'cannot your own
individual experience convince you of it?' 'Far from it,' replied Adeline: 'and I bless God that it does not: for
thence, and thence only, do I begin to be reconciled to myself. I have
no doubt that there is a great deal of individual suffering in the
marriage state, from a contrariety of temper and other causes; but I
believe that the mass of happiness and virtue is certainly increased by
it. Individual suffering, therefore, is no argument for the abolition
of marriage, than the accidental bursting of a musket would be for the
total abolition of fire-arms.' 'But, surely, dear Mrs Berrendale, you would wish divorce to be made
easier than it is?' 'By no means.' interrupted Adeline, understanding what he was going to
say: 'to BEAR and FORBEAR I believe to be the grand secret of happiness,
and that it ought to be the great study of life: therefore, whatever
would enable married persons to separate on the slightest quarrel or
disgust, would make it so much the less necessary for us to learn this
important lesson; a lesson so needful in order to perfect the human
character, that I believe the difficulty of divorce to be one of the
greatest blessings of society.' 'What can have so completely changed your opinions on this subject?' replied Colonel Mordaunt. 'Not my own experience,' returned Adeline; 'for the painful situations
in which I have been placed, I might attribute, not to the fallacy of
the system on which I have acted, but to those existing prejudices in
society which I wish to see destroyed.' 'Then, to what else is the change in your sentiments to be attributed?' 'To a more serious, unimpassioned, and unprejudiced view of the subject
than I had before taken: at present I am not equal to expatiate on
matters so important: however, some time or other, perhaps, I may make
known to you my sentiments on them in a more ample manner: but I have, I
trust, said enough to lead you to conclude, that though Mr Berrendale's
conduct to me has been atrocious, and that you are in many respects
entitled to my gratitude and thanks, you and I must henceforward be
strangers to each other.' Colonel Mordaunt, little expecting such a total overthrow to his hopes,
was, on receiving it, choked with contending emotions; and his broken
sentences and pale cheek were sufficiently expressive of the distress
which he endured. But I shall not enter into a detail of all he urged
in favour of his passion; nor the calm, dignified, manner in which
Adeline replied. Suffice that, at last, from a sort of intuitive
knowledge of the human heart, as it were, which persons of quick talent
and sensibilities possess however defective their experience, Adeline
resolved to try to soothe the self-love which she had wounded, knowing
that self-love is scarcely to be distinguished in its effects from love
itself; and that the agony of disappointed passion is always greater
when it is inflicted by the coldness or falsehood of the beloved object,
than when it proceeds from parental prohibition, or the cruel separation
enjoined by conscious poverty. She therefore told Colonel Mordaunt that
he was once very near being the first choice of her heart: when she
first saw him, she said, his person, and manners, and attentions, had so
strongly prepossessed her in his favour, that he himself, by ceasing to
see and converse with her, could alone have saved her from the pain of a
hopeless attachment. 'In pity, spare me,' cried Mordaunt, 'the contemplation of the happiness
I might have enjoyed!' 'But you know you were not a marrying-man, as it is called; and forgive
me if I say, that men who can on system suppress the best feelings of
their nature, and prefer a course of libertine indulgence to a virtuous
connexion, at that time of life when they might become happy husbands
and fathers, with the reasonable expectation of living to see their
children grown up to manhood, and superintending their education
themselves--such men, Colonel Mordaunt, deserve, in the decline of life,
to feel that regret and that self-condemnation which you this moment
anticipate.' 'True--too true!' replied the colonel; 'but, for mercy's sake, torture
me no more.' 'I would not probe where I did not intend to make a cure,' replied
Adeline. 'A cure!--what mean you!' 'I mean to induce you, ere it be yet too late, to endeavour to form a
virtuous attachment, and to unite yourself for life with some amiable
young woman who will make you as happy as I would have endeavoured to
make you, had it been my fortunate lot to be yours: for, believe me,
Colonel Mordaunt,' and her voice faltered as she said it, 'had _he_,
whom I still continue to love with unabated tenderness, though years
have elapsed since he was taken from me,--had he bequeathed me to you on
his death-bed, the reluctance with which I went to the altar would have
been more easily overcome.' Saying this, she suddenly left the room, leaving Colonel Mordaunt
surprised, gratified, and his mind struggling between hopes and fears;
for Adeline was not conscious that she imparted hope as well as
consolation by the method which she pursued; and though she sent Savanna
to tell the colonel she could see him no more that evening, he departed
in firm expectation that Adeline would not have resolution to forbid him
to see her again. In this, however, he was mistaken; Adeline had learnt the best of all
lessons, distrust of her own strength:--and she resolved to put it out
of her power to receive visits which a regard to propriety forbade, and
which might injure her reputation, if not her peace of mind. Therefore,
as soon as Colonel Mordaunt was gone, she summoned Savanna, and desired
her to proceed to business. 'What!' cried the delighted mulatto, 'are we going to prosecu massa?' 'No,' replied Adeline, 'we are going into the country: I am come to
a determination to take no legal steps in this affair, but leave Mr
Berrendale to the reproaches of his own conscience.' 'A fiddle's end!' replied Savanna, 'he have no conscience, or he no
leave you: better get him hang, if you can; den you marry de colonel.' 'I had better hang the father of my child, had I, Savanna?' 'Oh! no, no, no, no,--me forget dat.' 'But I do not, nor can I even bear to disgrace the father of Editha:
therefore, trusting that I can dispose of her, and secure her interest
better than by forcing her father to do her justice, and bastardize the
poor innocent whom his wife will soon bring into the world, I am going
to bury myself in retirement, and live the short remainder of my days
unknowing and unknown.' Savanna was going to remonstrate, but the words 'short remainder of my
days' distressed her so much, that tears choked her words; and she
obeyed in silence her mistress's orders to pack up, except when she
indulged in a few exclamations against her lady's cruelty in going away
without taking leave of Colonel Mordaunt, who, sweet gentleman, would
break his heart at her departure, especially as he was not to know
whither she was going. A postchaise was at the door the next morning at
six o'clock; and as Adeline had not much luggage, having left the chief
part of her furniture to be divided between the mistresses of her two
lodgings, in return for their kind attention to her and her child, she
took an affectionate leave of her landlady, and desired the post-boy
to drive a mile on the road before him: and when he had done so, she
ordered him to go on to Barnet; while the disappointed mulatto thanked
God that the tawny boy was gone to Scotland with his protectress, as it
prevented her having the mortification of leaving him behind her, as
well as the colonel.--'O had I such a lover,' cried she, (her eyes
filling with tears,) 'me never leave him, nor he me!' and for the first
time she thought her angel-lady hard-hearted. For some miles they proceeded in silence, for Adeline was too much
engrossed to speak; and the little Editha, being fast asleep in the
mulatto's arms, did not draw her mother out of the reverie into which she
had fallen. 'And where now?' said the mulatto, when the chaise stopped. 'To the next stage on the high north road.' And on they went again; nor
did they stop, except for refreshments, till they had travelled thirty
miles; when Adeline, worn out with fatigue, staid all night at the
inn where the chaise stopped, and the next morning they resumed their
journey, but not their silence. The mulatto could no longer restrain her
curiosity; and she begged to know whither they were going, and why they
were to be buried in the country? Adeline, sighing deeply, answered, that they were going to live in
Cumberland; and then sunk into silence again, as she could not give the
mulatto her true reasons for the plan that she was pursuing without
wounding her affectionate heart in a manner wholly incurable. The truth
was, that Adeline supposed herself to be declining: she thought that
she experienced those dreadful languors, those sensations of internal
weakness, which, however veiled to the eye of the observer, speak in
forcible language to the heart of the conscious sufferer. Indeed,
Adeline had long struggled, but in vain, against feelings of a most
overwhelming nature; amongst which, remorse and horror, for having led
by her example and precepts an innocent girl into a life of infamy, were
the most painfully predominant: for, believing Mary Warner's assertion
when she saw her at Mr Langley's chambers, she looked upon that unhappy
girl's guilt as the consequence of her own; and mourned, incessantly
mourned, over the fatal errors of her early judgment, which had made
her, though an idolater of virtue, a practical assistant to the cause
of vice. When Adeline imagined the term of her existence to be drawing
nigh, her mother, her obdurate but still dear mother, regained her
wonted ascendancy over her affections; and to her, the approach of
death seemed fraught with satisfaction. For that parent, so long, so
repeatedly deaf to her prayers, and to the detail of those sufferings
which she had made one of the conditions of her forgiveness, had
promised to see and to forgive her on her _death-bed_; and her heart
yearned, fondly yearned, for the moment when she should be pressed to
the bosom of a relenting parent. To Cumberland, therefore, she was resolved to hasten, and into the very
neighbourhood of Mrs Mowbray; while, as the chaise wheeled them along to
the place of their destination, even the prattle of her child could not
always withdraw her from the abstraction into which she was plunged, as
the scenes of her early years thronged upon her memory, and with them
the recollection of those proofs of a mother's fondness, for a renewal
of which, even in the society of Glenmurray, she had constantly and
despondingly sighed. As they approached Penrith, her emotion redoubled, and she involuntarily
exclaimed--'Cruel, but still dear, mother, you little think your child
is so near!' 'Heaven save me!' cried Savanna; 'are we to go and be near dat woman?' 'Yes,' replied Adeline. 'Did she not say she would forgive me on my
death-bed?' 'But you not there yet, dear missess,' sobbed Savanna; 'you not there of
long years!' 'Savanna,' returned Adeline, 'I should die contented to purchase my
mother's blessing and forgiveness.' Savanna, speechless with contending emotions, could not express by words
the feeling of mixed sorrow and indignation which overwhelmed her; but
she replied by putting Editha in Adeline's arms; then articulating with
effort, 'Look there!' she sobbed aloud. 'I understand you,' said Adeline, kissing away the tears gathering in
Editha's eyes, at sight of Savanna's distress: 'but perhaps I think my
death would be of more service to my child than my life.' 'And to me too, I suppose,' replied Savanna reproachfully. 'Well,--me go
to Scotland; for no one love me but the tawny boy.' 'You will stay and close my eyes first, I hope!' observed Adeline
mournfully. In a moment Savanna's resentment vanished. 'Me will live and die vid
you,' she replied, her tears redoubling, while Adeline again sunk into
thoughtful silence. As soon as they reached Penrith, Adeline inquired for lodgings out
of the town, on that side nearest to her mother's abode; and was so
fortunate, as she esteemed herself, to procure two apartments at a small
house within two miles of Mrs Mowbray's. 'Then I breathe once more the same air with my mother!' exclaimed
Adeline as she took possession of her lodging. 'Savanna, methinks I
breathe freer already!' 'Me more choked,' replied the mulatto, and turned sullenly away. 'Nay, I--I feel so much better, that to-morrow I will--I will take a
walk,' said Adeline hesitatingly. 'And where?' asked Savanna eagerly. 'Oh, to-night I shall only walk to bed,' replied Adeline smiling; and
with unusual cheerfulness she retired to rest. The next morning she arose early; and being informed that a stile near a
peasant's cottage commanded a view of Mrs Mowbray's house, she hired a
man and cart to convey her to the bottom of the hill, and with Editha by
her side she set out to indulge her feelings by gazing on the house
which contained her mother. When they alighted, Editha gaily endeavoured to climb the hill, and
urged her mother to follow her; but Adeline, rendered weak by illness
and breathless by emotion, felt the ascent so difficult, that no motive
less powerful than the one which actuated her could have enabled her to
reach the summit. At length, however, she did reach it:--and the lawn before Mrs Mowbray's
white house, her hay-fields, and the running stream at the bottom of
it, burst in all their beauty on her view.--'And this is my mother's
dwelling!' exclaimed Adeline: 'and there was I born: and near here--'
shall I die, she would have added, but her voice failed her. 'Oh! what a pretty house and garden!' cried Editha in the unformed
accents of childhood;--'how I should like to live there!' This artless remark awakened a thousand mixed and overpowering feelings
in the bosom of Adeline; and, after a pause of strong emotion, she
exclaimed, catching the little prattler to her heart--'you _shall_ live
there, my child!--yes, yes, you _shall_ live there!' 'But when?' resumed Editha. 'When I am in my grave,' answered Adeline. 'And when shall you be there?' replied the unconscious child, fondly
caressing her: 'pray, mamma--pray be there soon!' Adeline turned away, unable to answer her. 'Look--look, mamma!' --resumed Editha: 'there are ladies.--Oh! do let us
go there now!--why can't we?' 'Would to God we could!' replied Adeline; as in one of the ladies she
recognized Mrs Mowbray, and stood gazing on her till her eyes ached
again: but what she felt on seeing her she will herself describe in the
succeeding pages: and I shall only add, that, as soon as Mrs Mowbray
returned into the house, Adeline, wrapped in a long and mournful
reverie, returned, full of a new plan, to her lodgings. There is no love so disinterested as parental love; and Adeline had all
the keen sensibilities of a parent. To make, therefore, 'assurance
doubly sure' that Mrs Mowbray should receive and should love her orphan
when she was no more, she resolved to give up the gratification to which
she had looked forward, the hope, before she died, of obtaining her
forgiveness--that she might not weaken, by directing any part of them to
herself, those feelings of remorse, fruitless tenderness, and useless
regret in her mother's bosom, which she wished should be concentrated on
her child. 'No,' said Adeline to herself, 'I am sure that she will not refuse to
receive my orphan to her love and protection when I am no more, and am
become alike insensible of reproaches and of blessings; and I think that
she will love my child the more tenderly, because to me she will be
unable to express the compunction which, sooner or later, she will feel
from the recollection of her conduct towards me: therefore, I will make
no demands on her love for myself; but, in a letter to be given her
after my decease, bequeath my orphan to her care;'--and with this
determination she returned from her ride. 'Have you see her?' said Savanna, running out to meet her. 'Yes--but not spoken to her; nor shall I see her again.' 'What--I suppose she see you, and not speak?' 'Oh, no; she did not see me, nor shall I urge her to see me: my plans
are altered,' replied Adeline. 'And we go back to town and Colonel Mordaunt?' 'No,' resumed Adeline, sighing deeply, and preparing to write to Mrs
Mowbray. But it is necessary that we should for a short time go back to
Berrendale, and relate that, while Adeline and Editha were confined with
the small-pox, Mr Drury received a summons from his employer in Jamaica
to go over thither, to be intrusted with some particular business: in
consequence of this he resolved to call again on Adeline, and inquire
whether she still persisted in styling herself Mrs Berrendale; as he
concluded that Berrendale would be very glad of all the information
relative to her and her child which he could possibly procure, whether
his curiosity on the subject proceeded from fear or love. It so happened, that as soon as Editha, as well as her mother, was in
the height of the disorder, Mr Drury called; and finding that they were
both very bad, he thought that his friend Berrendale was likely to get
rid of both his encumbrances at once; and being eager to communicate
good news to a man whose influence in the island might be a benefit to
him, he every day called to inquire concerning their health. The second floor in the house where Adeline lodged was then occupied by
a young woman in indigent circumstances, who, as well as her child, had
sickened with the distemper the very day that Editha was inoculated: and
when Drury, just as he was setting off for Portsmouth, ran to gain the
latest intelligence of the invalids, a charwoman, who attended to the
door, not being acquainted with the name of the poor young woman and her
little girl, concluding that Mr Drury, by Mrs Berrendale and miss who
were ill with the small-pox, meant them, replied to his inquiries,--'Ah,
poor things! it is all over with them, they died last night.' On which, not staying for any further intelligence, Drury set off for
Portsmouth, and arrived at Jamaica just as Berrendale was going to remit
to Adeline a draft for a hundred pounds. For Adeline and the injury
which he had done her, had been for some days constantly present to
his thoughts. He had been ill; and as indigestion, the cause of his
complaints, is apt to occasion disturbed dreams, he had in his dreams
been haunted by the image of Glenmurray, who, with a threatening aspect,
had reproached him with cruelty and base ingratitude to him, in
deserting in such a manner the wife whom he had bequeathed to him. The constant recurrence of these dreams had depressed his spirits and
excited his remorse so much, that he could calm his feelings in no other
way than by writing a kind letter to Adeline, and enclosing her a draft
on his banker. This letter was on the point of being sent when Drury
arrived, and, with very little ceremony, informed him that Adeline was
dead. 'Dead!' exclaimed Berrendale, falling almost sensless on his couch:
'Dead!--Oh! for God's sake, tell me of what she died!--Surely, surely,
she--' Here his voice failed him. Drury coolly replied, that she and her child both died of the small-pox. 'But _when_? my dear fellow!--when? Say that they died nine months ago'
(that was previous to his marriage) 'and you make me your friend for
life!' Drury, so _bribed_, would have said _any thing_; and, with all the
coolness possible, he replied, 'Then be my friend for life:--they died
rather better than nine months ago.' Berrendale, being then convinced that bigamy was not likely to be proved
against him, soon forgot, in the joy which this thought occasioned him,
remorse for his conduct to Adeline, and regret for her early fate:
besides, he concluded that he saved £100 by the means; for he knew not
that the delicate mind of Adeline would have scorned to owe pecuniary
obligations to the husband who had basely and unwarrantably deserted
her. But he was soon undeceived on this subject, by a letter which Colonel
Mordaunt wrote in confidence to a friend in Jamaica, begging him to
inquire concerning Mr Berrendale's second marriage; and to inform him
privately that his injured wife had zealous and powerful friends in
England, who were continually urging her to prosecute him for bigamy. This intelligence had a fatal effect on the health of Berrendale; for
though the violent temper and overbearing disposition of his second
wife had often made him regret the gentle and compliant Adeline, and a
separation from her, consequently, would be a blessing, still he feared
to encounter the disgrace of a prosecution, and still more the anger of
his West Indian wife; who, it was not improbable, might even attack his
life in the first moment of ungoverned passion. And to these fears he soon fell a sacrifice; for a frame debilitated by
intemperance could not support the assaults made on it by the continued
apprehensions which Colonel Mordaunt's friend had excited in him; and he
died in that gentleman's presence, whom in his last moments he had
summoned to his apartment to witness a will, by which he owned Adeline
Mowbray to be his lawful wife, and left Editha, his acknowledged and
only heir, a very considerable fortune. But this circumstance, an account of which, with the will, was
transmitted to Colonel Mordaunt, did not take place till long after
Adeline took up her abode in Cumberland. But to return to Colonel Mordaunt. Though Adeline had said that he
must discontinue his visits, he resolved to disobey her; and the next
morning, as soon as he thought she had breakfasted, he repaired to her
lodgings; where he heard, with mixed sorrow and indignation, that she
had set off in a post-chaise at six o'clock, and was gone no one knew
whither. 'But, surely she has left some note or message for me!' exclaimed
Colonel Mordaunt. 'Neither the one nor the other,' was the answer; and he returned home in
no very enviable state of mind. Various, indeed, and contradictory were his feelings: yet still
affection was uppermost; and he could not but respect in Adeline the
conduct which drove him to despair. Nor was self-love backward to
suggest to him, that had not Adeline felt his presence and attentions to
be dangerous, she would not so suddenly have withdrawn from them; and
this idea was the only one on which he could at all bear to dwell: for,
when he reflected that day after day might pass without his either
seeing or hearing from her, existence seemed to become suddenly a
burthen, and he wandered from place to place with joyless and unceasing
restlessness.