To the south then, to
the sun!-where nature is kind, where Jove has showered forth the contents of Amalthea's horn, and
earth is garden. England, late birth-place of excellence and school of the wise, thy children are gone, thy glory faded! Thou, England, wert the triumph of man! Small favour was shewn thee by thy Creator, thou Isle of
the North; a ragged canvas naturally, painted by man with alien colours; but the hues he gave are
faded, never more to be renewed. So we must leave thee, thou marvel of the world; we must bid
farewell to thy clouds, and cold, and scarcity for ever! Thy manly hearts are still; thy tale of power
and liberty at its close! Bereft of man, O little isle! the ocean waves will buffet thee, and the raven
flap his wings over thee; thy soil will be birth-place of weeds, thy sky will canopy barrenness. It was
not for the rose of Persia thou wert famous, nor the banana of the east; not for the spicy gales of
India, nor the sugar groves of America; not for thy vines nor thy double harvests, nor for thy vernal
airs, nor solstitial sun-but for thy children, their unwearied industry and lofty aspiration. They are
gone, and thou goest with them the oft trodden path that leads to oblivion, -
  Farewell, sad Isle, farewell, thy fatal glory
  Is summed, cast up, and cancelled in this story. IN the autumn of this year 2096, the spirit of emigration crept in among the few survivors, who,
congregating from various parts of England, met in London. This spirit existed as a breath, a wish, a
far off thought, until communicated to Adrian, who imbibed it with ardour, and instantly engaged
himself in plans for its execution. The fear of immediate death vanished with the heats of September. Another winter was before us, and we might elect our mode of passing it to the best advantage. Perhaps in rational philosophy none could be better chosen than this scheme of migration, which
would draw us from the immediate scene of our woe, and, leading us through pleasant and
picturesque countries, amuse for a time our despair. The idea once broached, all were impatient to
put it in execution. We were still at Windsor; our renewed hopes medicined the anguish we had suffered from the late
tragedies. The death of many of our inmates had weaned us from the fond idea, that Windsor Castle
was a spot sacred from the plague; but our lease of life was renewed for some months, and even
Idris lifted her head, as a lily after a storm, when a last sunbeam tinges its silver cup. Just at this time
Adrian came down to us; his eager looks shewed us that he was full of some scheme. He hastened to
take me aside, and disclosed to me with rapidity his plan of emigration from England. To leave England for ever! to turn from its polluted fields and groves, and, placing the sea between
us, to quit it, as a sailor quits the rock on which he has been wrecked, when the saving ship rides by. Such was his plan. To leave the country of our fathers, made holy by their graves!-We could not feel even as a
voluntary exile of old, who might for pleasure or convenience forsake his native soil; though
thousands of miles might divide him, England was still a part of him, as he of her. He heard of the
passing events of the day; he knew that, if he returned, and resumed his place in society, the
entrance was still open, and it required but the will, to surround himself at once with the associations
and habits of boyhood. Not so with us, the remnant. We left none to represent us, none to repeople
the desart land, and the name of England died, when we left her,
In vagabond pursuit of dreadful safety. Yet let us go! England is in her shroud,-we may not enchain ourselves to a corpse. Let us go-the
world is our country now, and we will choose for our residence its most fertile spot. Shall we, in
these desart halls, under this wintry sky, sit with closed eyes and folded hands, expecting death? Let
us rather go out to meet it gallantly: or perhaps-for all this pendulous orb, this fair gem in the sky's
diadem, is not surely plague-striken-perhaps, in some secluded nook, amidst eternal spring, and
waving trees, and purling streams, we may find Life. The world is vast, and England, though her many
fields and wide spread woods seem interminable, is but a small part of her. At the close of a day's
march over high mountains and through snowy vallies, we may come upon health, and committing
our loved ones to its charge, replant the uprooted tree of humanity, and send to late posterity the
tale of the ante-pestilential race, the heroes and sages of the lost state of things. Hope beckons and sorrow urges us, the heart beats high with expectation, and this eager desire of
change must be an omen of success. O come! Farewell to the dead! farewell to the tombs of those
we loved!-farewell to giant London and the placid Thames, to river and mountain or fair district,
birth-place of the wise and good, to Windsor Forest and its antique castle, farewell! themes for story
alone are they,-we must live elsewhere. Such were in part the arguments of Adrian, uttered with enthusiasm and unanswerable rapidity. Something more was in his heart, to which he dared not give words. He felt that the end of time was
come; he knew that one by one we should dwindle into nothingness. It was not adviseable to wait
this sad consummation in our native country; but travelling would give us our object for each day,
that would distract our thoughts from the swift-approaching end of things. If we went to Italy, to
sacred and eternal Rome, we might with greater patience submit to the decree, which had laid her
mighty towers low. We might lose our selfish grief in the sublime aspect of its desolation. All this was
in the mind of Adrian; but he thought of my children, and, instead of communicating to me these
resources of despair, he called up the image of health and life to be found, where we knew not-
when we knew not; but if never to be found, for ever and for ever to be sought. He won me over to
his party, heart and soul. It devolved on me to disclose our plan to Idris. The images of health and hope which I presented to
her, made her with a smile consent. With a smile she agreed to leave her country, from which she
had never before been absent, and the spot she had inhabited from infancy; the forest and its mighty
trees, the woodland paths and green recesses, where she had played in childhood, and had lived so
happily through youth; she would leave them without regret, for she hoped to purchase thus the
lives of her children. They were her life; dearer than a spot consecrated to love, dearer than all else
the earth contained. The boys heard with childish glee of our removal: Clara asked if we were to go
to Athens. "It is possible," I replied; and her countenance became radiant with pleasure. There she
would behold the tomb of her parents, and the territory filled with recollections of her father's glory. In silence, but without respite, she had brooded over these scenes. It was the recollection of them
that had turned her infant gaiety to seriousness, and had impressed her with high and restless
thoughts. There were many dear friends whom we must not leave behind, humble though they were. There
was the spirited and obedient steed which Lord Raymond had given his daughter; there was Alfred's
dog and a pet eagle, whose sight was dimmed through age. But this catalogue of favourites to be
taken with us, could not be made without grief to think of our heavy losses, and a deep sigh for the
many things we must leave behind. The tears rushed into the eyes of Idris, while Alfred and Evelyn
brought now a favourite rose tree, now a marble vase beautifully carved, insisting that these must
go, and exclaiming on the pity that we could not take the castle and the forest, the deer and the
birds, and all accustomed and cherished objects along with us. "Fond and foolish ones," I said, "we
have lost for ever treasures far more precious than these; and we desert them, to preserve treasures
to which in comparison they are nothing. Let us not for a moment forget our object and our hope;
and they will form a resistless mound to stop the overflowing of our regret for trifles." The children were easily distracted, and again returned to their prospect of future amusement. Idris
had disappeared. She had gone to hide her weakness; escaping from the castle, she had descended
to the little park, and sought solitude, that she might there indulge her tears; I found her clinging
round an old oak, pressing its rough trunk with her roseate lips, as her tears fell plenteously, and her
sobs and broken exclamations could not be suppressed; with surpassing grief I beheld this loved one
of my heart thus lost in sorrow! I drew her towards me; and, as she felt my kisses on her eyelids, as
she felt my arms press her, she revived to the knowledge of what remained to her. "You are very kind
not to reproach me," she said: "I weep, and a bitter pang of intolerable sorrow tears my heart. And
yet I am happy; mothers lament their children, wives lose their husbands, while you and my children
are left to me. Yes, I am happy, most happy, that I can weep thus for imaginary sorrows, and that the
slight loss of my adored country is not dwindled and annihilated in mightier misery. Take me where
you will; where you and my children are, there shall be Windsor, and every country will be England to
me. Let these tears flow not for myself, happy and ungrateful as I am, but for the dead world-for
our lost country-for all of love, and life, and joy, now choked in the dusty chambers of death." She spoke quickly, as if to convince herself; she turned her eyes from the trees and forest-paths she
loved; she hid her face in my bosom, and we- yes, my masculine firmness dissolved-we wept
together consolatory tears, and then calm-nay, almost cheerful, we returned to the castle. The first cold weather of an English October, made us hasten our preparations. I persuaded Idris to
go up to London, where she might better attend to necessary arrangements. I did not tell her, that to
spare her the pang of parting from inanimate objects, now the only things left, I had resolved that we
should none of us return to Windsor. For the last time we looked on the wide extent of country
visible from the terrace, and saw the last rays of the sun tinge the dark masses of wood variegated by
autumnal tints; the uncultivated fields and smokeless cottages lay in shadow below; the Thames
wound through the wide plain, and the venerable pile of Eton college, stood in dark relief, a
prominent object; the cawing of the myriad rooks which inhabited the trees of the little park, as in
column or thick wedge they speeded to their nests, disturbed the silence of evening. Nature was the
same, as when she was the kind mother of the human race; now, childless and forlorn, her fertility
was a mockery; her loveliness a mask for deformity. Why should the breeze gently stir the trees, man
felt not its refreshment? Why did dark night adorn herself with stars-man saw them not? Why are
there fruits, or flowers, or streams, man is not here to enjoy them? Idris stood beside me, her dear hand locked in mine. Her face was radiant with a smile.-"The sun is
alone," she said, "but we are not. A strange star, my Lionel, ruled our birth; sadly and with dismay we
may look upon the annihilation of man; but we remain for each other. Did I ever in the wide world
seek other than thee? And since in the wide world thou remainest, why should I complain? Thou and
nature are still true to me. Beneath the shades of night, and through the day, whose garish light
displays our solitude, thou wilt still be at my side, and even Windsor will not be regretted." I had chosen night time for our journey to London, that the change and desolation of the country
might be the less observable. Our only surviving servant drove us. We past down the steep hill, and
entered the dusky avenue of the Long Walk. At times like these, minute circumstances assume giant
and majestic proportions; the very swinging open of the white gate that admitted us into the forest,
arrested my thoughts as matter of interest; it was an every day act, never to occur again! The setting
crescent of the moon glittered through the massy trees to our right, and when we entered the park,
we scared a troop of deer, that fled bounding away in the forest shades. Our two boys quietly slept;
once, before our road turned from the view, I looked back on the castle. Its windows glistened in the
moonshine, and its heavy outline lay in a dark mass against the sky-the trees near us waved a
solemn dirge to the midnight breeze. Idris leaned back in the carriage; her two hands pressed mine,
her countenance was placid, she seemed to lose the sense of what she now left, in the memory of
what she still possessed. My thoughts were sad and solemn, yet not of unmingled pain. The very excess of our misery carried
a relief with it, giving sublimity and elevation to sorrow. I felt that I carried with me those I best
loved; I was pleased, after a long separation to rejoin Adrian; never again to part. I felt that I quitted
what I loved, not what loved me. The castle walls, and long familiar trees, did not hear the parting
sound of our carriage-wheels with regret. And, while I felt Idris to be near, and heard the regular
breathing of my children, I could not be unhappy. Clara was greatly moved; with streaming eyes,
suppressing her sobs, she leaned from the window, watching the last glimpse of her native Windsor. Adrian welcomed us on our arrival. He was all animation; you could no longer trace in his look of
health, the suffering valetudinarian; from his smile and sprightly tones you could not guess that he
was about to lead forth from their native country, the numbered remnant of the English nation, into
the tenantless realms of the south, there to die, one by one, till the LAST MAN should remain in a
voiceless, empty world. Adrian was impatient for our departure, and had advanced far in his preparations. His wisdom guided
all. His care was the soul, to move the luckless crowd, who relied wholly on him. It was useless to
provide many things, for we should find abundant provision in every town. It was Adrian's wish to
prevent all labour; to bestow a festive appearance on this funeral train. Our numbers amounted to
not quite two thousand persons. These were not all assembled in London, but each day witnessed
the arrival of fresh numbers, and those who resided in the neighbouring towns, had received orders
to assemble at one place, on the twentieth of November. Carriages and horses were provided for all;
captains and under officers chosen, and the whole assemblage wisely organized. All obeyed the Lord
Protector of dying England; all looked up to him. His council was chosen, it consisted of about fifty
persons. Distinction and station were not the qualifications of their election. We had no station
among us, but that which benevolence and prudence gave; no distinction save between the living
and the dead. Although we were anxious to leave England before the depth of winter, yet we were
detained. Small parties had been dispatched to various parts of England, in search of stragglers; we
would not go, until we had assured ourselves that in all human probability we did not leave behind a
single human being. On our arrival in London, we found that the aged Countess of Windsor was residing with her son in
the palace of the Protectorate; we repaired to our accustomed abode near Hyde Park. Idris now for
the first time for many years saw her mother, anxious to assure herself that the childishness of old
age did not mingle with unforgotten pride, to make this high-born dame still so inveterate against
me. Age and care had furrowed her cheeks, and bent her form; but her eye was still bright, her
manners authoritative and unchanged; she received her daughter coldly, but displayed more feeling
as she folded her grand-children in her arms. It is our nature to wish to continue our systems and
thoughts to posterity through our own offspring. The Countess had failed in this design with regard
to her children; perhaps she hoped to find the next remove in birth more tractable. Once Idris named
me casually-a frown, a convulsive gesture of anger, shook her mother, and, with voice trembling
with hate, she said-"I am of little worth in this world; the young are impatient to push the old off
the scene; but, Idris, if you do not wish to see your mother expire at your feet, never again name that
person to me; all else I can bear; and now I am resigned to the destruction of my cherished hopes:
but it is too much to require that I should love the instrument that providence gifted with murderous
properties for my destruction." This was a strange speech, now that, on the empty stage, each might play his part without
impediment from the other. But the haughty Ex-Queen thought as Octavius Caesar and Mark Antony,
  We could not stall together
  In the whole world. The period of our departure was fixed for the twenty-fifth of November. The weather was
temperate; soft rains fell at night, and by day the wintry sun shone out. Our numbers were to move
forward in separate parties, and to go by different routes, all to unite at last at Paris. Adrian and his
division, consisting in all of five hundred persons, were to take the direction of Dover and Calais. On
the twentieth of November, Adrian and I rode for the last time through the streets of London. They
were grass-grown and desert. The open doors of the empty mansions creaked upon their hinges;
rank herbage, and deforming dirt, had swiftly accumulated on the steps of the houses; the voiceless
steeples of the churches pierced the smokeless air; the churches were open, but no prayer was
offered at the altars; mildew and damp had already defaced their ornaments; birds, and tame
animals, now homeless, had built nests, and made their lairs in consecrated spots. We passed St.
Paul's. London, which had extended so far in suburbs in all direction, had been somewhat deserted in
the midst, and much of what had in former days obscured this vast building was removed. Its
ponderous mass, blackened stone, and high dome, made it look, not like a temple, but a tomb. Methought above the portico was engraved the Hic jacet of England. We passed on eastwards,
engaged in such solemn talk as the times inspired. No human step was heard, nor human form
discerned. Troops of dogs, deserted of their masters, passed us; and now and then a horse, unbridled
and unsaddled, trotted towards us, and tried to attract the attention of those which we rode, as if to
allure them to seek like liberty. An unwieldy ox, who had fed in an abandoned granary, suddenly
lowed, and shewed his shapeless form in a narrow door-way; every thing was desert; but nothing
was in ruin. And this medley of undamaged buildings, and luxurious accommodation, in trim and
fresh youth, was contrasted with the lonely silence of the unpeopled streets. Night closed in, and it began to rain. We were about to return homewards, when a voice, a human
voice, strange now to hear, attracted our attention. It was a child singing a merry, lightsome air;
there was no other sound. We had traversed London from Hyde Park even to where we now were in
the Minories, and had met no person, heard no voice nor footstep. The singing was interrupted by
laughing and talking; never was merry ditty so sadly timed, never laughter more akin to tears. The
door of the house from which these sounds proceeded was open, the upper rooms were illuminated
as for a feast. It was a large magnificent house, in which doubtless some rich merchant had lived. The
singing again commenced, and rang through the high-roofed rooms, while we silently ascended the
stair-case. Lights now appeared to guide us; and a long suite of splendid rooms illuminated, made us
still more wonder. Their only inhabitant, a little girl, was dancing, waltzing, and singing about them,
followed by a large Newfoundland dog, who boisterously jumping on her, and interrupting her, made
her now scold, now laugh, now throw herself on the carpet to play with him. She was dressed
grotesquely, in glittering robes and shawls fit for a woman; she appeared about ten years of age. We
stood at the door looking on this strange scene, till the dog perceiving us barked loudly; the child
turned and saw us: her face, losing its gaiety, assumed a sullen expression: she slunk back, apparently
meditating an escape. I came up to her, and held her hand; she did not resist, but with a stern brow,
so strange in childhood, so different from her former hilarity, she stood still, her eyes fixed on the
ground. "What do you do here?" I said gently; "Who are you? "-she was silent, but trembled
violently.-"My poor child," asked Adrian, "are you alone?" There was a winning softness in his voice,
that went to the heart of the little girl; she looked at him, then snatching her hand from me, threw
herself into his arms, clinging round his neck, ejaculating-"Save me! save me!" while her unnatural
sullenness dissolved in tears. "I will save you," he replied, "of what are you afraid? you need not fear my friend, he will do you no
harm. Are you alone?" "No, Lion is with me." "And your father and mother?-"
"I never had any; I am a charity girl. Every body is gone, gone for a great, great many days; but if they
come back and find me out, they will beat me so!" Her unhappy story was told in these few words: an orphan, taken on pretended charity, ill-treated
and reviled, her oppressors had died: unknowing of what had passed around her, she found herself
alone; she had not dared venture out, but by the continuance of her solitude her courage revived,
her childish vivacity caused her to play a thousand freaks, and with her brute companion she passed
a long holiday, fearing nothing but the return of the harsh voices and cruel usage of her protectors. She readily consented to go with Adrian. In the mean time, while we descanted on alien sorrows, and on a solitude which struck our eyes and
not our hearts, while we imagined all of change and suffering that had intervened in these once
thronged streets, before, tenantless and abandoned, they became mere kennels for dogs, and
stables for cattle:-while we read the death of the world upon the dark fane, and hugged ourselves
in the remembrance that we possessed that which was all the world to us-in the meanwhile--
We had arrived from Windsor early in October, and had now been in London about six weeks. Day by
day, during that time, the health of my Idris declined: her heart was broken; neither sleep nor
appetite, the chosen servants of health, waited on her wasted form. To watch her children hour by
hour, to sit by me, drinking deep the dear persuasion that I remained to her, was all her pastime. Her
vivacity, so long assumed, her affectionate display of cheerfulness, her light-hearted tone and springy
gait were gone. I could not disguise to myself, nor could she conceal, her life-consuming sorrow. Still
change of scene, and reviving hopes might restore her; I feared the plague only, and she was
untouched by that. I had left her this evening, reposing after the fatigues of her preparations. Clara sat beside her,
relating a story to the two boys. The eyes of Idris were closed: but Clara perceived a sudden change
in the appearance of our eldest darling; his heavy lids veiled his eyes, an unnatural colour burnt in his
cheeks, his breath became short. Clara looked at the mother; she slept, yet started at the pause the
narrator made- Fear of awakening and alarming her, caused Clara to go on at the eager call of
Evelyn, who was unaware of what was passing. Her eyes turned alternately from Alfred to Idris; with
trembling accents she continued her tale, till she saw the child about to fall: starting forward she
caught him, and her cry roused Idris. She looked on her son. She saw death stealing across his
features; she laid him on a bed, she held drink to his parched lips. Yet he might be saved. If I were there, he might be saved; perhaps it was not the plague. Without a
counsellor, what could she do? stay and behold him die! Why at that moment was I away? "Look to
him, Clara," she exclaimed, "I will return immediately." She inquired among those who, selected as the companions of our journey, had taken up their
residence in our house; she heard from them merely that I had gone out with Adrian. She entreated
them to seek me: she returned to her child, he was plunged in a frightful state of torpor; again she
rushed down stairs; all was dark, desert, and silent; she lost all self-possession; she ran into the
street; she called on my name. The pattering rain and howling wind alone replied to her. Wild fear
gave wings to her feet; she darted forward to seek me, she knew not where; but, putting all her
thoughts, all her energy, all her being in speed only, most misdirected speed, she neither felt, nor
feared, nor paused, but ran right on, till her strength suddenly deserted her so suddenly, that she had
not thought to save herself. Her knees failed her, and she fell heavily on the pavement. She was
stunned for a time; but at length rose, and though sorely hurt, still walked on, shedding a fountain of
tears, stumbling at times, going she knew not whither, only now and then with feeble voice she
called my name, adding with heart-piercing exclamations, that I was cruel and unkind. Human being
there was none to reply; and the inclemency of the night had driven the wandering animals to the
habitations they had usurped. Her thin dress was drenched with rain; her wet hair clung round her
neck; she tottered through the dark streets; till, striking her foot against an unseen impediment, she
again fell; she could not rise; she hardly strove; but, gathering up her limbs, she resigned herself to
the fury of the elements, and the bitter grief of her own heart. She breathed an earnest prayer to die
speedily, for there was no relief but death. While hopeless of safety for herself, she ceased to lament
for her dying child, but shed kindly, bitter tears for the grief I should experience in losing her. While
she lay, life almost suspended, she felt a warm, soft hand on her brow, and a gentle female voice
asked her, with expressions of tender compassion, if she could not rise? That another human being,
sympathetic and kind, should exist near, roused her; half rising, with clasped hands, and fresh
springing tears, she entreated her companion to seek for me, to bid me hasten to my dying child, to
save him, for the love of heaven, to save him! The woman raised her; she led her under shelter, she entreated her to return to her home, whither
perhaps I had already returned. Idris easily yielded to her persuasions, she leaned on the arm of her
friend, she endeavoured to walk on, but irresistible faintness made her pause again and again. Quickened by the encreasing storm, we had hastened our return, our little charge was placed before
Adrian on his horse. There was an assemblage of persons under the portico of our house, in whose
gestures I instinctively read some heavy change, some new misfortune. With swift alarm, afraid to
ask a single question, I leapt from my horse; the spectators saw me, knew me, and in awful silence
divided to make way for me. I snatched a light, and rushing up stairs, and hearing a groan, without
reflection I threw open the door of the first room that presented itself. It was quite dark; but, as I
stept within, a pernicious scent assailed my senses, producing sickening qualms, which made their
way to my very heart, while I felt my leg clasped, and a groan repeated by the person that held me. I
lowered my lamp, and saw a negro half clad, writhing under the agony of disease, while he held me
with a convulsive grasp. With mixed horror and impatience I strove to disengage myself, and fell on
the sufferer; he wound his naked festering arms round me, his face was close to mine, and his
breath, death-laden, entered my vitals. For a moment I was overcome, my head was bowed by
aching nausea; till, reflection returning, I sprung up, threw the wretch from me, and darting up the
staircase, entered the chamber usually inhabited by my family. A dim light shewed me Alfred on a
couch; Clara trembling, and paler than whitest snow, had raised him on her arm, holding a cup of
water to his lips. I saw full well that no spark of life existed in that ruined form, his features were
rigid, his eyes glazed, his head had fallen back. I took him from her, I laid him softly down, kissed his
cold little mouth, and turned to speak in a vain whisper, when loudest sound of thunderlike cannon
could not have reached him in his immaterial abode. And where was Idris? That she had gone out to seek me, and had not returned, were fearful tidings,
while the rain and driving wind clattered against the window, and roared round the house. Added to
this, the sickening sensation of disease gained upon me; no time was to be lost, if ever I would see
her again. I mounted my horse and rode out to seek her, fancying that I heard her voice in every gust,
oppressed by fever and aching pain. I rode in the dark and rain through the labyrinthine streets of unpeopled London. My child lay dead
at home; the seeds of mortal disease had taken root in my bosom; I went to seek Idris, my adored,
now wandering alone, while the waters were rushing from heaven like a cataract to bathe her dear
head in chill damp, her fair limbs in numbing cold. A female stood on the step of a door, and called to
me as I gallopped past. It was not Idris; so I rode swiftly on, until a kind of second sight, a reflection
back again on my senses of what I had seen but not marked, made me feel sure that another figure,
thin, graceful and tall, stood clinging to the foremost person who supported her. In a minute I was
beside the suppliant, in a minute I received the sinking Idris in my arms. Lifting her up, I placed her on
the horse; she had not strength to support herself; so I mounted behind her, and held her close to
my bosom, wrapping my riding-cloak round her, while her companion, whose well known, but
changed countenance, (it was Juliet, daughter of the Duke of L--) could at this moment of horror
obtain from me no more than a passing glance of compassion. She took the abandoned rein, and
conducted our obedient steed homewards. Dare I avouch it? That was the last moment of my
happiness; but I was happy. Idris must die, for her heart was broken: I must die, for I had caught the
plague; earth was a scene of desolation; hope was madness; life had married death; they were one;
but, thus supporting my fainting love, thus feeling that I must soon die, I revelled in the delight of
possessing her once more; again and again I kissed her, and pressed her to my heart. We arrived at our home. I assisted her to dismount, I carried her up stairs, and gave her into Clara's
care, that her wet garments might be changed. Briefly I assured Adrian of her safety, and requested
that we might be left to repose. As the miser, who with trembling caution visits his treasure to count
it again and again, so I numbered each moment, and grudged every one that was not spent with
Idris. I returned swiftly to the chamber where the life of my life reposed; before I entered the room I
paused for a few seconds; for a few seconds I tried to examine my state; sickness and shuddering
ever and anon came over me; my head was heavy, my chest oppressed, my legs bent under me; but I
threw off resolutely the swift growing symptoms of my disorder, and met Idris with placid and even
joyous looks. She was lying on a couch; carefully fastening the door to prevent all intrusion; I sat by
her, we embraced, and our lips met in a kiss long drawn and breathless-would that moment had
been my last! Maternal feeling now awoke in my poor girl's bosom, and she asked: "And
Alfred?" "Idris," I replied, "we are spared to each other, we are together; do not let any other idea intrude. I
am happy; even on this fatal night, I declare myself happy, beyond all name, all thought-what would
you more, sweet one?" Idris understood me: she bowed her head on my shoulder and wept. "Why," she again asked, "do
you tremble, Lionel, what shakes you thus?" "Well may I be shaken," I replied, "happy as I am. Our child is dead, and the present hour is dark and
ominous. Well may I tremble! but, I am happy, mine own Idris, most happy." "I understand thee, my kind love," said Idris, "thus-pale as thou art with sorrow at our loss;
trembling and aghast, though wouldest assuage my grief by thy dear assurances. I am not happy,"
(and the tears flashed and fell from under her down-cast lids), "for we are inmates of a miserable
prison, and there is no joy for us; but the true love I bear you will render this and every other loss
endurable." "We have been happy together, at least," I said; "no future misery can deprive us of the past. We
have been true to each other for years, ever since my sweet princess-love came through the snow to
the lowly cottage of the poverty-striken heir of the ruined Verney. Even now, that eternity is before
us, we take hope only from the presence of each other. Idris, do you think, that when we die, we
shall be divided?" "Die! when we die! what mean you? What secret lies hid from me in those dreadful words?" "Must we not all die, dearest?" I asked with a sad smile. "Gracious God! are you ill, Lionel, that you speak of death? My only friend, heart of my heart, speak!" "I do not think," replied I, "that we have any of us long to live; and when the curtain drops on this
mortal scene, where, think you, we shall find ourselves?" Idris was calmed by my unembarrassed
tone and look; she answered:-"You may easily believe that during this long progress of the plague, I
have thought much on death, and asked myself, now that all mankind is dead to this life, to what
other life they may have been borne. Hour after hour, I have dwelt on these thoughts, and strove to
form a rational conclusion concerning the mystery of a future state. What a scare-crow, indeed,
would death be, if we were merely to cast aside the shadow in which we now walk, and, stepping
forth into the unclouded sunshine of knowledge and love, revived with the same companions, the
same affections, and reached the fulfilment of our hopes, leaving our fears with our earthly vesture
in the grave. Alas! the same strong feeling which makes me sure that I shall not wholly die, makes me
refuse to believe that I shall live wholly as I do now. Yet, Lionel, never, never, can I love any but you;
through eternity I must desire your society; and, as I am innocent of harm to others, and as relying
and confident as my mortal nature permits, I trust that the Ruler of the world will never tear us
asunder." "Your remarks are like yourself, dear love," replied I, "gentle and good; let us cherish such a belief,
and dismiss anxiety from our minds. But, sweet, we are so formed, (and there is no sin, if God made
our nature, to yield to what he ordains), we are so formed, that we must love life, and cling to it; we
must love the living smile, the sympathetic touch, and thrilling voice, peculiar to our mortal
mechanism. Let us not, through security in hereafter, neglect the present. This present moment,
short as it is, is a part of eternity, and the dearest part, since it is our own unalienably. Thou, the
hope of my futurity, art my present joy. Let me then look on thy dear eyes, and, reading love in them,
drink intoxicating pleasure." Timidly, for my vehemence somewhat terrified her, Idris looked on me. My eyes were bloodshot,
starting from my head; every artery beat, methought, audibly, every muscle throbbed, each single
nerve felt. Her look of wild affright told me, that I could no longer keep my secret:-"So it is, mine
own beloved," I said, "the last hour of many happy ones is arrived, nor can we shun any longer the
inevitable destiny. I cannot live long-but, again and again, I say, this moment is ours!" Paler than marble, with white lips and convulsed features, Idris became aware of my situation. My
arm, as I sat, encircled her waist. She felt the palm burn with fever, even on the heart it pressed:-
"One moment," she murmured, scarce audibly, "only one moment. "-
She kneeled, and hiding her face in her hands, uttered a brief, but earnest prayer, that she might
fulfil her duty, and watch over me to the last. While there was hope, the agony had been
unendurable;-all was now concluded; her feelings became solemn and calm. Even as Epicharis,
unperturbed and firm, submitted to the instruments of torture, did Idris, suppressing every sigh and
sign of grief, enter upon the endurance of torments, of which the rack and the wheel are but faint
and metaphysical symbols. I was changed; the tight-drawn cord that sounded so harshly was loosened, the moment that Idris
participated in my knowledge of our real situation. The perturbed and passion-tossed waves of
thought subsided, leaving only the heavy swell that kept right on without any outward manifestation
of its disturbance, till it should break on the remote shore towards which I rapidly advanced:-"It is
true that I am sick," I said, "and your society, my Idris is my only medicine; come, and sit beside me." She made me lie down on the couch, and, drawing a low ottoman near, sat close to my pillow,
pressing my burning hands in her cold palms. She yielded to my feverish restlessness, and let me talk,
and talked to me, on subjects strange indeed to beings, who thus looked the last, and heard the last,
of what they loved alone in the world. We talked of times gone by; of the happy period of our early
love; of Raymond, Perdita, and Evadne. We talked of what might arise on this desert earth, if, two or
three being saved, it were slowly re-peopled.-We talked of what was beyond the tomb; and, man in
his human shape being nearly extinct, we felt with certainty of faith, that other spirits, other minds,
other perceptive beings, sightless to us, must people with thought and love this beauteous and
imperishable universe. We talked-I know not how long-but, in the morning I awoke from a painful heavy slumber; the
pale cheek of Idris rested on my pillow; the large orbs of her eyes half raised the lids, and shewed the
deep blue lights beneath; her lips were unclosed, and the slight murmurs they formed told that, even
while asleep, she suffered. "If she were dead," I thought, "what difference? now that form is the
temple of a residing deity; those eyes are the windows of her soul; all grace, love, and intelligence
are throned on that lovely bosom-were she dead, where would this mind, the dearer half of mine,
be? For quickly the fair proportion of this edifice would be more defaced, than are the sand-choked
ruins of the desert temples of Palmyra." IDRIS stirred and awoke; alas! she awoke to misery. She saw the signs of disease on my countenance,
and wondered how she could permit the long night to pass without her having sought, not cure, that
was impossible, but alleviation to my sufferings. She called Adrian; my couch was quickly surrounded
by friends and assistants, and such medicines as were judged fitting were administered. It was the
peculiar and dreadful distinction of our visitation, that none who had been attacked by the pestilence
had recovered. The first symptom of the disease was the death-warrant, which in no single instance
had been followed by pardon or reprieve. No gleam of hope therefore cheered my friends. While fever producing torpor, heavy pains, sitting like lead on my limbs, and making my breast
heave, were upon me; I continued insensible to every thing but pain, and at last even to that. I awoke
on the fourth morning as from a dreamless sleep. An irritating sense of thirst, and, when I strove to
speak or move, an entire dereliction of power, was all I felt. For three days and nights Idris had not moved from my side. She administered to all my wants, and
never slept nor rested. She did not hope; and therefore she neither endeavoured to read the
physician's countenance, nor to watch for symptoms of recovery. All her thought was to attend on
me to the last, and then to lie down and die beside me. On the third night animation was suspended;
to the eye and touch of all I was dead. With earnest prayer, almost with force, Adrian tried to draw
Idris from me. He exhausted every adjuration, her child's welfare and his own. She shook her head,
and wiped a stealing tear from her sunk cheek, but would not yield; she entreated to be allowed to
watch me that one night only, with such affliction and meek earnestness, that she gained her point,
and sat silent and motionless, except when, stung by intolerable remembrance, she kissed my closed
eyes and pallid lips, and pressed my stiffening hands to her beating heart. At dead of night, when, though it was mid winter, the cock crowed at three o'clock, as herald of the
morning change, while hanging over me, and mourning in silent, bitter thought for the loss of all of
love towards her that had been enshrined in my heart; her dishevelled hair hung over her face, and
the long tresses fell on the bed; she saw one ringlet in motion, and the scattered hair slightly stirred,
as by a breath. It is not so, she thought, for he will never breathe more. Several times the same thing
occurred, and she only marked it by the same reflection; till the whole ringlet waved back, and she
thought she saw my breast heave. Her first emotion was deadly fear, cold dew stood on her brow;
my eyes half opened; and, re-assured, she would have exclaimed, "He lives!" but the words were
choked by a spasm, and she fell with a groan on the floor. Adrian was in the chamber. After long watching, he had unwillingly fallen into a sleep. He started up,
and beheld his sister senseless on the earth, weltering in a stream of blood that gushed from her
mouth. Encreasing signs of life in me in some degree explained her state; the surprise, the burst of
joy, the revulsion of every sentiment, had been too much for her frame, worn by long months of
care, late shattered by every species of woe and toil. She was now in far greater danger than I, the
wheels and springs of my life, once again set in motion, acquired elasticity from their short
suspension. For a long time, no one believed that I should indeed continue to live; during the reign of
the plague upon earth, not one person, attacked by the grim disease, had recovered. My restoration
was looked on as a deception; every moment it was expected that the evil symptoms would recur
with redoubled violence, until confirmed convalescence, absence of all fever or pain, and encreasing
strength, brought slow conviction that I had recovered from the plague. The restoration of Idris was more problematical. When I had been attacked by illness, her cheeks
were sunk, her form emaciated; but now, the vessel, which had broken from the effects of extreme
agitation, did not entirely heal, but was as a channel that drop by drop drew from her the ruddy
stream that vivified her heart. Her hollow eyes and worn countenance had a ghastly appearance; her
cheek-bones, her open fair brow, the projection of the mouth, stood fearfully prominent; you might
tell each bone in the thin anatomy of her frame. Her hand hung powerless; each joint lay bare, so
that the light penetrated through and through. It was strange that life could exist in what was wasted
and worn into a very type of death. To take her from these heart-breaking scenes, to lead her to forget the world's desolation in the
variety of objects presented by travelling, and to nurse her failing strength in the mild climate
towards which we had resolved to journey, was my last hope for her preservation. The preparations
for our departure, which had been suspended during my illness, were renewed. I did not revive to
doubtful convalescence; health spent her treasures upon me; as the tree in spring may feel from its
wrinkled limbs the fresh green break forth, and the living sap rise and circulate, so did the renewed
vigour of my frame, the cheerful current of my blood, the new-born elasticity of my limbs, influence
my mind to cheerful endurance and pleasurable thoughts. My body, late the heavy weight that
bound me to the tomb, was exuberant with health; mere common exercises were insufficient for my
reviving strength; methought I could emulate the speed of the race-horse, discern through the air
objects at a blinding distance, hear the operations of nature in her mute abodes; my senses had
become so refined and susceptible after my recovery from mortal disease. Hope, among my other blessings, was not denied to me; and I did fondly trust that my unwearied
attentions would restore my adored girl. I was therefore eager to forward our preparations. According to the plan first laid down, we were to have quitted London on the twenty-fifth of
November; and, in pursuance of this scheme, two-thirds of our people-thepeople- all that
remained of England, had gone forward, and had already been some weeks in Paris. First my illness,
and subsequently that of Idris, had detained Adrian with his division, which consisted of three
hundred persons, so that we now departed on the first of January, 2098. It was my wish to keep Idris
as distant as possible from the hurry and clamour of the crowd, and to hide from her those
appearances that would remind her most forcibly of our real situation. We separated ourselves to a
great degree from Adrian, who was obliged to give his whole time to public business. The Countess of
Windsor travelled with her son. Clara, Evelyn, and a female who acted as our attendant, were the
only persons with whom we had contact. We occupied a commodious carriage, our servant officiated
as coachman. A party of about twenty persons preceded us at a small distance. They had it in charge
to prepare our halting places and our nightly abode. They had been selected for this service out of a
great number that offered, on account of the superior sagacity of the man who had been appointed
their leader.