At the moment when this devout aspiration issued from the pious bosom of Mary,
she was alarmed by a loud and instantaneous noise at her window; the glass gave way;
something fell on the floor, with a violent noise. She started to the other end of the room;
and, in making her retreat, threw down her candle, and extinguished it. All was again quiet in the room; yet poor Mary had not courage to walk to the
shattered window, or even to look towards it. She knew that the cause of her alarm still
lay on the floor; and, with palpitating heart, and trembling limbs, she seated herself on the
bed, behind the drawn curtains, till a voice at the door, which she knew to be the housemaid's,
whom she had seen in the morning, aroused her attention with "Miss, Miss
Cuthbert; be you asleep, Miss?" Mary immediately answered in the negative, and
unbolted the door, though in doing so, she walked over the fragments of glass, which
were plentifully scattered over the floor. "Lah, Miss," said the maid, "I warnest you must have been mainly frightened; you
looks as pale as a ghost, pretty nigh. To be sure the noise were enough to wake the dead,
but you'll be used to us in time," giving a knowing wink. "What is the meaning of this? Who threw it at my window?" said Mary, picking
up a large battledore, and blushing to think that she had feared to approach it. "Surely,
Miss Moreton could not countenance an insult like this?" "Lah's me, Miss, why Miss
Moreton knows nothing at all about it. Mr. Germ was entirely by his own self." "Mr. Germ!" repeated Mary, "A man of his advanced age to play so boyish a
trick; you surprise me!" "Yes, yes, Miss, he does; and 'tis an even chance that he doesn't go to his bed till
day-break, for he told me to ask your pardon, and to fetch un his battledoor again." "Lah's, Sir," says I, "now do'e please to call un battle-window for the future." He
said I was a silly wench, and bid me go along, but I don't mind the Floss-all-over much." "If he means to repeat his attacks, I had better wait for day-break too," said Mary,
calmly assisting the servant in picking up the pieces of broken glass. "Oh! he mayn't
come along this way again for the night, Miss; he's only batting and owling hood now;
and so he went with his battledoor, to knock down one of the leather-wings, just as he
went flap, flap, against your window; and then it all went crash, crash, and off flew the
bat. And I declare for my partickler part, I thought the whole house was coming down
about our ears. "But, lah's me, Miss, I must run to old Germ, for he's had no sport this blessed
night; not one bat or screech owl has he caught. I'll come up again directly, Miss, to make
the window shutters fast, and then you'll be safe, and then I'll make you comfortable; and
to-morrow we'll have the glazier; though if I was somebody, and mistress of the Antic
Villar, I wou'd know who should pay for the mending." Quite recovered from her affright, and reconciled to the occasion of it, now that
she found that it had proceeded entirely from accident, Mary was inclined to smile at the
vulgar simplicity of the girl; but she was careful not to encourage her in her loquacity, and
she readily saw that Kitty did not want it, for on her return to the apartment, she resumed
her discourse. "Well, the old gentleman is as pleased as punch, and he's gone into the shubbery,
batting and owling again; such a rare curious sight! 'Sir,' says I, 'I'm afeard you'll catch
cold in pursuing them enauseous beasts.' 'Beasts,' says he, 'they are no beasts.' 'Lah's, Sir,' says I again, 'dont'ee say so, for you must remember what a beastly
mess the last owl as your honour catch'd made about the little dressing-room where you
kept it.' He turned upon his heel, for he couldn't well answer to this; and away he ran,
with his battledoor in his hand, his green specticles on his nose, and a red handkercher
tied under his chin; a body would think he was crazy as did'nt know his ways. Well,
Miss, I must wish'ee good night, and hope as how you will have nothink to disturb'ee no
more to-night." Mary hoped so too, and, glad to be rid of her talkative companion, she
resigned herself to the influence of sleep. "Ah, little think the gay licentious proud,
------"How many drink the cup
"Of baleful grief, and eat the bitter bread
"Of misery." THOMSON. MARY Cuthbert awoke early; and, perceiving that it was a very fine morning, she
determined to indulge herself with a walk, being assured that she should not be liable to
meet any of the inmates of the Villa, unless it was Mr. Germ; and she guessed that even
the philosopher would be more inclined to seek sleep than snails, after his nocturnal
rambles. Mary strolled round the park, and was delighted with a lovely and richly
variegated prospect. She seemed borne out of herself, and her own concerns, whilst
wandering over these new and luxurious scenes; and whilst lifting up her heart, in
gratitude and praise, to the Fountain and Giver of all Good, her spirits seemed
strengthened and exhilarated. Following as fancy led, she got beyond the precincts of the park, and found herself
on the verge of a common, skirted by a wood. A neat little cottage was in sight; she
walked towards it; and when she had reached it, her curiosity was greatly attracted, at
seeing a very lovely young woman standing at the door, and holding an infant in her arms,
apparently in great distress, as her tears, and the agitation with which she continually
folded the innocent to her bosom, plainly bespoke. Ever ready to sympathise with the unfortunate, Mary gently inquired what was the
matter? The young woman started at hearing the voice of a stranger; having been too
much occupied in her own reflections to perceive her approach. "Is it possible for me to
be of any assistance to you?" asked Mary. Her soft voice spoke to the heart; the tears of
the young woman could no longer be restrained; they forced their way in torrents down
her pallid cheeks. But this was a momentary affection; for, turning half aside, as if
ashamed at discovering her feelings, a bitter and harsh expression overspread her
countenance, as she said, "No, I thank you, Ma'am, the rich and the powerful have no
right to be troubled with griefs that they know nothing about." "I am neither rich or
powerful," said Mary, "and after acknowledging this, you may perhaps think my curiosity
wholly impertinent, as I cannot be essentially useful, but the will to alleviate distress is
mine." "You come from the Villa, I suppose, Madam?" said the young woman, with an
incredulous look. "I do," said Mary; "I have been there two days; I am quite a stranger in
this country, but Miss Moreton will, I make no doubt, exert herself to relieve your
distress, if you will make it known to her!" "You are a stranger, I perceive, Madam. Ah! Miss Moreton wouldn't hear of my distress; 'tis of a common kind: My husband's long
illness, his consequent loss of work, four helpless little ones-" she stopped and wiped
her eyes. "What is your husband's business?" asked Mary. "A carpenter, Madam; and in
Mr. Moreton's time he had constant employ at the Villa." "And has he never worked for
his daughter?" asked Mary. "Oh, yes, Ma'am, and it was there that he got his hurt." "He had an accident, then?" "Oh, yes, Ma'am; and, acting against his conscience,
as I may say, he has sometimes thought that it was a judgment upon him; but William
was only working in the way of his occupation, and, as I have often told him, if he had
not done it, another would; but he cannot make himself easy, though he told his mind,
broad plain to Miss Moreton, in the beginning, and that is more than many of them do
that are about her. 'Tis a thousand pities; for if she had not been spoiled, she might have
made a nice young lady, and been the glory of the country." "But your husband," said Mary; "speak of his accident," willing to hear the story
rather than any remarks on Miss Moreton. "Will you condescend to sit down, Madam?" and Mary walked into the cottage, and sat down in a room where neatness appeared
struggling with poverty, and where one child was spreading the breakfast on the lowly
board, whilst two smaller ones were looking on. "These are my four babes," said the mother, still holding the infant in her arms;
"my poor William is not able to get up to breakfast this morning." "I fear, I shall interrupt you," said Mary; "I would not retard your meal." "Oh
dear, no, Ma'am, we shall not breakfast till William has had his nap; he had but a
troublesome night of it, and so fell into a little doze this morning; but grief is wakeful, I
could not rest, so, as soon as he was fast, I stole from his side to stand at my door, and to
think of all that is likely to befal me. For, I thank God!" wiping her eyes, "I still contrive
to carry a cheerful face before poor William, although my heart is pretty nigh breaking!" Mary sighed at the sight of the genuine distress, depicted in the countenance of the
young woman, as she uttered the last words. "Ah! Madam, forgive me; but you seem to
feel for the unhappy; to be good and kind; and there is so little of this to be met with, that
one is apt to be too bold; but I will go on with my story. "William's father, Madam, was a carpenter, and bred his son to his own business;
they were born and bred in this very cottage, and father and son always worked at the
Villa. But in the days of my husband's father it was not called a Villa, no, Madam, it was
Rutton Court; the family of the Ruttons were known centuries back in this country; they
always lived in the great house, and were beloved and respected; they never raised their
old tenants, or discharged their old servants; they had a chapel in their own house, and
any body who liked might attend service there twice every Sunday. And the chaplain
would visit all that wished it, and give comfort to the souls of their poor neighbours;
while the Squire would take care that their bodies were in no want. The last Squire Rutton
died without a will, and childless; the property went amongst a plenty of distant relations
very far off, so there was a sale of Rutton Manor, and every thing belonging to it, and Mr.
Moreton, you see, Ma'am, being a very lucky man in the trading way, came into the
country and bought it, and retired from business, and came to live here. "Mr. Moreton was a different man from the Ruttons; not that he was hard-hearted
or tyrannical; but he was fond of every thing new, and old customs were laid by and
forgotten, and new-fangled ones were taken up, and the duty in the chapel was gave over,
and it was shut up, though I have heard that his Lady, Mrs. Moreton, was very sorry at
this. My William, however, had constant work, in turning the old court to the new Villa,
and had very good pay, and very well content he was; and then, when Miss Moreton came
to be mistress of it, he was had again, to beautify and alter, and all very well; for who
have a right to follow their own inventions if the rich have not, Ma'am? and how would

the workman get employ, if there was not a time for pulling down, as well as building up. But then such alterations as Miss Moreton made, Ma'am! 'twas too bad certainly to
convert the house of God into a --William did call it a den of thieves; but no,
Madam-but no, Madam-no, it was to be a theatre; William spoke his mind, for it went
to his heart, who was always brought up in the fear of the Lord, to see the old paintings,
and the angels, and the ten commandments, torn down, from what used to be the Altar
Piece, to make room for the naked gods and goddesses; for William had heard many and
many a good sermon in that place, and it sorely went to his heart, and he did speak, and
that too in Miss Moreton's hearing. "She said it was her wish to get over all superstitious notions; and that the chapel
had been quite useless to her, as her servants had refused to sleep there; and that she was
delighted at having such a good theatre raised to her hands, with such a fine caned roof to
speak in; and William said, Ma'am, he saw her get up in the pulpit, and speak a long
speech from a play-book, to try how her voice would sound. Well, to work they all went,
to beautify the theatre; and William, in taking down a piece of carved wood from the
ceiling, to put up Fame blowing her trumpet, fell from the high scaffolding, and broke his
thigh near the hip bone." Sarah Jarvis stopped in her narration to wipe her eyes; and walking to her dresser,
she opened a drawer, and taking from it a small tablet of wood, with the letters I.H.S. emblazoned in gold on it, and surrounded by a Cross and Glory, she said "this was the
piece of carving which poor William displaced, Madam. He brought it home with him,
and he has often said, that, if he were a Roman Catholic, he should have said his prayers
before it, over and over, and asked its pardon." "And surely, Miss Moreton, who is all
benevolence," said Mary, "surely, she stretched out her arm to succour and to help you!" "Ah! Madam, that benevolence is a fine word for talk; but one grain of old-fashioned
active charity is worth a mint of it." "Miss Moreton was not very well pleased with William for speaking about the
chapel at first; and then some of the servants and the work-people talked about his
accident, and said it was a judgment for daring to pull down God's house. So then, Miss
Moreton was fretted and vexed, and a new carpenter was sent for from London; one as
they called a right proper play-house carpenter; and so poor William took to his bed, and I
lay-in soon after of this poor baby, and with one thing and t'other, we were brought low
enough, as you see us now!" "And has Miss Moreton done nothing for you?" asked Mary, in a tone almost
amounting to incredulity. "Oh! yes, Ma'am, she walked to our cottage herself one
morning, with one of the Frenchmen; and she asked for my husband; and indeed I was
very near laughing outright, in the midst of all my troubles, when I saw that she had
brought him a present of a fine worked cushion to put his maimed limb upon; and she
gave him likewise a white dimity gown to fold about him. It was all very well meant, I
suppose, but, to be sure, they were not the sort of things which William wanted; however,
nothing would serve but Miss Moreton must place the cushion herself, and help on the
gown with her own hands! The Civilear, as they call that French gentleman, was lifting
up his eyes, and clasping his hands together all the while, as though he had been saying
his prayers; and he called her a ministering angel, and the tears were to be seen standing
in his eyes. But somehow, I did not please either of them; for very unfortunately for the

nice nose of the Civilear, I had been frying a little cabbage and potatoes for my children's
dinner, and so the house smelled of it of course. The gentleman eyed me, and sniffed, and
sniffed again; and he shrugged up his shoulders till they fairly reached his ears; and going
out, I heard him tell Miss Moreton, that he plainly saw I had neither sentiment or feeling,
and was a woman of most gross ideas, to entertain myself with fryed meat, whilst my
husband was so ill! Miss Moreton seemed to be of his opinion, and from that moment to
this I have seen no more of the lady." An emphasis was laid on the two last words. "Nor
of the gentleman, I should suppose!" said Mary, rather quickly.