How you frowned on me! I did not think you could have
     frowned so dreadfully--but then I was uninjured by affliction,
     unaltered by illness. Were you to see me now, you would not
     have the heart to frown on me: and yet my letters being
     repeatedly returned, and even the last unnoticed and unanswered,
     though it told you that even on your own conditions I could now
     claim your pardon, for that I had been "wretched in love," and
     had experienced "the anguish of being forsaken, despised, and
     disgraced in the eye of the world," proves but too surely that
     the bitterness of resentment is not yet passed!--But on my
     _death-bed_ you promised to see and forgive me--_and I am there,
     my mother_!! Yet will I not claim that promise;--I will not
     weaken, by directing it towards myself, the burst of sorrow,
     of too late regret, of self-upbraidings, and long-restrained
     affection, which must be directed towards my child when I am
     not alive to profit by it. No:--though I would give worlds to
     embrace you once more, for the sake of my child I resign the
     gratification. 'Oh, mother! you little think that I saw you, only a few days
     ago, from the stile by the cottage which overlooks your house:
     you were walking with a lady, and my child was with me
     (my Editha, for I have called her after you.) You seemed,
     methought, even cheerful, and I was so selfish that I felt
     shocked to think I was so entirely forgotten by you; for I was
     sure that if you thought of me you could not be cheerful. But
     your companion left you; and then you looked so very sad, that
     I was wretched from the idea that you were then thinking too
     much of me, and I wished you to resume your cheerfulness again. '_I_ was not cheerful, and Editha by her artless prattle
     wounded me to the very soul.--She wished, she said, to live in
     that sweet house, and asked why she should not live there? _I
     could_ have told her why, but dared not do it; but I assured
     her, and do not for mercy's sake prove that assurance false! that she _should_ live there _one day_. '"But when--when?" she asked. '"When I am in my grave,"' replied I: and, poor innocent! throwing herself into my arms with playful fondness, she begged
     me to go to my grave directly. I feel but too sensibly that her
     desire will soon be accomplished. 'But must I die unblest by you? True, I am watched by the
     kindest of human beings! but then she is not my mother--that
     mother, who, with the joys of my childhood and my home, is so
     continually recurring to my memory. Oh! I forget all your
     unkindness, my mother, and remember only your affection. How I
     should like to feel your hand supporting my head, and see you
     perform the little offices which sickness requires!--And must
     I never, never see you more? Yes! you will come, I am sure you
     will: but come, come quickly, or I shall die without your
     blessing. 'I have had a fainting fit--but I am recovered, and can address
     you again.--Oh! teach my Editha to be humble, teach her to be
     slow to call the experience of ages contemptible prejudices;
     teach her no opinions that can destroy her sympathies with
     general society, and make her an alien to the hearts of those
     amongst whom she lives. 'Be above all things careful that she wanders not in the night
     of scepticism. But for the support of religion, what, amidst my
     various sorrows, what would have become of _me_? 'There is something more that I would say. Should my existence
     be prolonged even but a few days, I shall have to struggle with
     poverty as well as sickness; and the anxious friend (I will not
     call her servant) who is now my all of earthly comfort, will
     scarcely have money sufficient to pay me the last sad duties;
     and I owe her, my mother, a world of obligation! She will make
     my last moments easy, and _you_ must reward her. From her you
     will receive this letter when I am no more, and to your care
     and protection I bequeath her. She is--my eyes grow dim, and I
     must leave off for the present.' On the very evening in which Adeline had written this address to her
mother, Mrs Mowbray had received Mrs Pemberton's letter; and as Miss
Woodville had been interred that morning, she felt herself at liberty to
join Mrs Pemberton in her search after Adeline. While various plans for
this purpose presented themselves to her mind, and each of them was
dismissed in its turn as fruitless or impracticable,--full of these
thoughts she pensively walked along the lawn before her door, till sad
and weary she leaned on a little gate at the bottom of it; which, as she
did so, swung slowly backwards and forwards, responsive as it were to
her feelings. But, as she continued to muse, and to recall the varied sorrows of her
past life, the gate on which she leaned began to vibrate more quickly;
till, unable to bear the recollections which assailed her, she was
hastening with almost frantic speed towards the house, when she saw a
cottager approaching, to whose sick daughter and helpless family she had
long been a bountiful benefactress. 'What is the matter, John?' cried Mrs Mowbray, hastening forward to meet
him--'you seem agitated.' 'My poor daughter, madam;' replied the man, bursting into tears. At the sight of his distress, his _parental_ distress, Mrs Mowbray
sighed deeply, and asked if Lucy was worse. 'I doubt she is dying,' said the afflicted father. 'Heaven forbid!' exclaimed Mrs Mowbray, throwing her shawl over her
shoulders; 'I will go and see her myself.' 'What, really?--But the way is so long, and the road is so miry?' 'No matter--I must do my duty.' 'God bless you, and reward you!' cried the grateful father--'that is so
like you! Lucy said you would come!' Mrs Mowbray then filled a basket with medicine and refreshments, and set
out on her charitable visit. She found the poor girl in a very weak and alarming state; but the
sight of her benefactress, and the tender manner in which she supported
her languid head, and administered wine and other cordials to her,
insensibly revived her; and while writhing under the feelings of an
unhappy parent herself, Mrs Mowbray was soothed by the blessings of the
parent whom she comforted. At this moment they were alarmed by a shriek from a neighbouring
cottage, and a woman who was attending on the sick girl ran out to
inquire into the cause of it. She returned, saying that a poor sick young gentlewoman, who lodged at
the next house, was fallen back in a fit, and they thought she was dead. 'A young gentlewoman,' exclaimed Mrs Mowbray, 'at the next cottage!' rising up. 'Aye sure,' cried the woman, 'she looks like a lady for certain, and she
has the finest child I ever saw.' 'Perhaps she is not dead,' said Mrs Mowbray:--'let us go see.' Little did Mrs Mowbray think that it was her own child whom she was
hastening to relieve; and that, while meditating a kind action,
recompense was so near. Adeline, while trying to finish her letter to her mother, had scarcely
traced a few illegible lines, when she fell back insensible on her
pillow; and at the moment of Mrs Mowbray's entering the cottage,
Savanna, who had uttered the shriek which had excited her curiosity,
had convinced herself that she was gone for ever. The woman who accompanied Mrs Mowbray entered the house first; and
opening a back chamber, low-roofed, narrow, and lighted only by one
solitary and slender candle, Mrs Mowbray, beheld through the door the
lifeless form of the object of her solicitude, which Savanna was
contemplating with loud and frantic sorrow. 'Here is a lady come to see what she can do for your mistress,' cried
the woman, while Savanna turned hastily round:--'Here she is--here is
good Madam Mowbray.' 'Madam Mowbray!' shrieked Savanna, fixing her dark eyes on Mrs Mowbray,
and raising her arm in a threatening manner as she approached her: then
snatching up the letter which lay on the bed,--'Woman!' she exclaimed,
grasping Mrs Mowbray's arm with frightful earnestness, 'read that--'tis
for you!' Mrs Mowbray, speechless with alarm and awe, involuntarily seized the
letter--but scarcely had she read the first words, when uttering a deep
groan she sprung forward, to clasp the unconscious form before her, and
fell beside it equally insensible. But she recovered almost immediately to a sense of her misery; and
while, in speechless agony, she knelt by the bed-side, Savanna,
beholding her distress, with a sort of dreadful pleasure exclaimed,
'Ah! have you at last learn to feel?' 'But is she, is she _indeed_ gone?' cried Mrs Mowbray, 'is there _no_
hope?' and instantly seizing the cordial which she had brought with her,
assisted by the woman, she endeavoured to force it down the throat of
Adeline. Their endeavours were for some time vain: at length however, she
exhibited signs of life, and in a few minutes more she opened her sunk
eye, and gazed unconsciously around her. 'My God! I thank you!' exclaimed Mrs Mowbray, falling on her knees;
while Savanna, laying her mistress's head on her bosom, sobbed with
fearful joy. 'Adeline! my child, my dear, dear child!' cried Mrs Mowbray, seizing her
clammy hand. That voice, those words which she had so long wished to hear, though
hopeless of ever hearing them again, seemed to recall the fast fading
recollection of Adeline: she raised her head from Savanna's bosom, and,
looking earnestly at Mrs Mowbray, faintly smiled, and endeavoured to
throw herself into her arms,--but fell back again exhausted on the
pillow. But in a few minutes she recovered so far as to be able to speak; and
while she hung round her mother's neck, and gazed upon her with eager
and delighted earnestness, she desired Savanna to bring Editha to her
immediately. 'Will you, will you--,' said Adeline, vainly trying to speak her
wishes, as Savanna put the sleeping girl in Mrs Mowbray's arms: but
she easily divined them; and, clasping her to her heart, wept over
her convulsively--'She shall be dear to me as my own soul!' said Mrs
Mowbray. 'Then I die contented,' replied Adeline. 'Die!' exclaimed Mrs Mowbray hastily: 'no, you must not, shall not die;
you must live to see me atone for--'

'It is in vain,' said Adeline faintly. 'I bless God that he allows me to
enjoy this consolation--say that you forgive me.' 'Forgive you! Oh, Adeline! for years have I forgiven and pined after
you; but a wicked woman intercepted all your letters; and I thought you
were dead, or had renounced me for ever.' 'Indeed!' cried Adeline. 'Oh! had I suspected that!' 'Nay more, Mrs Pemberton is now in London, in search of you, in order to
bring you back to happiness!' As Mrs Mowbray said this, Savanna, drawing
near, took her hand and gently pressed it. Adeline observed the action, and seeing by it that Savanna's heart
relented towards her mother, said, 'I owe that faithful creature more
than I can express; but to your care I bequeath her.' 'I will love her as my child,' said Mrs Mowbray, 'and behave to her
better than I did to--'

'Hush!' cried Adeline, putting her hand to Mrs Mowbray's lips. 'But you _shall_ live! I will send for Dr Norberry; you shall be moved
to my house, and all will be well--all our past grief be forgotten,'
returned Mrs Mowbray with almost convulsive eagerness. Adeline faintly smiled, but repeated that every hope of that kind was
over, but that her utmost wish has gratified in seeing her mother, and
receiving her full forgiveness. 'But you must live for my sake!' cried Mrs Mowbray: 'and for mine,'
sobbed out Savanna. 'Could you not be moved to my house?' said Mrs Mowbray. 'There every
indulgence and attention that money can procure shall be yours. Is this
a place,--is this poverty--this--' Here her voice failed her, and she
burst into tears. 'Mother, dearest mother,' replied Adeline, 'I see you, I am assured of
your love again, and I have not a want beside. Still, I could like, I
could wish, to be once more under a _parent's roof_.' In a moment, the cottager who was present, and returning with usury to
Mrs Mowbray's daughter the anxious interest which she had taken in his,
proposed various means of transporting Adeline to the Lawn; a difficult
and a hazardous undertaking: but the poor invalid was willing to risk
the danger and the fatigue; and her mother could not but indulge her. At
length the cottager, as it was for the _general benefactress_, having
with care procured even more assistance than was necessary, Adeline was
conveyed on a sort of a litter, along the valley, and found herself once
more in the house of her mother; while Savanna, sharing in the joy which
Adeline's countenance expressed, threw herself on Mrs Mowbray's neck,
and exclaimed, 'Now I forgive you!' 'Mother, dear mother,' cried Adeline, after having for some minutes
vainly endeavoured to speak--'I am so happy! no more an outcast, but
under my mother's roof!--Nay, I even think I _can_ live now,' added she
with a faint smile. Had Adeline risen from her bed in complete health and vigour, she would
scarcely have excited more joy in her mother, and in Savanna, than she
did by this expression. 'Can live!' cried Mrs Mowbray, 'O! you shall, you must live.' And an
express was sent off immediately to Dr Norberry too, who was removed to
Kendal, to be near his elder daughter, lately married in the
neighbourhood. Dr Norberry arrived in a few hours. Mrs Mowbray ran out to meet him; but
a welcome died on her tongue, and she could only speak by her tears. 'There, there, my good woman, don't be foolish,' replied he: 'it is very
silly to blubber, you know: besides, it can do no good,' giving her a
kiss, while the tears trickled down his rough cheek. 'So, the lost sheep
is found?' 'But, O! she will be lost again,' faltered Mrs Mowbray; 'I doubt nothing
can save her!' 'No!' cried the old man, with a gulp, 'no! not my coming so many miles
on purpose?--Well, but where is she?' 'She will see you presently, but begged to be excused for a few
minutes.' 'You see,' said he, 'by my dress, what has happened,' gulping
as he spoke. 'I have lost the companion of thirty years!--and--and--'
here he paused, and after an effort went on to say, that his wife in her
last illness had owned that she had suppressed Adeline's letters, and
had declared the reason of it--'But, poor soul!' continued the doctor,
'it was the only sin against me, I believe, or any one else, that she
ever committed--so I forgave her: and I trust that God will.' Soon after they were summoned to the sick room, and Dr Norberry beheld
with a degree of fearful emotion, which he vainly endeavoured to hide
under a cloak of pleasantry, the dreadful ravages which sorrow and
sickness had made in the face and form of Adeline. 'So, here you are at last!' cried he, trying to smile while he sobbed
audibly, 'and a pretty figure you make, don't you?--But we have you
again, and we will not part with you so soon, I can tell you (almost
starting as the faint but rapid pulse met his fingers)--that is, I
mean,' added he, 'unless it please God.' Mrs Mowbray and Savanna, during
this speech, gazed on his countenance in breathless anxiety, and read in
it a confirmation of their fears. 'But who's afraid?' cried the doctor,
forcing a laugh, while his tone and his looks expressed the extreme of
apprehension, and his laugh ended in a sob. Mrs Mowbray turned away in a sort of desperate silence; but the mulatto
still kept her penetrating eye fixed upon him, and with a look so full
of woe! 'I'll trouble you, mistress, to take those formidable eyes of yours
off my face,' cried the doctor pettishly; 'for I can't stand their
inquiry!--But who the devil are you?' 'She is my nurse, my consoler, and my friend,' said Adeline. 'Then she is mine of course,' cried the doctor, 'though she has a
terrible stare with her eyes:--but give me your hand, mistress. What is
your name?' 'Me be name Savanna,' replied the mulatto; 'and me die and live wid my
dear mistress,' she added, bursting into tears. 'Pshaw!' cried the doctor, 'I can't bear this--here I came as a
physician, and these blubberers melt me down into an old woman. Adeline,
I must order all these people out of the room, and have you to myself,
or I can do nothing.' He was obeyed; and on inquiring into all Adeline's symptoms, he found
little to hope and every thing to fear--'But your mind is relieved, and
you have youth on your side; and who knows what good air, good food, and
good nurses may do for you!' 'Not to mention a good physician,' added Adeline, smiling, 'and a good
friend in that physician.' 'This it be to have money,' said Savanna, as she saw the various things
prepared and made to tempt Adeline's weak appetite:--'poor Savanna mean
as well--her heart make all these, but her hand want power.' During this state of alarming suspense Mrs Pemberton was hourly expected,
as she had written word that she had traced Adeline into Lancashire,
and suspected that she was in her mother's neighbourhood.--It may be
supposed that Mrs Mowbray, Adeline, and Savanna, looked forward to her
arrival with eager impatience; but not so Dr Norberry--he said that
no doubt she was a very good sort of woman, but that he did not like
pretensions to righteousness over much, and had a particular aversion to
a piece of formal drab-coloured morality. Adeline only laughed at these prejudices, without attempting to confute
them; for she knew that Mrs Pemberton's appearance and manners would
soon annihilate them. At length she reached the Lawn; and Savanna,
who saw her alight, announced her arrival to her mistress, and was
commissioned by her to introduce her immediately into the sick
chamber.--She did so; but Mrs Pemberton, almost overpowered with joy
at the intelligence which awaited her, and ill fortified by Savanna's
violent and mixed emotions against the indulgence of her own, begged to
compose herself a few moments before she met Adeline: but Savanna was
not to be denied; and seizing her hand she led her up to the bedside of
the invalid.--Adeline smiled affectionately when she saw her; but Mrs
Pemberton started back, and, scarcely staying to take the hand which
she offered her, rushed out of the room, to vent in solitude the burst
of uncontrollable anguish which the sight of her altered countenance
occasioned her.--Alas! her eye had been but too well tutored to read
the characters of death in the face, and it was some time before she
recovered herself sufficiently to appear before the anxious watchers by
the bed of Adeline with that composure which on principle she always
endeavoured to display.--At length, however, she re-entered the room,
and approaching the poor invalid, kissed in silence her wan flushed
cheek. 'I am very different now, my kind friend, to what I was when you _first_
saw me,' said Adeline, faintly smiling. To the moment when they _last_ met, Adeline had not resolution enough to
revert, for then she was mourning by the dead body of Glenmurray. Mrs Pemberton was silent for a moment; but, making an effort, she
replied, 'Thou art now more like what thou wert in _mind_, when I
_first_ met thee at Rosevalley, than when I first saw thee at Richmond. At Rosevalley I beheld thee innocent, at Richmond guilty, and here I see
thee penitent, and, I hope, resigned to thy fate.' --She spoke the word
_resigned_ with emphasis, and Adeline _understood_ her. 'I am indeed resigned,' replied Adeline in a low voice: 'nay, I feel
that I am much favoured in being spared so long. But there is one thing
that weighs heavily on my mind; Mary Warner is leading a life of shame,
and she told me when I last saw her, that she was corrupted by my
precept and example: if so--'

'Set thy conscience at rest on that subject,' interrupted Mrs Pemberton:
'while she lived with me, I discovered, long before she ever saw thee,
that she had been known to have been faulty.' 'Oh! what a load have you removed from my mind!' replied Adeline. 'Still
it would be more relieved, if you would promise to find her out; and she
may be heard of at Mr Langley's chambers in the Temple. Offer her a
yearly allowance for life, provided she will quit her present vicious
habits; I am sure my mother will gladly fulfil my wishes in this
respect.' 'And so will I,' replied Mrs Pemberton. 'Is there any thing else that I
can do for thee?' 'Yes: I have two pensioners at Richmond,--a poor young woman, and her
orphan boy,--an illegitimate child,' she added, deeply sighing, as she
recollected what had interested her in their fate. 'I bequeath them to
your care: Savanna knows where they are to be found. And now, all that
disturbs my thoughts at this awful moment is, the grief which my poor
mother and Savanna will feel;--nay, they will be quite unprepared for
it; for they persist to hope still, and I believe that even Dr Norberry
allows his wishes to deceive his judgment.' 'They will suffer, indeed!' cried Mrs Pemberton: 'but I give thee my
word, that I will never leave thy mother, and that Savanna shall be our
joint care.' 'It is enough--I shall now die in peace,' said Adeline; and Mrs
Pemberton turned away to meet Mrs Mowbray, who, with Dr Norberry at that
moment entered the room. Mrs Mowbray met her, and welcomed her audibly
and joyfully: but Mrs Pemberton, aware of the blow which impended over
her, vainly endeavoured to utter a congratulation; but throwing herself
into Mrs Mowbray's extended arms, she forgot her usual self-command, and
sobbed loudly on her bosom. Dr Norberry gazed at the benevolent Quaker with astonishment. True, she
was '_drab-coloured_;' but where was the repulsive formality that he had
expected? 'This woman can feel like other women, and is as good a hand
at a crying-bout as myself.' But Mrs Pemberton did not long give way to
so violent an indulgence of her feelings; and gently withdrawing herself
from Mrs Mowbray's embrace, she turned to the window, while Mrs Mowbray
hastened to the bed-side of Adeline. Mrs Pemberton then turned round
again, and, seizing Dr Norberry's hand, which she fervently pressed,
said in a faltering voice, 'Would thou couldst _save_ her!' 'And--and _can't_ I? can't I?' replied he, gulping. Mrs Pemberton looked
at him with an expression which he could neither mistake nor endure; but
muttering in a low tone, 'No! dear, sweet soul! I doubt I can't, I doubt
I can't, by the Lord!' he rushed out of the room. From that moment he never was easy but when he could converse with Mrs
Pemberton; for he knew that she, and she only, sympathized in his
feelings, as she only knew that Adeline was not likely to recover. The
invalid herself observed his attention to her friend, nor could she
forbear to rally him on the total disappearance of his prejudices
against the fair Quaker; for, such was the influence of Mrs Pemberton's
dignified yet winning manners, and such was the respect with which she
inspired him, that, if he had his hat on, he always took it off when she
entered the room, and never uttered any thing like an oath, without
humbly begging her pardon; and he told Adeline, that were all Quakers
like Mrs Pemberton, he should be tempted to cry. 'Drab is your only
wear.' Another and another day elapsed, and Adeline still lived.--On the
evening of the third day, as she lay half-slumbering with her head on
Savanna's arm, and Mrs Mowbray, lulling Editha to sleep on her lap, was
watching beside her, glancing her eye alternately with satisfied and
silent affection from the child to the mother, whom she thought in a
fair way of recovery; while Dr Norberry, stifling an occasional sob, was
contemplating the group, and Mrs Pemberton, her hands clasped in each
other, seemed lost in devout contemplation, Adeline awoke, and as she
gazed on Editha, who was fondly held to Mrs Mowbray's bosom, a smile
illumined her sunk countenance. Mrs Mowbray at that moment eagerly and
anxiously pressed forward to catch her weak accents, and inquire how
she felt.