To
     say the truth, her conduct to me and mine has been odd, not to
     say wrong. But, poor thing! she is either dead or miserable,
     and I forgive her:--so I do you, as I said before, and the Lord
     give you all the consolation which you so greatly need! Yours once more,
                                       In true kindness of spirit,
                                                    JAMES NORBERRY.' This letter made Mrs Mowbray's wounds bleed afresh, at the same time
that it destroyed all her expectations of finding Adeline; and the only
hope that remained to cheer her was, that she might perhaps, if yet
alive, write sooner or later, to implore forgiveness, but month after
month elapsed, and no tidings of Adeline reached her despairing mother. She then put an advertisement in the paper, so worded that Adeline, had
she seen it, must have known to whom it alluded; but it never met her
eyes, and Mrs Mowbray gave herself up to almost absolute despair; when
accident introduced her to a new acquaintance, whose example taught her
patience, and whose soothing benevolence bade her hope for happier days. One day as Mrs Mowbray, regardless of a heavy shower, and lost in
melancholy reflections, was walking with irregular steps on the road to
Penrith, with an unopened umbrella in her hand, she suddenly raised her
eyes from the ground, and beheld a Quaker lady pursued by an over-driven
bullock, and unable any longer to make an effort to escape its fury. At
this critical moment Mrs Mowbray, from a sort of irresistible impulse,
as fortunate in its effects as presence of mind, yet scarcely perhaps to
be denominated such, suddenly opened her umbrella; and, approaching
the animal, brandished it before his eyes. Alarmed at this unusual
appearance, he turned hastily and ran towards the town, where she saw
that he was immediately met and secured. 'Thou hast doubtless saved my life,' said the Quaker, grasping Mrs
Mowbray's hand with an emotion which she vainly tried to suppress; 'and
I pray that thine may be blest!' Mrs Mowbray returned the pressure of her hand, and burst into tears;
overcome with joy for having saved a fellow-creature's life; with
terror, which she was now at leisure to feel for the danger to which
she had herself been exposed; and with mournful emotion from the
consciousness how much she needed the blessing which the grateful Quaker
invoked on her head. 'Thou tremblest even more than I do,' observed the lady, smiling, but
seeming ready to faint; 'I believe we had better, both of us, sit down
on the bank; but it is so wet that perhaps we may as well endeavour to
reach my house, which is only at the end of yon field.' Mrs Mowbray
bowed her assent; and, supporting each other, they at length arrived at
a neat white house, to which the Quaker cordially bade her welcome. 'It was but this morning,' said Mrs Mowbray, struggling for utterance,
'that I called upon Death to relieve me from an existence at once
wretched and useless.' Here she paused:--and her new acquaintance,
cordially pressing her hand, waited for the conclusion of her
speech;--'but now,' continued Mrs Mowbray, 'I revoke, and repent my idle
and vicious impatience of life. I have probably saved your life, and
something like enjoyment now seems to enliven mine.' 'I suspect,' replied the lady, 'that thou hast known deep affliction;
and I rejoice that at this moment, and in so providential a manner, I
have been introduced to thy acquaintance:--for I too have known sorrow,
and the mourner knows how to speak comfort to the heart of the mourner. My name is Rachel Pemberton; and I hope that when I know thy name, and
thy story, thou wilt allow me to devote to thy comfort some hours of
the existence which thou hast preserved.' She then hastily withdrew, to
pour forth in solitude the breathings of devout gratitude:--while Mrs
Mowbray, having communed with her own thoughts, felt a glow of unwonted
satisfaction steal over her mind; and by the time Mrs Pemberton
returned, she was able to meet her with calmness and cheerfulness. 'Thou knowest my name,' said Mrs Pemberton as she entered, seating
herself by Mrs Mowbray, 'but I have yet to learn thine.' 'My name is Mowbray,' she replied sighing deeply. 'Mowbray!--The lady of Rosevalley in Gloucestershire; and the mother of
Adeline Mowbray?' exclaimed Mrs Pemberton. 'What of Adeline Mowbray? What of my child?' cried Mrs Mowbray, seizing
Mrs Pemberton's hand. 'Blessed woman! tell me,--Do you indeed know
her?--can you tell me where to find her?' 'I will tell thee all that I know of her,' replied Mrs Pemberton in
a faltering voice; 'but thy emotion overpowers me.--I--I was once a
mother, and I can feel for thee.' She then turned away her head to
conceal a starting tear; while Mrs Mowbray, in incoherent eagerness,
repeated her questions, and tremblingly awaited her answer. 'Is she well? Is she happy?--say but that!' she exclaimed, sobbing as
she spoke. 'She was well and contented when I last heard from her,' replied Mrs
Pemberton calmly. 'Heard from her? Then she writes to you! Oh, blessed, blessed woman! show me her letters, and tell me only that she has forgiven me for all
my unkindness to her--' As she said this, Mrs Mowbray threw her arms
round Mrs Pemberton, and sunk half-fainting on her shoulder. 'I will tell thee all that has ever passed between us, if thou wilt be
composed,' gravely answered Mrs Pemberton; 'but this violent expression
of thy feelings is unseemly and detrimental.' 'Well--well--I will be calm,' said Mrs Mowbray; and Mrs Pemberton began
to relate the interview which she had with Adeline at Richmond. 'How long ago did this take place?' eagerly interrupted Mrs Mowbray. 'Full six years.' 'Oh, God!' exclaimed she, impatiently,--'Six years! By this time then
she may be dead--she may--'

'Thou art incorrigible, I fear,' said Mrs Pemberton, 'but thou art
afflicted, and I will bear with thy impatience:--sit down again and
attend to me, and thou wilt hear much later intelligence of thy
daughter.' 'How late?' asked Mrs Mowbray with frantic eagerness;--and Mrs
Pemberton, overcome with the manner in which she spoke, could scarcely
falter out, 'Within a twelvemonth I have heard of her.' 'Within a twelvemonth!' joyfully cried Mrs Mowbray: but, recollecting
herself, she added mournfully--'but in that time what--what may not have
happened!' 'I know not what to do with thee nor for thee,' observed Mrs Pemberton;
'but do try, I beseech thee, to hear me patiently!' Mrs Mowbray then re-seated herself; and Mrs Pemberton informed her of
Adeline's premature confinement at Richmond; of her distress on
Glenmurray's death, and of her having witnessed it. 'Ah! you acted a mother's part--you did what I ought to have done,'
cried Mrs Mowbray, bursting into tears,--'but, go on--I will be
patient.' Yet that was impossible; for, when she heard of Adeline's insanity, her
emotions became so strong that Mrs Pemberton, alarmed for her life, was
obliged to ring for assistance. When she recovered,--'Thou hast heard the worst now,' said Mrs
Pemberton, 'and all I have yet to say of thy child is satisfactory.' She then related the contents of Adeline's first letter, informing her
of her marriage:--and Mrs Mowbray, clasping her hands together, blessed
God that Adeline was become a wife. The next letter Mrs Pemberton read
informed her that she was the mother of a fine girl. 'A mother!' she exclaimed, 'Oh, how I should like to see her child!' --But
at the same moment she recollected how bitterly she had reviled her when
she saw her about to become a mother, at their last meeting; and, torn
with conflicting emotions, she was again insensible to aught but her
self-upbraidings. 'Well--but where is she now? where is the child? and when did you hear
from her last?' cried she. 'I have not heard from her since,' hesitatingly replied Mrs Pemberton. 'But can't you write to her?' 'Yes;--but in her last letter she said she was going to change her
lodgings, and would write again when settled in a new habitation.' Again Mrs Mowbray paced the room in wild and violent distress: but her
sorrows at length yielded to the gentle admonitions and soothings of Mrs
Pemberton, who bade her remember, that when she rose in the morning she
had not expected the happiness and consolation which she had met with
that day; and that a short time might bring forth still greater comfort. 'For,' said Mrs Pemberton, 'I can write to the house where she formerly
lodged, and perhaps the person who keeps it can give us intelligence of
her.' On hearing this, Mrs Mowbray became more composed, and diverted her
sorrow by a thousand fond inquiries concerning Adeline, which none but a
mother could make, and none but a mother could listen to with patience. While this conversation was going on, a knock at the door was heard, and
Miss Woodville entered the room in great emotion; for she had heard, on
the road, that a mad bullock had attacked a lady; and also that Mrs
Mowbray, scarcely able to walk, had been led into the white house in the
field by the road side. Miss Woodville was certainly as much alarmed as she pretended to be:
but there was a somewhat in the expression of her alarm which, though
it gratified Mrs Mowbray, was displeasing to the more penetrating Mrs
Pemberton. She could not indeed guess that Miss Woodville's alarm sprung
merely from apprehension lest Mrs Mowbray should die before she had
provided for her in her will: yet, notwithstanding, she felt that her
expressions of concern and anxiety had no resemblance to those of real
affection; and in spite of her habitual candour, she beheld Miss
Woodville with distrust. But this feeling was considerably increased on observing, that when Mrs
Mowbray exultingly introduced her, not only as the lady whose life she
had been the means of preserving, but as the friend and correspondent
of her daughter, she evidently changed colour; and, in spite of her
habitual plausibility, could not utter a single coherent sentence of
pleasure or congratulation:--and it was also evident, that, being
conscious of Mrs Pemberton's regarding her with a scrutinizing eye, she
was not easy till, on pretence of Mrs Mowbray's requiring rest after her
alarm, she had prevailed on her to return home. But she could not prevent the new friends from parting with eager
assurances of meeting again and again; and it was agreed between them,
that Mrs Pemberton should spend the next day at the Lawn. Mrs Pemberton, who is thus again introduced to the notice of my readers,
had been, as well as Mrs Mowbray, the pupil of adversity. She had been
born and educated in fashionable life; and she united to a very lovely
face and elegant form, every feminine grace and accomplishment. When she was only eighteen, Mr Pemberton, a young and gay Quaker, fell
in love with her; and having inspired her with a mutual passion, he
married her, notwithstanding the difference of their religious opinions,
and the displeasure of his friends. He was consequently disowned by the
society: but being weaned by the happiness which he found at home from
those public amusements which had first lured him from the strict habits
of his sect, he was soon desirous of being again admitted a member of
it; and in process of time he was once more received into it; while
his amiable wife, having no wish beyond her domestic circle, and being
disposed to think her husband's opinions right, became in time a convert
to the same profession of faith, and exhibited in her manners the rare
union of the easy elegance of a woman of the world with the rigid
decorum and unadorned dress of a strict Quaker. But in the midst of her happiness, and whilst looking forward to a
long continuance of it, a fever, caught in visiting the sick bed of a
cottager, carried off her husband, and next two lovely children; and Mrs
Pemberton would have sunk under the stroke, but for the watchful care
and affectionate attentions of the friend of her youth, who resided
near her, and who, in time, prevailed on her to receive with becoming
fortitude and resignation the trials which she was appointed to undergo. During this season of affliction, as we have before stated, she became
a minister in the Quaker society: but at the time of her meeting
Adeline at Richmond, she had been called from the duties of her public
profession to watch over the declining health of her friend and
consoler, and to accompany her to Lisbon. There, during four long years, she bent over her sick couch, now elated
with hope, and now sunk into despondence; when, at the beginning of the
fifth year, her friend died in her arms, and she returned to England,
resolved to pass her days, except when engaged in active duties, on a
little estate in Cumberland, bequeathed to her by her friend on her
death-bed. But ill health and various events had detained her in the
west of England since her return; and she had not long taken possession
of her house near Penrith, when she became introduced in so singular a
manner to Mrs Mowbray's acquaintance--an acquaintance which would, she
hoped, prove of essential service to them both; and as soon as her guest
departed, Mrs Pemberton resolved to inquire what character Mrs Mowbray
bore in the neighbourhood, and whether her virtues at all kept pace with
her misfortunes. Her inquiries were answered in the most satisfactory manner; as,
fortunately for Mrs Mowbray, with the remembrance of her daughter had
recurred to her that daughter's benevolent example. She remembered the
satisfaction which used to beam from Adeline's countenance when she
returned from her visits to the sick and the afflicted; and she resolved
to try whether those habits of charitable exertion which could increase
the happiness of the young and light-hearted Adeline, might not have
power to alleviate the sorrows of her own drooping age, and broken
joyless heart. 'Sweet are the uses of adversity!' --She who, while the child of
prosperity, was a romantic, indolent theorist, an inactive speculator,
a proud contemner of the dictates of sober experience, and a neglecter
of that practical benevolence which can in days produce more benefit to
others than theories and theorists can accomplish in years--this erring
woman, awakened from her dreams and reveries, to habits of useful
exertion, by the stimulating touch of affliction, was become the
visitor of the sick, the consoler of the sorrowful, the parent of the
fatherless, while virtuous industry looked up to her with hope; and her
name, like that of Adeline in happier days, was pronounced with prayers
and blessings. But, alas! she felt that blessing could reach her only in the shape of
her lost child: and though she was conscious of being useful to others,
though she had the satisfaction of knowing that she had but the day
before been the means of preserving a valuable life, she met Mrs
Pemberton, when she arrived at the Lawn, with a countenance of fixed
melancholy, and was at first disposed to expect but little success from
the project of writing to Adeline's former lodgings in order to inquire. The truth was, that Miss Woodville had artfully insinuated the
improbability of such an inquiry's succeeding; and, though Mrs Mowbray
had angrily asserted her hopes when Miss Woodville provokingly asserted
her _fears_, the treacherous girl's insinuations had sunk deeply into
her mind, and Mrs Pemberton saw, with pain and wonder, an effect
produced of which the cause was wholly unseen. But she at length
succeeded in awakening Mrs Mowbray's hopes; and in a letter written by
Mrs Pemberton to the mistress of the house whence Adeline formerly
dated, she enclosed one to her daughter glowing with maternal
tenderness, and calculated to speak peace to her sorrows. These letters were sent, as soon as written, to the post by Mrs
Mowbray's footman; but Miss Woodville contrived to meet him near the
post-office, and telling him she would put the letter in the receiver,
she gave him a commission to call at a shop in Penrith for her, at which
she had not time to call herself. Thus was another scheme for restoring Adeline to her afflicted mother
frustrated by the treachery of this interested woman; who, while Mrs
Pemberton and Mrs Mowbray looked anxiously forward to the receipt of an
answer from London, triumphed with malignant pleasure in the success of
her artifice.--But, spite of herself, she feared Mrs Pemberton, and was
not at all pleased to find that, till the answer from London could
arrive, that lady was to remain at the Lawn. She contrived, however, to be as little in her presence as possible;
for, contrary to Mrs Pemberton's usual habits, she felt a distrust of
Miss Woodville, which her intelligent eye could not help expressing, and
which consequently alarmed the conscious heart of the culprit. Being
left therefore, by Miss Woodville's fears, alone with Mrs Mowbray,
she drew from her, at different times, ample details of Adeline's
childhood, and the method which Mrs Mowbray had pursued in her
education. 'Ah! 'tis as I suspected,' interrupted Mrs Pemberton during one of
these conversations. 'Thy daughter's _faults_ originated in thee! her
education was cruelly defective.' 'No!' replied Mrs Mowbray with almost angry eagerness, 'whatever my
errors as a mother have been, and for the rash marriage which I made I
own myself culpable in the highest degree, I am sure that I paid the
greatest attention to my daughter's education. If you were but to
see the voluminous manuscript on the subject, which I wrote for her
improvement--'

'But where was thy daughter; and how was she employed during the time
that thou wert writing a book by which to educate her?' Mrs Mowbray was silent: she recollected that, while she was gratifying
her own vanity in composing her system of education, Adeline was almost
banished her presence; and, but for the humble instruction of her
grandmother, would, at the age of fifteen, have run a great risk of
being both an ignorant and useless being. 'Forgive me, friend Mowbray,' resumed Mrs Pemberton, aware in some
measure of what was passing in Mrs Mowbray's mind--'forgive me if I
venture to observe, that till of late years a thick curtain of self-love
seems to have been dropped between thy heart and maternal affection. It
is now, and now only, that thou hast learned to feel like a true and
affectionate mother!' 'Perhaps you are right,' replied Mrs Mowbray mournfully, 'still, I
always meant well; and hoped that my studies would conduce to the
benefit of my child.' 'So they might, perhaps, to that of thy second, third, or fourth child,
hadst thou been possessed of so many; but, in the meanwhile, thy
first-born must have been fatally neglected. A child's education begins
almost from the hour of its birth; and the mother who understands her
task, knows that the circumstances which every moment calls forth, are
the tools with which she is to work in order to fashion her child's mind
and character. What would you think of the farmer who was to let his
fields lie fallow for years, while he was employed in contriving a
method of cultivating land to increase his gains ten-fold?' 'But I did not suffer Adeline's mind to lie fallow.--I allowed her to
read, and I directed her studies.' 'Thou didst so; but what were those studies? and didst thou acquaint
thyself with the deductions which her quick mind formed from them? No--thou didst not, as parents should do, inquire into the impressions
made on thy daughter's mind by the books which she perused. Prompt to
feel, and hasty to decide, as Adeline was, how necessary was to her the
warning voice of judgment and experience!' 'But how could I imagine that a girl so young should dare to act,
whatever her opinions might be, in open defiance of the opinions of the
world?' 'But she had not lived in the world; therefore, scarcely knew how
repugnant to it her opinions were; nor, as she did not mix in general
society, could she care sufficiently for its good opinion, to be willing
to act contrary to her own ideas of right, rather than forfeit it:
besides, thou ownest that thou didst openly profess thy admiration
of the sentiments which she adopted; nor, till they were confirmed
irrevocably hers, didst thou declare, that to act up to them was, in thy
opinion, vicious. And then it was too late: she thought thy timidity,
and not thy wisdom, spoke, and she set thee the virtuous example of
acting up to the dictates of conscience. But Adeline and thou are both
the pupils of affliction and experience; and I trust that, all your
errors repented of, you will meet once more to expiate your past follies
by your future conduct.' 'I hope so too,' meekly replied Mrs Mowbray, whose pride had been
completely subdued by self-upbraidings and distress: 'Oh! when--when
will an answer arrive from London?' Alas! day after day elapsed, and no letter came; but while Mrs Mowbray
was almost frantic with disappointment and anxiety, Mrs Pemberton
thought that she observed in Miss Woodville's countenance a look of
triumphant malice, which ill accorded with the fluent expressions of
sympathy and regret with which she gratified her unsuspicious relation,
and she determined to watch her very narrowly; for she thought it
strange that Adeline, however she might respect her mother's oath,
should never, in the bitterness of her sorrows, have unburthened her
heart by imparting them to her: one day, when, as usual, the post had
been anxiously expected, and, as usual, had brought no letter from
London concerning Adeline; and while Miss Woodville was talking on
indifferent subjects with ill suppressed gaiety, though Mrs Mowbray,
sunk into despondence, was lying on the sofa by her; Mrs Pemberton
suddenly exclaimed--'There is only one right way of proceeding, friend
Mowbray,--thou and I must go to London, and make our inquiries in
person, and then we shall have a great chance of succeeding.' As she
said this, she looked steadfastly at Miss Woodville, and saw her turn
very pale, while her eye was hastily averted from the penetrating glance
of Mrs Pemberton; and when she heard Mrs Mowbray, in a transport of
joy, declare that they had better set off that very evening,--unable to
conceal her terror and agitation, she hastily left the room. Mrs Pemberton instantly followed her into the apartment to which she had
retired, and the door of which she had closed with much violence. She
found her walking to and fro, and wringing her hands, as if in agony. On seeing Mrs Pemberton, she started, and sinking into a chair, she
complained of being very ill, and desired to be left alone. 'Thou art ill, and thy illness is of the worst sort, I fear,' replied
Mrs Pemberton; 'but I will stay, and be thy physician.' '_You_, my physician?' replied Miss Woodville, with fury in her looks;
'You?' 'Yes--_I_--I see that thou art afraid lest Adeline should be restored to
her paternal roof.' 'Who told you so, officious, insolent woman?' returned Miss Woodville. 'Thy own looks--but all this is very natural in thee: thou fearest that
Adeline's favour should annihilate thine.' 'Perhaps I do,' cried Miss Woodville, a little less alarmed, and
catching at this plausible excuse for her uneasiness; 'for, should I be
forced to leave my cousin's house, I shall be reduced to comparative
poverty and solitude again.' 'But why shouldest thou be forced to leave it? Art thou not Adeline's
friend?' 'Ye--yes,' faltered out Miss Woodville. 'But it is uncertain whether we can find Adeline--still we shall be very
diligent in our inquiries; yet it is so strange that she should never
have written to her mother, if alive, that perhaps--'

'Oh, I dare say she is dead,' hastily interrupted Miss Woodville. 'Has she been dead long, thinkest thou?' 'No--not long--not above six months, I dare say.' 'No!--Hast thou any reason then for knowing that she was alive six
months ago?' asked Mrs Pemberton, looking steadily at Miss Woodville, as
she spoke. 'I?--Lord--no--How should I know?' she replied, her lip quivering, and
her whole frame trembling. 'I tell thee how.--Art thou not conscious of having intercepted letters
from thy cousin to her relenting parent?' Mrs Pemberton had scarcely uttered these words, when Miss Woodville fell
back nearly _insensible_ in her chair--a proof that the accusation was
only too well founded. As soon as she recovered, Mrs Pemberton said,
with great gentleness, 'Thou art ill,--ill indeed, but, as I suspected,
thy illness is of the mind; there is a load of guilt on it; throw it off
then by a full confession, and be the sinner that repenteth.' In a few moments Miss Woodville, conscious that her emotion had betrayed
her, and suspecting that Mrs Pemberton had by some means or other
received hints of her treachery, confessed that she had intercepted and
destroyed letters from Adeline to her mother; and also owned, to the
great joy of Mrs Pemberton, that Adeline's last letter, the letter
in which she informed Mrs Mowbray, that all the conditions were then
fulfilled, without which alone she had sworn never to forgive her, had
arrived only two months before; and that it was dated from such a
street, and such a number, in London. 'My poor friend will be so happy!' said Mrs Pemberton; and, her own eyes
filling with tears of joy, she hastened to find Mrs Mowbray. 'But what will become of _me_?' exclaimed Miss Woodville, detaining
her--'_I_ am ruined--ruined for ever!' 'Not so,' replied Mrs Pemberton, 'thou art _saved_,--saved, I trust, for
_ever_--Thou hast confessed thy guilt, and made all the atonement now in
thy power. Go to thine own room, and I will soon make known to thee thy
relation's sentiments towards thee.' So saying, she hastened to Mrs Mowbray, whom she found giving orders,
with eager impatience, to have post horses sent for immediately. 'Then thou art full of expectation, I conclude, from the event of our
journey to town?' said Mrs Pemberton, smiling. 'To be sure I am,' replied Mrs Mowbray. 'And so am I,' she answered,--'for I think that I know the present abode
of thy daughter.' Mrs Mowbray started--her friend's countenance expressed more joy and
exultation than she had ever seen on it before; and, almost breathless
with new hope, she seized her hand and conjured her to explain herself. The explanation was soon given; and Mrs Mowbray's joy, in consequence of
it, unbounded. 'But what is thy will,' observed Mrs Pemberton, 'with regard to thy
guilty relation?' 'I cannot--cannot see her again now, if ever;--and she must immediately
leave my house.' 'Immediately?' 'Yes,--but I will settle on her a handsome allowance; for my conscience
tells me, that, had I behaved like a mother to my child, no one could
have been tempted to injure her thus,--I put this unhappy woman into
a state of temptation, and she yielded to it:--but I feel only too
sensibly, that no one has been such an enemy to my poor Adeline as I
have been; nor, conscious of my own offences towards her, dare I resent
those of another.' 'I love, I honour thee for what thou hast now uttered,' cried Mrs
Pemberton with unusual animation.--'I see that thou art now indeed a
Christian; such are the breathings of a truly contrite spirit; and,
verily, she who can so easily forgive the crimes of others may hope to
have her own forgiven.' Mrs Pemberton then hastened to speak hope and comfort to the mind of
the penitent offender, while Mrs Mowbray ran to meet her servant, who,
to her surprise, was returning without horses, for none were to be
procured; and Mrs Mowbray saw herself obliged to delay her journey till
noon the next day, when she was assured of having horses from Penrith. But when, after a long and restless night, she arose in the morning,
anticipating with painful impatience the hour of her departure, Mrs
Pemberton entered her room, and informed her that she had passed nearly
all the night at Miss Woodville's bed-side, who had been seized with a
violent delirium at one o'clock in the morning, and in her ravings was
continually calling on Mrs Mowbray, and begging to see her once more. 'I will see her directly,' replied Mrs Mowbray, without a moment's
hesitation; and hastened to Miss Woodville's apartment, where she found
the medical attendant whom Mrs Pemberton had sent for just arrived. He
immediately declared the disorder to be an inflammation on the brain,
and left them with little or no hope of her recovery. Mrs Mowbray, affected beyond measure at the pathetic appeals for pardon
addressed to her continually by the unconscious sufferer, took her
station at the bed-side; and, hanging over her pillow, watched for the
slightest gleam of returning reason, in order to speak the pardon so
earnestly implored: and while thus piously engaged, the chaise that was
to convey her and her friend to London, and perhaps to Adeline, drove up
to the gate. 'Art thou ready?' said Mrs Pemberton, entering the room equipped for her
journey. At this moment the poor invalid reiterated her cries for pardon, and
begged Mrs Mowbray not to leave her without pronouncing her forgiveness. Mrs Mowbray burst into tears; and though sure that she was not even
conscious of her presence, she felt herself almost unable to forsake
her:--still it was in search of her daughter that she was going--nay,
perhaps, it was to her daughter that she was hastening; and, as this
thought occurred to her, she hurried to the door of the chamber, saying
she should be ready in a moment. But the eye of the phrensied sufferer followed her as she did so, and in
a tone of unspeakable agony she begged, she entreated that she might not
be left to die in solitude and sorrow, however guilty she might have
been.--Then again she implored Mrs Mowbray to speak peace and pardon
to her drooping soul; while, unable to withstand these solicitations,
though she knew them to be the unconscious ravings of the disorder, she
slowly and mournfully returned to the bed-side. 'It is late,' said Mrs Pemberton--'we ought ere now to be on the road.' 'How can I go, and leave this poor creature in such a state?--But then
should we find my poor injured child at the end of the journey! Such an
expectation as that!--'

'Thou must decide quickly,' replied Mrs Pemberton gently. 'Decide! Then I will go with you.--Yet still should Anna recover her
senses before her death, and wish to see me, I should never forgive
myself for being absent--it might soothe the anguish of her last moments
to know how freely I pardon her.--No, no:--after all, if pleasure awaits
me, it is only delaying it a few days; and this, this unhappy girl is on
her _death-bed_.--You, you must go _without_ me.' As she said this, Mrs Pemberton pressed her hand with affectionate
eagerness, and murmured out in broken accents, 'I honour thy decision,
and may I return with comfort to thee!' 'Yet though I wish you to go,' cried Mrs Mowbray, 'I grieve to expose
you to such fatigue and trouble in your weak state of health, and--'

'Say no more,' interrupted Mrs Pemberton, 'I am only doing my duty; and
reflect on my happiness if I am allowed to restore the lost sheep to
the fold again!' --So saying she set off on her journey, and arrived in
London only four days after Adeline had arrived in Cumberland. Mrs Pemberton drove immediately to Adeline's lodgings, but received the
same answer as Colonel Mordaunt had received; namely, that she was gone
no one knew whither. Still she did not despair of finding her: she, like
the Colonel, thought that a mulatto, a lady just recovered from the
small-pox, and a child, were likely to be easily traced; and having
written to Mrs Mowbray, owning her disappointment, but bidding her not
despair, she set off on her journey back, and had succeeded in tracing
Adeline as far as an inn on the high North road,--when an event took
place which made her further inquiries needless. Adeline, after several repeated trials, succeeded in writing the
following letter to her mother:--


      'Dearest of Mothers,

     'When this letter reaches you, I shall be no more; and however
     I may hitherto have offended you, I shall then be able to
     offend you no longer; and that child, whom you bound yourself
     by oath never to see or forgive but on the most cruel of
     conditions while living, dead you may perhaps deign to receive
     to your pardon and your love.--Nay, my heart tells me that you
     will do more,--that you will transfer the love which you once
     felt for me, to my poor helpless orphan; and in full confidence
     that you will be this indulgent, I bequeath her to you with my
     dying breath.--O! look on her, my mother, nor shrink from her
     with disgust, although you see in her my features; but rather
     rejoice in the resemblance, and fancy that I am restored to you
     pure, happy, and beloved as I once was.--Yes, yes,--it will be
     so: I have known a great deal of sorrow--let me then indulge
     the little ray of pleasure that breaks in upon me when I think
     that you will not resist my dying prayer, but bestow on my
     child the long arrears of tenderness due to me. 'Yes, yes, you will receive, you will be kind to her; and by so
     doing you will make me ample amends for all the sorrow which
     your harshness caused me when we met last.--That was a dreadful
     day!