He dined
with us the next day, and was to leave town again on Wednesday or Thursday. Will you be very angry
with me, my dear Lizzy, if I take this opportunity of saying (what I was never bold enough to say
before) how much I like him. His behaviour to us has, in every respect, been as pleasing as when we
were in Derbyshire. His understanding and opinions all please me; he wants nothing but a little more
liveliness, and that, if he marry prudently, his wife may teach him. I thought him very sly;-he hardly
ever mentioned your name. But slyness seems the fashion. "Pray forgive me if I have been very presuming, or at least do not punish me so far as to exclude me
from P. I shall never be quite happy till I have been all round the park. A low phaeton, with a nice
little pair of ponies, would be the very thing. "But I must write no more. The children have been wanting me this half hour. "Yours, very sincerely,
"M. GARDINER." The contents of this letter threw Elizabeth into a flutter of spirits, in which it was difficult to
determine whether pleasure or pain bore the greatest share. The vague and unsettled suspicions
which uncertainty had produced of what Mr. Darcy might have been doing to forward her sister's
match, which she had feared to encourage as an exertion of goodness too great to be probable, and
at the same time dreaded to be just, from the pain of obligation, were proved beyond their greatest
extent to be true! He had followed them purposely to town, he had taken on himself all the trouble
and mortification attendant on such a research; in which supplication had been necessary to a
woman whom he must abominate and despise, and where he was reduced to meet, frequently meet,
reason with, persuade, and finally bribe, the man whom he always most wished to avoid, and whose
very name it was punishment to him to pronounce. He had done all this for a girl whom he could
neither regard nor esteem. Her heart did whisper that he had done it for her. But it was a hope
shortly checked by other considerations, and she soon felt that even her vanity was insufficient,
when required to depend on his affection for her-for a woman who had already refused him-as
able to overcome a sentiment so natural as abhorrence against relationship with Wickham. Brother-
in-law of Wickham! Every kind of pride must revolt from the connection. He had, to be sure, done
much. She was ashamed to think how much. But he had given a reason for his interference, which
asked no extraordinary stretch of belief. It was reasonable that he should feel he had been wrong; he
had liberality, and he had the means of exercising it; and though she would not place herself as his
principal inducement, she could, perhaps, believe that remaining partiality for her might assist his
endeavours in a cause where her peace of mind must be materially concerned. It was painful,
exceedingly painful, to know that they were under obligations to a person who could never receive a
return. They owed the restoration of Lydia, her character, every thing, to him. Oh! how heartily did
she grieve over every ungracious sensation she had ever encouraged, every saucy speech she had
ever directed towards him. For herself she was humbled; but she was proud of him. Proud that in a
cause of compassion and honour, he had been able to get the better of himself. She read over her
aunt's commendation of him again and again. It was hardly enough; but it pleased her. She was even
sensible of some pleasure, though mixed with regret, on finding how steadfastly both she and her
uncle had been persuaded that affection and confidence subsisted between Mr. Darcy and herself. She was roused from her seat, and her reflections, by some one's approach; and before she could
strike into another path, she was overtaken by Wickham. "I am afraid I interrupt your solitary ramble, my dear sister?" said he, as he joined her. "You certainly do," she replied with a smile; "but it does not follow that the interruption must be
unwelcome." "I should be sorry indeed, if it were. We were always good friends; and now we are better." "True. Are the others coming out?" "I do not know. Mrs. Bennet and Lydia are going in the carriage to Meryton. And so, my dear sister, I
find, from our uncle and aunt, that you have actually seen Pemberley." She replied in the affirmative. "I almost envy you the pleasure, and yet I believe it would be too much for me, or else I could take it
in my way to Newcastle. And you saw the old housekeeper, I suppose? Poor Reynolds, she was
always very fond of me. But of course she did not mention my name to you." "Yes, she did." "And what did she say?" "That you were gone into the army, and she was afraid had-not turned out well. At such a distance
as that, you know, things are strangely misrepresented." "Certainly," he replied, biting his lips. Elizabeth hoped she had silenced him; but he soon afterwards
said:
"I was surprised to see Darcy in town last month. We passed each other several times. I wonder what
he can be doing there." "Perhaps preparing for his marriage with Miss de Bourgh," said Elizabeth. "It must be something
particular, to take him there at this time of year." "Undoubtedly. Did you see him while you were at Lambton? I thought I understood from the
Gardiners that you had." "Yes; he introduced us to his sister." "And do you like her?" "Very much." "I have heard, indeed, that she is uncommonly improved within this year or two. When I last saw her,
she was not very promising. I am very glad you liked her. I hope she will turn out well." "I dare say she will; she has got over the most trying age." "Did you go by the village of Kympton?" "I do not recollect that we did." "I mention it, because it is the living which I ought to have had. A most delightful place!-Excellent
Parsonage House! It would have suited me in every respect." "How should you have liked making sermons?" "Exceedingly well. I should have considered it as part of my duty, and the exertion would soon have
been nothing. One ought not to repine;-but, to be sure, it would have been such a thing for me! The
quiet, the retirement of such a life would have answered all my ideas of happiness! But it was not to
be. Did you ever hear Darcy mention the circumstance, when you were in Kent?" "I have heard from authority, which I thought as good, that it was left you conditionally only, and at
the will of the present patron." "You have. Yes, there was something in that; I told you so from the first, you may remember." "I did hear, too, that there was a time, when sermon-making was not so palatable to you as it seems
to be at present; that you actually declared your resolution of never taking orders, and that the
business had been compromised accordingly." "You did! and it was not wholly without foundation. You may remember what I told you on that
point, when first we talked of it." They were now almost at the door of the house, for she had walked fast to get rid of him; and
unwilling, for her sister's sake, to provoke him, she only said in reply, with a good-humoured smile:
"Come, Mr. Wickham, we are brother and sister, you know. Do not let us quarrel about the past. In
future, I hope we shall be always of one mind." She held out her hand; he kissed it with affectionate gallantry, though he hardly knew how to look,
and they entered the house. Mr. Wickham was so perfectly satisfied with this conversation that he never again distressed himself,
or provoked his dear sister Elizabeth, by introducing the subject of it; and she was pleased to find
that she had said enough to keep him quiet. The day of his and Lydia's departure soon came, and Mrs. Bennet was forced to submit to a
separation, which, as her husband by no means entered into her scheme of their all going to
Newcastle, was likely to continue at least a twelvemonth. "Oh! my dear Lydia," she cried, "when shall we meet again?" "Oh, lord! I don't know. Not these two or three years, perhaps." "Write to me very often, my dear." "As often as I can. But you know married women have never much time for writing. My sisters may
write to me. They will have nothing else to do." Mr. Wickham's adieus were much more affectionate than his wife's. He smiled, looked handsome,
and said many pretty things. "He is as fine a fellow," said Mr. Bennet, as soon as they were out of the house, "as ever I saw. He
simpers, and smirks, and makes love to us all. I am prodigiously proud of him. I defy even Sir William
Lucas himself to produce a more valuable son-in-law." The loss of her daughter made Mrs. Bennet very dull for several days. "I often think," said she, "that there is nothing so bad as parting with one's friends. One seems so
forlorn without them." "This is the consequence, you see, Madam, of marrying a daughter," said Elizabeth. "It must make
you better satisfied that your other four are single." "It is no such thing. Lydia does not leave me because she is married, but only because her husband's
regiment happens to be so far off. If that had been nearer, she would not have gone so soon." But the spiritless condition which this event threw her into was shortly relieved, and her mind
opened again to the agitation of hope, by an article of news which then began to be in circulation. The housekeeper at Netherfield had received orders to prepare for the arrival of her master, who
was coming down in a day or two, to shoot there for several weeks. Mrs. Bennet was quite in the
fidgets. She looked at Jane, and smiled and shook her head by turns. "Well, well, and so Mr. Bingley is coming down, sister," (for Mrs. Phillips first brought her the news). "Well, so much the better. Not that I care about it, though. He is nothing to us, you know, and I am
sure I never want to see him again. But, however, he is very welcome to come to Netherfield, if he
likes it. And who knows what may happen? But that is nothing to us. You know, sister, we agreed
long ago never to mention a word about it. And so, is it quite certain he is coming?" "You may depend on it," replied the other, "for Mrs. Nicholls was in Meryton last night; I saw her
passing by, and went out myself on purpose to know the truth of it; and she told me that it was
certain true. He comes down on Thursday at the latest, very likely on Wednesday. She was going to
the butcher's, she told me, on purpose to order in some meat on Wednesday, and she has got three
couple of ducks just fit to be killed." Miss Bennet had not been able to hear of his coming without changing colour. It was many months
since she had mentioned his name to Elizabeth; but now, as soon as they were alone together, she
said:
"I saw you look at me to-day, Lizzy, when my aunt told us of the present report; and I know I
appeared distressed. But don't imagine it was from any silly cause. I was only confused for the
moment, because I felt that I should be looked at. I do assure you that the news does not affect me
either with pleasure or pain. I am glad of one thing, that he comes alone; because we shall see the
less of him. Not that I am afraid of myself, but I dread other people's remarks." Elizabeth did not know what to make of it. Had she not seen him in Derbyshire, she might have
supposed him capable of coming there with no other view than what was acknowledged; but she still
thought him partial to Jane, and she wavered as to the greater probability of his coming
there with his friend's permission, or being bold enough to come without it. "Yet it is hard," she sometimes thought, "that this poor man cannot come to a house which he has
legally hired, without raising all this speculation! I will leave him to himself." In spite of what her sister declared, and really believed to be her feelings in the expectation of his
arrival, Elizabeth could easily perceive that her spirits were affected by it. They were more disturbed,
more unequal, than she had often seen them. The subject which had been so warmly canvassed between their parents, about a twelvemonth ago,
was now brought forward again. "As soon as ever Mr. Bingley comes, my dear," said Mrs. Bennet, "you will wait on him of course." "No, no. You forced me into visiting him last year, and promised, if I went to see him, he should
marry one of my daughters. But it ended in nothing, and I will not be sent on a fool's errand again." His wife represented to him how absolutely necessary such an attention would be from all the
neighbouring gentlemen, on his returning to Netherfield. "'Tis an etiquette I despise," said he. "If he wants our society, let him seek it. He knows where we
live. I will not spend my hours in running after my neighbours every time they go away and come
back again." "Well, all I know is, that it will be abominably rude if you do not wait on him. But, however, that
shan't prevent my asking him to dine here, I am determined. We must have Mrs. Long and the
Gouldings soon. That will make thirteen with ourselves, so there will be just room at table for him." Consoled by this resolution, she was the better able to bear her husband's incivility; though it was
very mortifying to know that her neighbours might all see Mr. Bingley, in consequence of it,
before they did. As the day of his arrival drew near,-
"I begin to be sorry that he comes at all," said Jane to her sister. "It would be nothing; I could see him
with perfect indifference, but I can hardly bear to hear it thus perpetually talked of. My mother
means well; but she does not know, no one can know, how much I suffer from what she says. Happy
shall I be, when his stay at Netherfield is over!" "I wish I could say anything to comfort you," replied Elizabeth; "but it is wholly out of my power. You
must feel it; and the usual satisfaction of preaching patience to a sufferer is denied me, because you
have always so much." Mr. Bingley arrived. Mrs. Bennet, through the assistance of servants, contrived to have the earliest
tidings of it, that the period of anxiety and fretfulness on her side might be as long as it could. She
counted the days that must intervene before their invitation could be sent; hopeless of seeing him
before. But on the third morning after his arrival in Hertfordshire, she saw him, from her dressing-
room window, enter the paddock and ride towards the house. Her daughters were eagerly called to partake of her joy. Jane resolutely kept her place at the table;
but Elizabeth, to satisfy her mother, went to the window-she looked,-she saw Mr. Darcy with him,
and sat down again by her sister. "There is a gentleman with him, mamma," said Kitty; "who can it be?" "Some acquaintance or other, my dear, I suppose; I am sure I do not know." "La!" replied Kitty, "it looks just like that man that used to be with him before. Mr. what's-his-name. That tall, proud man." "Good gracious! Mr. Darcy!-and so it does, I vow. Well, any friend of Mr. Bingley's will always be
welcome here, to be sure; but else I must say that I hate the very sight of him." Jane looked at Elizabeth with surprise and concern. She knew but little of their meeting in
Derbyshire, and therefore felt for the awkwardness which must attend her sister, in seeing him
almost for the first time after receiving his explanatory letter. Both sisters were uncomfortable
enough. Each felt for the other, and of course for themselves; and their mother talked on, of her
dislike of Mr. Darcy, and her resolution to be civil to him only as Mr. Bingley's friend, without being
heard by either of them. But Elizabeth had sources of uneasiness which could not be suspected by
Jane, to whom she had never yet had courage to shew Mrs. Gardiner's letter, or to relate her own
change of sentiment towards him. To Jane, he could be only a man whose proposals she had refused,
and whose merit she had undervalued; but to her own more extensive information, he was the
person to whom the whole family were indebted for the first of benefits, and whom she regarded
herself with an interest, if not quite so tender, at least as reasonable and just as what Jane felt for
Bingley. Her astonishment at his coming-at his coming to Netherfield, to Longbourn, and voluntarily
seeking her again, was almost equal to what she had known on first witnessing his altered behaviour
in Derbyshire. The colour which had been driven from her face, returned for half a minute with an additional glow,
and a smile of delight added lustre to her eyes, as she thought for that space of time that his
affection and wishes must still be unshaken. But she would not be secure. "Let me first see how he behaves," said she; "it will then be early enough for expectation." She sat intently at work, striving to be composed, and without daring to lift up her eyes, till anxious
curiosity carried them to the face of her sister as the servant was approaching the door. Jane looked
a little paler than usual, but more sedate than Elizabeth had expected. On the gentlemen's
appearing, her colour increased; yet she received them with tolerable ease, and with a propriety of
behaviour equally free from any symptom of resentment or any unnecessary complaisance. Elizabeth said as little to either as civility would allow, and sat down again to her work, with an
eagerness which it did not often command. She had ventured only one glance at Darcy. He looked
serious, as usual; and, she thought, more as he had been used to look in Hertfordshire, than as she
had seen him at Pemberley. But, perhaps he could not in her mother's presence be what he was
before her uncle and aunt. It was a painful, but not an improbable, conjecture. Bingley, she had likewise seen for an instant, and in that short period saw him looking both pleased
and embarrassed. He was received by Mrs. Bennet with a degree of civility which made her two
daughters ashamed, especially when contrasted with the cold and ceremonious politeness of her
curtsey and address to his friend. Elizabeth, particularly, who knew that her mother owed to the latter the preservation of her
favourite daughter from irremediable infamy, was hurt and distressed to a most painful degree by a
distinction so ill applied. Darcy, after inquiring of her how Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner did, a question which she could not answer
without confusion, said scarcely anything. He was not seated by her; perhaps that was the reason of
his silence; but it had not been so in Derbyshire. There he had talked to her friends, when he could
not to herself. But now several minutes elapsed without bringing the sound of his voice; and when
occasionally, unable to resist the impulse of curiosity, she raised her eyes to his face, she as often
found him looking at Jane as at herself, and frequently on no object but the ground. More
thoughtfulness and less anxiety to please, than when they last met, were plainly expressed. She was
disappointed, and angry with herself for being so. "Could I expect it to be otherwise!" said she. "Yet why did he come?" She was in no humour for conversation with anyone but himself; and to him she had hardly courage
to speak. She inquired after his sister, but could do no more. "It is a long time, Mr. Bingley, since you went away," said Mrs. Bennet. He readily agreed to it. "I began to be afraid you would never come back again. People did say you meant to quit the place
entirely at Michaelmas; but, however, I hope it is not true. A great many changes have happened in
the neighbourhood, since you went away. Miss Lucas is married and settled. And one of my own
daughters. I suppose you have heard of it; indeed, you must have seen it in the papers. It was in The
Times and The Courier, I know; though it was not put in as it ought to be. It was only said, 'Lately,
George Wickham, Esq. to Miss Lydia Bennet,' without there being a syllable said of her father, or the
place where she lived, or anything. It was my brother Gardiner's drawing up too, and I wonder how
he came to make such an awkward business of it. Did you see it?" Bingley replied that he did, and made his congratulations. Elizabeth dared not lift up her eyes. How
Mr. Darcy looked, therefore, she could not tell. "It is a delightful thing, to be sure, to have a daughter well married," continued her mother, "but at
the same time, Mr. Bingley, it is very hard to have her taken such a way from me. They are gone
down to Newcastle, a place quite northward, it seems, and there they are to stay I do not know how
long. His regiment is there; for I suppose you have heard of his leaving the --shire, and of his being
gone into the regulars. Thank Heaven! he has some friends, though perhaps not so many as he
deserves." Elizabeth, who knew this to be levelled at Mr. Darcy, was in such misery of shame, that she could
hardly keep her seat. It drew from her, however, the exertion of speaking, which nothing else had so
effectually done before; and she asked Bingley whether he meant to make any stay in the country at
present. A few weeks, he believed. "When you have killed all your own birds, Mr. Bingley," said her mother, "I beg you will come here,
and shoot as many as you please on Mr. Bennet's manor. I am sure he will be vastly happy to oblige
you, and will save all the best of the covies for you." Elizabeth's misery increased, at such unnecessary, such officious attention! Were the same fair
prospect to arise at present as had flattered them a year ago, every thing, she was persuaded, would
be hastening to the same vexatious conclusion. At that instant, she felt that years of happiness could
not make Jane or herself amends for moments of such painful confusion. "The first wish of my heart," said she to herself, "is never more to be in company with either of them. Their society can afford no pleasure that will atone for such wretchedness as this! Let me never see
either one or the other again!" Yet the misery, for which years of happiness were to offer no compensation, received soon
afterwards material relief, from observing how much the beauty of her sister re-kindled the
admiration of her former lover. When first he came in, he had spoken to her but little; but every five
minutes seemed to be giving her more of his attention. He found her as handsome as she had been
last year; as good natured, and as unaffected, though not quite so chatty. Jane was anxious that no
difference should be perceived in her at all, and was really persuaded that she talked as much as
ever. But her mind was so busily engaged, that she did not always know when she was silent. When the gentlemen rose to go away, Mrs. Bennet was mindful of her intended civility, and they
were invited and engaged to dine at Longbourn in a few days time. "You are quite a visit in my debt, Mr. Bingley," she added, "for when you went to town last winter,
you promised to take a family dinner with us, as soon as you returned. I have not forgot, you see; and
I assure you, I was very much disappointed that you did not come back and keep your engagement." Bingley looked a little silly at this reflection, and said something of his concern at having been
prevented by business. They then went away. Mrs. Bennet had been strongly inclined to ask them to stay and dine there that day; but, though she
always kept a very good table, she did not think anything less than two courses could be good
enough for a man on whom she had such anxious designs, or satisfy the appetite and pride of one
who had ten thousand a year. As soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits; or in other words, to dwell
without interruption on those subjects that must deaden them more. Mr. Darcy's behaviour
astonished and vexed her. "Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent," said she, "did he come at all?" She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure. "He could be still amiable, still pleasing, to my uncle and aunt, when he was in town; and why not to
me? If he fears me, why come hither? If he no longer cares for me, why silent? Teasing, teasing, man! I will think no more about him." Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach of her sister, who joined her
with a cheerful look, which showed her better satisfied with their visitors, than Elizabeth. "Now," said she, "that this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly easy. I know my own strength, and I
shall never be embarrassed again by his coming. I am glad he dines here on Tuesday. It will then be
publicly seen that, on both sides, we meet only as common and indifferent acquaintance." "Yes, very indifferent indeed," said Elizabeth, laughingly. "Oh, Jane, take care." "My dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak, as to be in danger now?" "I think you are in very great danger of making him as much in love with you as ever." They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs. Bennet, in the meanwhile, was giving
way to all the happy schemes, which the good humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an
hour's visit, had revived. On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and the two who were most anxiously
expected, to the credit of their punctuality as sportsmen, were in very good time. When they
repaired to the dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take the place,
which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by her sister. Her prudent mother, occupied
by the same ideas, forbore to invite him to sit by herself. On entering the room, he seemed to
hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was decided. He placed himself
by her. Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend. He bore it with noble indifference,
and she would have imagined that Bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had she not seen
his eyes likewise turned towards Mr. Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing alarm. His behaviour to her sister was such, during dinner time, as showed an admiration of her, which,
though more guarded than formerly, persuaded Elizabeth, that if left wholly to himself, Jane's
happiness, and his own, would be speedily secured. Though she dared not depend upon the
consequence, she yet received pleasure from observing his behaviour. It gave her all the animation
that her spirits could boast; for she was in no cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her
as the table could divide them. He was on one side of her mother. She knew how little such a
situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to advantage. She was not near
enough to hear any of their discourse, but she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and
how formal and cold was their manner whenever they did. Her mother's ungraciousness, made the
sense of what they owed him more painful to Elizabeth's mind; and she would, at times, have given
anything to be privileged to tell him that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole
of the family. She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of bringing them together; that
the whole of the visit would not pass away without enabling them to enter into something more of
conversation than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance. Anxious and uneasy, the
period which passed in the drawing-room, before the gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull to a
degree that almost made her uncivil. She looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all
her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend. "If he does not come to me, then," said she, "I shall give him up for ever." The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have answered her hopes; but, alas!