The removal, which was

impending, had brought on somewhat the more hastily the communication of my views. I fairly confessed that the married life was now much in my thoughts; and
I
owned that the eyes of Mary had perhaps contributed more to my conversion, than the arguments of her father. My friend asked me, if I had ever opened myself
to
her on the subject, or was informed of the state of her inclination toward me? I owned, I had not. The subject was in itself so interesting, and was so new to my thoughts, that, whenever the impulse of confessing my partiality had

presented itself to me, it had always brought with it such a palpitation of the heart, and tremulousness of voice, as had compelled me for the time to desist
from my purpose. Nor could there ever, in my mind, be sufficient reason for an early declaration, except where the parties were so circumstanced, that they
could not otherwise have the opportunity of a protracted intercourse, and a more minute acquaintance with each other's qualifications and temper. Was it not

much more gratifying to a delicate mind, by silent attentions to steal away the soul, and to observe the gradual demonstrations of kindness in a mistress,
growing up unconsciously to herself, than by an abrupt question to compel her to check or to anticipate the progress of sentiment? Should I own the truth? Whenever I meditated the proposing of the question, I was immediately beset in two

ways with the passion of fear. I feared to be refused: else why did I put the question? I also feared to be accepted: perhaps no ingenuous mind, not yet lost
to a serious anticipation of the future, could be free from that fear. It was a question of so deep a stake, to both the parties to whom it related! The man

who was about to form it, could scarcely help recollecting on the verge, Now I am free; I am master of my own actions and of my plans of life: before the
clock
shall strike again, it may be I shall be bound by the sacred ties of honour, and the fate of my future life will be at the disposal of another! The season of

courtship is, at least to the man who has outlived the first heyday of his boiling blood, a season of probation; it is the business of either party to study

the other, and in each interview distinctly to enquire, "Is this the person with whom I ought to embark in the voyage

of life? Every species of promise, express or implicit, ought to be kept back, that he may preserve, as long as possible, the healthful and genuine character
of the scene in which he is engaged. "Farewel," said Macneil in the close of the interesting conversation in which we were engaged. "I leave my daughter behind me; and I may say, I leave her in
your protection. The family with which she is to spend the winter are very good sort of people; but they are people of fashion, and without hearts. No man
knows any thing amiss of them; they are correct in their methods of acting, and punctual in their payments; I feel satisfied that nothing amiss can happen to

my daughter, while she is an inmate of their house. But it is to your sentiments, as a man of worth and honour, that I confide her. I believe, she approves
of
you; I think she will accept of your tender, if you shall judge proper to

make it. In this, it is of course as much your desire, as it is mine, that she should be free. Fleetwood, it is a very deep and solemn confidence that I repose
in you. If you marry my daughter, you must be to her, father, and mother, and sisters, and all the world in one. If you are unjust to her, she will have no
one
to whom to appeal. If you are capricious, and rigorous, and unreasonable, she will be your prisoner!" This pathetic appeal from the father of her I loved, suddenly filled my eyes with a gush of tears. I eagerly pressed his hand. "Macneil," said I, "I will never
be unjust to your daughter; she shall never find me capricious, or rigorous, or unreasonable. I swear to you, that I will be such a husband, as the most
tender
of fathers would choose for his daughter!" ---It will be seen how I kept my oath. After the interval of a few days we

parted. I will not repeat here what mrs. Macneil said to me concerning her child, as that would be to go over again in substance what had been already said by
the father. This accomplished woman never appeared so amiable to me as during our short residence at Falmouth. She had as much right, perhaps more, than her

husband, to urge upon me the justice I should owe to the lovely Mary. Never had any mother more affectionately or more diligently discharged the duties of a

parent; never was mother more amply qualified to discharge them. I, and Mary, and one of the daughters of the family with whom Mary was invited to visit, attended the rest of the party in a boat, to the side of the vessel in
which they embarked for Genoa. We went with them on board the ship, and spent still two hours more in their company. Never was a family so equally or

so strongly inspired with love for each other, as the groupe before me. "Why am I not going with you?" said Mary. "Do not talk of that," replied the mother; "we shall else never be able to leave you behind." I attended on horseback the chaise which conveyed Mary, and the young lady, her companion, to London. Having fixed her there, I was obliged to set out on an
excursion of a few weeks into Wales, to inspect some affairs which required my presence. It was on the twentieth of September that the Macneils sailed from
England; and the weather had proved squally and uncertain almost from the hour we parted. On that day week from the time we quitted Falmouth, I slept at
Shrewsbury; and never in my life do I recollect a night so tremendously stormy. My thoughts were of course wholly on the Romney, the vessel on board which
these dear

friends were embarked. I could not refrain from anticipating every thing dreadful. How curiously is the human mind affected by circumstances! I have often
listened to a storm, without almost recollecting that the globe of earth contained the element of water within its frame; I have felt entranced with the
hollow
sound, and the furious blasts, that sung round and shook the roof that sheltered me; I have got astride in imagination upon the horses of the element, and
plunged with fearful delight into the vast abyss. Now every blast of wind went to my soul. Every thought was crowded with dismal images of piercing shrieks,
of
cracking masts, of the last despair, of dying clasps, and a watery grave. It is in vain to endeavour to give an idea of what this night I endured. It was not

fancy or loose conjecture; it was firm persuasion; I saw my friends

perish; when the morning dawned, I rose with a perfect conviction that they were no more. So deep was the suffering I endured, that I had not spirit the next morning to leave Shrewsbury, and proceed on my destined journey. I could think of nothing
but the sad fate of Macneil, and affairs of business appeared wholly unworthy of attention. What a long and melancholy day did it seem! A calm had succeeded;

the sun shone, and nature was cheerful; to what purpose? The sun no longer shone on Macneil!--- By the evening however, the monotony of rest became more
intolerable to me than travelling; I ordered a chaise; I drove all night; and in the morning arrived at my paternal abode. The day after my arrival I received a letter from my adored Mary. The sole topic of the letter was the storm of the

twenty-seventh. She wrote in broken sentences, with grief, with terror, with distraction. "My all," said she, "is embarked in one venture! father, mother,
sisters! What infatuation prevailed upon me to separate myself from them? It is a crime, no less deep and terrible than parricide! What shall I do alone in
the
world? Ye wild and raging winds! Ye merciless and all-devouring waves! Ye have made me tenfold a vagabond and a beggar upon the earth! The remembrance of
last
Saturday is distraction to me! Would that total distraction would come, and drive all remembrance from my brain for ever!" She continued in a style no less
incoherent, and seemed to be as fully impressed as myself, with the conviction that the late storm had proved fatal to her whole family. I no sooner read the letter of Mary, than I lost no time in setting out for

London, that I might afford her every consolation in my power. It was particularly since this fatal prognostic had struck her, that she felt how forlorn was
her situation in the family where she resided. She had met one of the daughters upon a visit in Staffordshire; they two had been the only individuals of the party, who had not reached a demure and sober
age; and for a month they had been sole companions to each other. They had sung and danced to each other; they had strolled through the meadows and reclined
in
the shade together; Mary had instructed her friend in botany, and her friend had been eager to learn, because she was told that botany was a fashionable
accomplishment; she had in return been copious and animated in her description of the town-amusements. All this ended in the two young ladies, with that
ardour

and levity which is perhaps inseparable from youth, swearing to each other an everlasting friendship. Mary was a total stranger to every member of the family
except this young lady; and the seniors complied in this point with their daughter's wishes, in inviting the youngest miss Macneil to pass the winter with
them. Mr. Macneil wished for my sake to leave Mary in England, and easily turned the balance of her mind toward accepting the invitation. For the first two or three days Mary had been delighted with the metropolis; and no doubt would have continued to be delighted for as many months, had not
anxiety for the safety of her family gradually driven all other thoughts out of her mind. At first she had conceived of a voyage at sea no otherwise, than of a journey by land; her father had been a great traveller; her mother had been in Italy;

yet tempests and shipwrecks had made no part of the little histories she had heard them relate of their past adventures. The ocean occupied no distinct region
of her fancy; she had devoted no part of her thoughts to meditate the natural history of the world of waters. In the past years of her life she had had no
interest, giving to her ideas that particular direction; she had committed no rich freightage to the mercy of the unfaithful element. Now the case was
altered. She had parted with her friends in a gentle and prosperous gale; but the late squally weather had given being and substance in her mind to the phenomena of
the
sea. What occupied her thoughts became the theme of her tongue; but she soon found that her fashionable friend lent an idle ear to the monotonous topic. Miss

Matilda Rancliffe was what is well expressed by the phrase, a fair-weather friend; she loved

no dismals; her step was airy; the tone of her voice was frolic and cheerful; and she owned that her sensibilities were so overpowering, as to make the impulse
in her to fly from the presence of distress irresistible. The servant at mr. Rancliffe's showed me into the drawing-room, where the whole family, with one or two visitors, was assembled. Every one was cheerful and
amused; the young ladies were busy talking of a party of pleasure, and anticipating the happiness they should reap from it. I looked round the circle, and
could not at first discover the object of my search. The poor Mary had withdrawn into a corner, neglecting all, and by all neglected. Her cheeks were pale;
her
eyes were sunk; her attitude was the attitude of despair. As soon as she saw me, she hastened to me, and led me into another room. "Oh, sir," said she, "tell me all

that you know, and all that you guess, respecting my poor father and mother. You, mr. Fleetwood, are acquainted with these things; you no doubt have witnessed
storms at sea, and know the different coasts near which they were to pass in their voyage. Are there any hopes? Whereabout was the vessel likely to be when
this storm came on? Was there ever so dreadful a tempest?" I endeavoured to encourage the unhappy orphan; I sought to inspire courage, with as much skill as
it
could be communicated by one who had not a spark of hope existing in his mind. "And how, Mary," said I, "do you find yourself situated in this worthy family?" "Ah, mr. Fleetwood," replied she, with a desponding voice, "this is a sad place
for me! As long as I was gay, and could join in their amusements, we went on well enough; I was a sort of favourite. But now that my heart sinks

within me, nobody cares for me; they are glad to pass me by, and crowd together in a laughing knot at the most distant part of the room. This whole family,
father, mother, brothers, sisters, seem to live only for amusements. What a situation for me, who have spent my whole life in a family of love? a family,
where
no individual could suffer, without exciting the liveliest anxieties, and the tenderest attentions, in all the rest?" A month longer elapsed, before we had any intelligence of the fate of the Romney. During this period, my visits to the amiable forlorn were unintermitted. If
Mary had before conceived a nascent partiality to me, it now became much stronger. The sight of me was the only pleasure the day afforded. The contrast
between
my sympathy and affection, and the indifference of the Rancliffes, was extreme. Into my bosom only could she pour her sorrows; in my

eye only did she meet the expression of humanity. On my part, the situation was no less favourable to the growth of attachment. The sweet and affectionate
disposition of Mary was conspicuous. Her desolate situation rendered her tenfold more interesting. I now felt, for the first time in my life, how delightful
a
task it is to console distress, when the sufferer is a woman, beautiful and young. At the proper hour I always flew to the presence of my charming ward with

the most eager impatience. In general, when the mind is engaged in the performance of virtuous actions, one of the sentiments which most palpably offers
itself
is an honest pride. It was not pride that I felt on the present occasion. My mind was too much softened to be able to entertain so erect and prosperous a
passion. There was something deliciously languid in the tone of my spirits; it was sadness, but a sadness not without

its gratifications. Sorrow brings two generous hearts nearer to each other, than joy. I was astonished, when I reflected on the ignorance in which I had lived
of the most delicious emotions of the human breast, and how near I had been to going to the grave without once participating what is most precious and
excellent in the life of man. The melancholy news at length reached us, which with so sure a foresight we had anticipated. The vessel in which the family of my beloved had embarked, was
tossed several days in the bay of Biscay, and at length dashed to pieces near cape Finisterre, upon the iron-fronted coast of the province of Galicia. The
captain only, and a few of the officers and sailors, were saved in the long boat. They had proffered to receive two of the passengers into the boat. But this

kindred of love refused to be separated; they could not endure to cast lots upon

their lives; and, rather than submit to so dire an extremity, father, mother and daughters preferred to perish together. ---How painfully are we apt to reflect
afterward upon a project such as this of the voyage to Italy, as partaking of the nature of suicide! If the Macneils had been content to live in England,
they
might have enjoyed many years of pleasure, and have been long an ornament and advantage to their species. I never from this hour recollected the scene of
their
embarkation, without figuring them to myself as so many victims, robed in white, and crowned with chaplets, marching along the beach, as to be sacrificed. When the melancholy event was ascertained, it was no longer possible for Mary to continue in the family of the Rancliffes. She hired a lodging to which she
retired, with only one humble female friend to accompany her. The family who politely dismissed her, condoled with her upon her misfortune. It is impossible to conceive any thing more hard and unfeeling, than the
condolences which politeness extorts on so terrible an occasion. If a man could observe, from a place of safety, the roarings of a tiger, as he tore the
palpitating limbs of his own brother, they would scarcely jar more painfully on the sense. The adieux of the Rancliffes said but too plainly, As soon as we
have shut the door on you and your woes, we purpose to forget that there is any such being in the world. I was now poor Mary's only visitor. I shall not undertake to detail the progress of our amour under these tragical circumstances. For a long time, though our
courtship substantially proceeded, no word of love, or hope, or of prospect to the future, fell from my lips. If I had attempted to utter such a word, I
should
have felt it like sacrilege; and I am sure the pure and affectionate heart of Mary would have sustained such a shock, as must ultimately have proved a bar to

our union for ever. No; she regarded me merely as a zealous guardian, and a faithful protector. She saw in me her father's friend; and, as I seemed busy in
performing the functions of that friend to his surviving representative, she honoured

me for my fidelity, she felt toward me an increasing reverence, and had no thought nearer her heart than the gratifying my wishes, and anticipating my
requests. The passion of the sexes will perhaps infallibly grow up between male and female, wherever they are much together, and feel much mutual
approbation,
provided they are impressed with no adverse prepossessions, and there is nothing in the discipline and decorums of society that forbids and sets a brand on
its
completion. The melancholy too that hung over our interviews, softened our minds, and prepared them for tender and passionate feelings. One further misfortune impended over my ward; for such by the most sacred obligations she was now become. Her father, as I have said, had converted his whole
property into money, which he lodged, previously to his embarkation, in a banking-house in Genoa. He of

course received, in the due forms practised on such occasions, two complete duplicates of the titles or instruments by which he or his representative might
claim the property at Genoa on producing the said titles or instruments. These duplicates were inclosed in two boxes of ebony, in figure and appearance
perfectly similar. One of them mr. Macneil designed to take with him on board the Romney, that he might employ his fortune in the purchases he meditated,
with
the least possible delay; the other was to be left in my hands, with a view to any possible accident or miscarriage. I was present with my friend, when he
closed and sealed his different packages, the last day but two before he left the Windermere. We read over on that occasion the papers received from the
Genoese banker. The room in which we sat was crowded with trunks and boxes, some already locked,

others waiting for their last complement. In the middle of the room was a large table, covered with valuable trinkets, bank-notes, money, books of accounts,
and packets of papers of a thousand denominations. Suddenly Macneil was summoned out of the room, to speak to a land-bailiff or tradesman of some sort, who
had
come for the second time upon some trifling and vexatious question. Before he left the room, my friend hastened to put away his most important papers. He
closed the two boxes of ebony, and carefully placed some other papers in a trunk which was near him. His seal lay on the table; and, taking it in his hand,
he
requested me to affix it where it was wanting. In all this he seemed to proceed so cautiously, as to leave my mind entirely free from suspicion; while at the

same time his attention was really engaged by another subject. This is the only account

I can give of the affair. The trunks were opened no more. One of the ebony-boxes, together with the rest of the packages, was finally conveyed on board the
Romney: the other, as was previously determined, remained in my possession. When, in consequence of the shipwreck in which Macneil perished (for he had
placed
a will he had lately made in my hands, and had appointed me, in conjunction with an eminent barrister at law, his executor), I broke the seal, and opened the

box which was supposed to contain the title and instruments of his fortune, now become the fortune of his surviving child, I found it entirely empty. I was thunderstruck with this circumstance. I entered into a correspondence with the banker at Genoa; I afterward commenced a law-suit against him. His answers
to my letters were cautiously and artfully expressed; they avoided

saying any thing directly, respecting the sum of sixty thousand pounds sterling which I stated mr. Macneil to have remitted; the writer intrenched himself in
the forms and language of business; he said that he should be glad to see the titles and instruments on which I founded so considerable a claim; but, till he

saw them, he could deliver no opinion on the matter. As this detestable correspondence proceeded, and in proportion as he felt himself more secure of his
ground, he assumed a loftier and more insolent tone. He was astonished that I should trouble him with repeated applications in an affair which he knew
nothing
of, and required that I should desist from such extraordinary and discreditable importunities. This may well appear to the reader somewhat wonderful: the
banker who committed this enormous fraud had hitherto borne an unimpeachable character: all I can say

is, that the temptation was probably too large for his sentiments of integrity. I may be permitted, as a misanthrope, to remark, that the integrity of too many
men has its limits, and that it is to be feared there have been bankers, even in England, who would have sold themselves to the devil for sixty thousand
pounds.---The fact is however, in a word, that the property of the Macneils was never recovered. I have often thought it was fortunate for me, that I and my good friend, the Genoese banker, were not inhabitants of the same country. It was certainly in some
measure an issue of character that was tried between us. I do believe that, if the Genoese had not entertained the hope of keeping his reputation as well as

the money, he would have paid Mary her fortune. What applause would he have obtained, if he had disbursed out of his coffers sixty thousand pounds, which,

as every one who repeated the story would have been forward to remark, he was not obliged to pay! On the other hand, what a villain was I, if, on false or
uncertain grounds, I charged him with fraudulently detaining so enormous a sum! I must take care, as he observed to me in some of his letters, how I advanced

an accusation against him, tending to subvert the whole basis of his transactions, without having in my possession documents by which it could be supported. The good Genoese, as I afterward learned, made out a plausible and even pathetic story, to his acquaintance and friends, of the injury he sustained. It
might,
he said, have been the intention of the unhappy gentleman who was lost at sea, to have vested this property in his hands; the more was his misfortune that he

never received it! Sixty thousand pounds however was a large sum; he had never in the whole

course of his business held cash to that amount, at one time, for any one individual; and he took upon him to doubt from every thing he had heard, whether the
deceased had ever been worth half the sum. It was a hard thing indeed, to be made accountable for money he never saw, and to be called a cheat and a villain

unless he would give away half his estate; and, though he trusted in the equity of the laws of Genoa to protect his fortune, and in the candour of his
countrymen to vindicate his character, yet the uneasiness which the rashness of this Englishman, to say the least of it, had given his mind, was such as no
vindication could ever compensate.---I am not sure, if I had gone at this time to Genoa, whether I should not have been publicly hooted, as I passed along
the
streets. Yet, in reality, spite of the loss of these important instruments, I had documents

left, sufficient to justify me in the mind of every impartial observer. The amount of mr. Macneil's fortune was of course a matter that had been sufficiently
obvious to many. This fortune could not suddenly be annihilated. The Milanese friend of Macneil was ready to attest that it had been his purpose to lodge his

property in this house, and that he certainly believed, he had done so. He produced a letter in which the fact was strongly implied, though it was not
affirmed
in words that admitted not of debate. In his will my friend described the receipt of the sum as being acknowledged by the banker, and entered into some
detail
as to the number and titles of the instruments under which he claimed. But all this was not sufficient to procure a decree in my favour before the Genoese magistrates. The Italian lawyers observed, that a description of property
in

a man's will, was the most unlike thing in the world to a title to an estate; and that, if such a doctrine, as this claim turned on, were admitted, which they
well knew the equity of the bench before which they pleaded would reject with indignation, every man who pleased, in every country of Europe, might bequeath

his daughter sixty thousand pounds, not only from their client, but from every banking, and even considerable mercantile, house within the limits of the
republic. They dwelt at great length upon the high character for integrity, which had ever been preserved by the commercial class of the citizens of Genoa, a

class, which was well known to consist principally of the most ancient and honourable nobility in the world; they expatiated pathetically upon the virtues,
the
charities, the devotion, and the unblemished life of their client, and the agonies his pure and uncorrupted

mind had suffered from so foul an imputation; and they earnestly called on the court by their present decree to vindicate, not the defendant only, whose
character in this case had been grievously aspersed, but the whole state, from the suspicion that such a crime could have been so much as conceived by one of

her citizens.---Their exertions and eloquence were crowned with the most entire success. I hesitated long to disclose to the unfortunate Mary the new calamity which hung over her. One consideration at length decided me to make her of council in the
controversy that was going on. I found her mind dwelling with incessant anguish on the image of her departed kindred. She refused all amusement and
avocations. The employments, which had lately been so dear, were now loathsome to her. The fields and the garden had no charms. Her spirits and

her appetite deserted her. I saw that there was no chance of recalling her to life, but by giving her some object to which she could not refuse to attend. I
believe the loss of her fortune of sixty thousand pounds, was the direct means by which she was preserved from the grave. At first she declared in the most peremptory manner, that she would listen to nothing that related to the goods of life. What were the means of life to her,
when she was already bereaved of every thing that made life worth having! It was a pleasure to her to conceive, that, when she lost parents and sisters, she

had nothing left! There was something soothing in the idea, that the same billows which had devoured her dearest relatives, had swallowed up their wealth,
and
left her a helpless beggar in the world! By degrees I recalled her to a sounder

mind. I represented to her the importance of wealth, and the duty which prescribed the preservation and right disposition of it. With the fortune which had
thus devolved to her, how respectable might she become! She might maintain a houshold of temperate and happy individuals. She might relieve the wants of
multitudes, might unfold talent, encourage industry, and multiply around her the class of sober and honourable citizens in the state. Even the inherent
qualities which she or any other individual possessed, were illustrated, when they appeared in conjunction with the goods of fortune. The merits of the poor

man were always clouded, undervalued, and baffled of their utility; while those of the rich were illuminated with the beams of applause, and enabled to
appear
with tenfold effect upon the theatre of society. I further reminded her of the guilt she would incur,

if, instead of endeavouring to make a proper use of the wealth which had devolved to her, she suffered it, by any negligence of hers, to become the prize of
profligacy and fraud, and to be administered in the depraved manner which such dispositions would dictate. I prevailed on the sorrowing maid to suffer me to bring to her the barrister, who was the joint executor of her father's will. We read together, in her
presence, the letters which had relation to the subject. We canvassed the evidence, nuncupatory and scriptory, which might be made useful in the cause. We
brought together in her apartments a consultation of English lawyers, with whom we thought it necessary to advise as to the measures to be pursued. Add to
this, that the letters, which from time to time reached us from the Genoese banker, and from the lawyers it was necessary for us to retain in that city,
both

when they were expected, and when they arrived, kept alive our interest, and furnished topics for our conversation. A law-suit is like an adventure in a gaming
transaction; the mind is continually upon the stretch, the affair from day to day assumes a new face, hope and fear dance an alternate measure before the
eyes,
and we are now sanguine with expectation, and now speechless and dejected with intolerable despair. How many waking and anxious nights may he expect to pass,

who, from choice or necessity, is obliged to commit his property to the discussions of the wrangling bar!---The degree of uneasiness, which is inseparable
from
an affair of this sort, was, as I have already said, salutary to Mary, and served by imperceptible degrees to bring her back to the considerations of the
world. Here then was a strange series of vicissitudes in the pecuniary fortune of my

destined bride. When I had first contemplated marriage with her, she was one of three coheiresses merely, of a man of a given fortune, who might expect on the
day of her marriage to receive a certain portion, and, after the death of her parents, to divide in equal allotments the property which they possessed. In
the
few days that clapsed between the melancholy intelligence of the loss of her family, and the period when it became necessary to look into the affairs of my
deceased friend, she stood forth the undoubted successor to his ample property. I never had been, in any occurrence of my life, a mercenary character; and I

doubt whether, in any moment of these few days, the idea of Mary's accession of property offered itself to my thoughts; certainly it was very far from being

among the early suggestions inspired by this melancholy catastrophe. But, after this, there was a long time, nearly a year,

before the question was finally set at rest (the action indeed was not dismissed by the Italian courts under two years; but I had, before that, resolutely
driven the expectation of any advantage to result, from my thoughts); and during this period, amidst the various fluctuations of our cause, and the sanguine

hopes which were occasionally held out to me, the successive images of my mistress, as the possessor of an ample property, and a beggar, could not but
forcibly
present themselves to my apprehension. What a strange thing is the human mind! Of what consequence was it to me, whether the amiable and accomplished woman I married, were, or were not, amply
endowed with the goods of fortune? I had already enough for every honest and honourable purpose in life. Fortune could not make her more amiable and
accomplished than she was: adversity could take nothing from her. I can safely declare that I never repined for a moment, that she gave me her hand, without bringing me a shilling. Yet I am formed like all other corporeal
essences, and am affected by the adventitious and unmeriting circumstances of rank or riches with which my fellow-being is surrounded. Had Mary entered into
my
alliance a distinguished heiress, this, in spite of my philosophy, would have commanded from me a certain deference and homage. As she was, pennyless, a mere

pensionary on my bounty, ---I swear I did not value her less,---I felt more tenderness, more humanity, a more religious kind of forbearance toward her. But
the
sentiment was of a different sort; her first claim was upon my pity. I experienced this a hundred times, when I hastened to pay her my customary visit. When
I
waited upon her as an heiress, I approached with a certain submission; I looked at her as

an independent being; my thoughts moved slow, and my tongue was apt to falter, if I suggested to her any idea of a freer and more unceremonious sort. When I
visited her portionless, my mind moved freer; I breathed a thinner and more elastic atmosphere; my tongue assumed a tone of greater confidence; and, at the
same time that I felt for her the deepest compassion and the most entire sympathy, my speech became more eloquent, and I caught myself talking with the
condescension of a superior, ---superior in the possession of that sordid dirt, which the system of human things much oftener bestows upon a driveller or a
knave, than upon a being of genuine excellence and worth. Another idea of a subtler nature offered itself to my thoughts, which I will state here, as calculated to illustrate the whimsical composition of the human
mind. I felt that, in consequence of

the heavy calamity which had overtaken this beautiful orphan, it was become doubly incumbent on me that I should marry her. She was left, by a deplorable and
astonishing event, desolate upon the stage of the world; and she was in all moral and religious obligation entitled to the full benefit of my fortune. But
this
is not exactly the idea to which I refer. An ample property of sixty thousand pounds had unaccountably disappeared. What was become of it? I charged the
malversation on the Genoese banker: he denied the charge. The question was at issue before the laws and lawyers of his country: it was probable that the
accused would ultimately be acquitted. He would be acquitted, because I had no sufficient evidence to exhibit, to substantiate the assertion. Well then; here

was a horrible fraud which had been perpetrated. As I charged it on the banker, might not another charge

it on me? I had been trusted by Macneil in all his affairs; there was no apparent individual to whom the guilt could belong, but the Genoese or myself. He had
no more visible temptation than I. His opulence was not less; and, like me, he was childless and a bachelor; it was generally believed that, when he died, he

would bequeath his property to the church. But, if the fraud were mine, how much more complicated would be my guilt! I was the friend of the deceased, the
Genoese a stranger; I had been fixed on by Macneil, as the select depositary of his interests. Then imagine for a moment, how inexpressible must be the
height
of my profligacy, if, conscious to myself that I alone was guilty of the embezzlement, I deliberately charged it upon another, and solemnly prosecuted the
charge! Imagine what the guilt must be, of stripping a wealthy orphan, left

in my guardianship, of her property, at the same moment that fate had robbed her of her natural protectors, and of thus turning her forth pennyless, to seek
the means of a wretched subsistence! These, it will be said, are but wild and air-drawn pictures. I had passed through the world with an unimpeached reputation: the integrity and liberality of my
transactions were known to every one that had heard of my name; no creature would ever dream of suspecting me of so flagitious an action. Be it so. A man is

diversely viewed by the variously circumstanced inhabitants of the globe. Milton is known to one man merely as the Latin translator to a secretary of state;

and the nurse of La Fontaine interrupted his confessor, who was setting before him on his death-bed the terrors of another world, with the exclamation, "For

Christ's sake, do not disturb the poor wretch; he is less

knave than fool; God can never have the heart to damn him." Such was my temper, that I could not sleep tranquilly upon my pillow, while I thought it possible
that a native of Genoa or Peru should regard me as a villain, pampering my own follies and depraved propensities with the purloined property of another. Let me not be misunderstood. Let it not be supposed that the passion and determination of my mind in favour of this charming girl were less fervent than they
ever had been. On the contrary she became every hour more interesting to me. While she sat like Niobe, her whole soul dissolved in tears for the untimely
destruction of her family, it was impossible not to feel in its utmost energy the wish, Might I be your comforter! In proportion as she gained the power of
attending in some degree to the objects before her, her intercourse gave me nameless emotions. There was a gentle sweetness in her manner, that I never saw
in
any other human creature. I remembered her gay and active and spirited;

it was now a faint and undefined image of these qualities that presented itself, a sun that yielded an uncertain beam, amidst the mass of clouds that sought to
overwhelm it. That transparent complexion, that countenance in which, like a book, the spectator might read every emotion and temporary impulse of the soul,

rendered every state of mind of the angelic creature to whom it belonged interesting. When the first faint smile, after the death of her father, illumined
her
features, it struck me like a resurrection from the dead: my sensations were such as those which Admetus must have felt, when Hercules brought back to him
his
heroic consort from the regions of Pluto. There was something too aerial, too subtle, too heavenly in her countenance, to be properly the attribute of a
terrestrial being. The glories of Elysium seemed to hang round her. Poor Mary had nothing on

earth left her to love, but me; and she felt toward me as toward father, mother, sisters in one. Nothing could be so delicate and flattering to me, as the
whole of her demeanour; and every demonstration of this sort had a double price, as it appeared a gentle and voluntary and cheerful restraint upon the state
of
her mind, so much taken away from the dead to give to the living. Thus we passed the winter. The cheerful blaze of our quiet hearth compensated for the driving hail and snow which raged without. Gradually I endeavoured to
engage the attention of my charmer with indifferent objects. I adorned her apartments with the most beautiful products of the gardener's care I was able to
procure. I obtained some for her which she had never seen before. She instructed me in botany; she brought forth her port-folios, and showed me her charming

drawings. I called

her attention to the beauties of the English writers from Queen Elizabeth to the Civil War, writers who had always appeared to me to surpass those of any other
age or country. It was one of the agreeable attributes of this winter, that our interviews were never broken in upon by any accidental interloper. One
peaceful
hour of animated disquisition, or soothing remission, passed away after another, unmarked. When I saw my adorable ward, if not happy, at least peaceful and
pleased, my heart beat with honest exultation, and I said, This is my work! she was willing to yield equal credit to my exertions. It was the work of nature! Time, youth and health inevitably did so much for my patient, that there was little left for me, her soul's physician, to effect. If the intercourse and
position I have described would have been delightful to any one with the soul of a man, imagine what they were

to me, who, from the hour of my birth till now, had never experienced the sweets of honourable love. A brilliant and genial spring succeeded the winter. I had never felt this interesting period of the awakening of the universe from its torpor, so deeply as
now. Nature became restored to life and the pulses of life, and my charmer sympathised with the general tone of created things. During the winter I had never

ventured to propose to her a visit to any of the scenes of public amusement which the metropolis affords; no one could have looked in her face, and started
the
proposition; it would have been treason to the majesty of her grief; it would have been sacrilege, to bring forward the dejected mourner amidst the hardened

gaiety and indifference of an assembly, or the unhallowed jests and obstreperous mirth of a theatre. An excursion into the country is an amusement

of a different sort. Nature in her gayest scenes is never drunken and tumultuous. A cheerful sobriety is their characteristic. When I escape from the
multitude, and hasten to her retreats, I am never incommoded with obtrusive and discordant sounds; all around me is silent; or, if any thing is heard, it is

the rustling of the wind, or the uncouth warblings of the feathered tribe; even the lowing of the herds is sweet; and if I were placed amidst a forest of
wild
beasts, I should find, could I divest myself of the terror they excite, that the mighty master had tempered their roarings, till they afforded a sublime
mellowness, not unpleasing to the ear. The soft tints of the morning had a staid liveliness in them which led my poor Mary out of herself, ere she was aware. The air had a sweet alacrity which she
could not resist. "Mr. Fleetwood," said she, "your attentions are

a thousand times greater than I deserve. Had they a character of obtrusiveness and command, I should know what part to take. But I can discover nothing in them
which betrays that you think of gratification to yourself; you appear to be the soul of humanity and tenderness. I should be the most ungrateful creature in

the world, if I did not accept your solicitudes for my health and invitations to the air, or if I refused to smile, when nature and Fleetwood summon me to
smile." We made a tour in succession to almost all the environs of the metropolis. If one is content to give up the demand for the wild, the majestic and awful in
scenery, I know of no city, the neighbourhood of which affords a greater variety of rich and beautiful and animated spots, than London. The Thames is the
great
wealth of this vicinity. What can be more striking than the crowd of

masts and vessels of various sizes, as discovered from Greenwich, or the frolic meandrings of this rural stream, as it shows itself at Richmond? What objects
can be more unlike than these two? If you recede from the river, Sydenham, and Epsom, and Esher, and Hampstead, and Hendon, and twenty other delightful
scenes,
are ready to advance their several claims for the prize of beauty. Let not my readers wonder at this enumeration, which to some of them may perhaps appear
trite. Let them recollect that with every one of these places I associate some interesting scene of courtship, which renders the remembrance dear to me. Let

them be thankful that I dismiss this part of my narrative so lightly. If I were to enlarge upon the history of this beautiful spring, and relate at length
the
pleasing incidents which occurred, particularly at Epsom and Richmond, instead of consecrating

a page to this topic, I should fill volumes. In the month of July I became a husband. When a sufficient period had elapsed to make my poor Mary feel that she belonged in some measure to the world, she was
too ingenuous not to disdain the forms and semblances of grief. As she had scarcely any visitor beside myself, it became proper that we should, as soon as
might be, put an end to this equivocal situation, upon which the good-natured world is always eager to interpose its constructions. "My beloved Fleetwood,"
said Mary, "I feel that I love you to the full as much, I believe more, than I could love a man of my own age. The sentiment that I feel for you has a sort
of
religion in it, which renders it a thousand times sweeter, and more soothing to my heart. I reverence, at the same time that I love you. I shall be
infinitely
more reluctant to

wound you, and more solicitous for your peace, than I should be, if you were a youth in the full revelry and exuberance of the morning of life. In all
partnership engagements, there must be a subordination. If I had a young husband, I might perhaps sometimes be presumptuous enough to estimate his
discernment
at no higher a rate than my own; but the case is otherwise now. Mistake me not, my dear Fleetwood. I am not idle and thoughtless enough, to promise to sink
my
being and individuality in yours. I shall have my distinct propensities and preferences. Nature has moulded my mind in a particular way; and I have of course

my tastes, my pleasures, and my wishes, more or less different from those of every other human being. I hope you will not require me to disclaim them. In me

you will have a wife, and not a passive machine.