
 








"Doom'd from each native joy to part;
"Each dear connection of the heart!" LANGHORNE. IT was a cold and wet morning, in the month of April, when Mary Cuthbert got into the
stage-coach which was destined to convey her many miles from the place of her nativity,
and the friends of her infantine days and her juvenile years. Deprived of both her parents
at the early age of eighteen, this young and beautiful orphan had felt the heavy stroke of
calamity; and though she had sustained herself under affliction, through a firm belief in a
superintending Providence, with the resignation of a Christian, yet her whole deportment
had evinced that she had greatly suffered-for that she had fondly loved, all who had
beheld the dove-like eyes of Mary, when, turned with filial affection on her parents, they
swam in "liquid lustre," would have given voluntary testimony! Mr. Cuthbert had long been the pastor of a small parish in Somersetshire, where
his worth had endeared him to his parishioners; and their respect and reverence had so
conciliated his regard, that he wished not to emerge into a more conspicuous walk of life;
but, with his gentle and amiable partner, was contented with the small emoluments of his
living. Their mutual love, and mutual cares, devolved on their only child, and Mary
Cuthbert's improvement had kept pace with their wishes. If perfect happiness resided
upon earth, it had surely fixed its residence at Woodberry, till the fading form, the hectic
colour of Mrs. Cuthbert told a "trembling tale" to her fond husband. A cold, taken by
walking in the wet to visit a poor woman during the painful hour of labour, laid the
foundation of a disorder which baffled all human skill. Mr. Cuthbert never recovered the
loss of his wife; from that dreadful moment, he seemed to have lost the elasticity of his
mind, with the activity of his body; and even the desolate and orphan state in which his
poor girl would be left had not power to stimulate his exertions for life, though the
acuteness of his parental reflections contributed to bend him in anguish still nearer to the
grave. Too liberal and too generous to lay up from his scanty income, he had only a few
hundreds to bequeath to his child: he had no other relations, except a niece, who had
recently lost her parents, and, mistress of an affluent and independent fortune, resided in
Staffordshire, in a house which her father had purchased a few years before. Mr. Moreton had carried on an extensive manufactory at Birmingham with great
success; he had married the only sister of Mr. Cuthbert, but the wide distance which
separated them had deprived the brother and sister of all intercourse, except by letter, for
many years preceding the death of the latter; and, on hearing that his niece had lost her
other parent, Mr. Cuthbert had contented himself with writing her a letter of condolence,
judging that a young heiress, in the full plenitude of wealth, could well spare the personal
inquiries of a plain and serious uncle. But when he saw himself daily sinking to the grave;

when he looked on his beauteous and innocent Mary; when he recollected the friendless
state in which she would be left to struggle with a world, to which she was yet a stranger;
all the father rushed to his eyes, and he turned his thoughts towards Clarissa Moreton, as
to the future guardian and protectress of her cousin. Of the character of his niece he knew
nothing; her mother had been perfectly regular and uniform in her deportment and
conduct, and he doubted not, but that her example and instructions had had their proper
influence on her daughter. Besides, Miss Moreton was four years older than his Mary;
and from eighteen to twenty-two how much experience is learned; how much judgment is
acquired; how much consideration is added to the female character? Miss Moreton, too,
had been used to the world; she had been born and bred amongst the populous walks of
life, whilst the recluse Priory of Woodberry Parsonage had kept Mary Cuthbert as much
in sequestration, as though she had been the blooming vestal of some time-worn cloister. To Clarissa Moreton then the anxious parent addressed himself with trembling hands and
beating heart. Ah! the subject was very near that heart; for was he not pleading for his
only child? Miss Moreton's answer was calculated to disperse all Mr. Cuthbert's fears. She accepted the office of guardianship, and agreed, nay, insisted on her cousin's residing
with her till she became of age, unless she should marry previous to that period. In two
days after the receipt of this letter, Mr. Cuthbert breathed his last in the arms of his
beloved Mary. Thus having, in a general way, placed before our readers the circumstances which
led to the long and tedious journey which our youthful traveller was undertaking, alone
and unprotected, we will pass over the two first days of it, during which no incident
occurred worthy of remark. Her companions in the different coaches had been civil and
well behaved; the modesty and simplicity of her demeanor had been her passport to
general respect; but, fatigued and tired of such close confinement, she was congratulating
herself at having changed her coach for the last time, as the next stage was the city of
Coventry, where her cousin's carriage was to meet her, and to convey her to "the Attic
Villa," (for so was Miss Moreton's residence called) about four miles from that place. On
re-entering the coach, Mary perceived that her former companions were gone; a female of
decent appearance and a smug round tradesman had made way for two young men of a
genteel air; who, having paused for a few moments, to read her blushing countenance
with eyes of speaking admiration; and having, through the same channel, mutually
communicated their sentiments, now recurred to a conversation (as shall appear in the
next Chapter) which seemed only to have been interrupted by the necessary confusion and
bustle of entering a stage-coach. "Even such enraptur'd life, such energy was
ours." THOMSON. "OF all things in the world, I shall enjoy the introduction and the visit; of that I am well
assured; but, my dear Charles, in the ardour of your regard for me, may you not be
stepping a little beyond the verge of propriety? Can you take the liberty of introducing an
entire stranger to your fair friend? Surely the customs of the world, and the delicacy of the
female character-"
"How often," said the other gentleman, hastily interrupting his companion, "how
often must I tell you, my dear Montgomery, that your scrupulous conscience, your fears,
and your doubts, will always stand in the way of your enjoyments. The goddess of the
shrine to which I am guiding you despises the customs of the world, as much as she
differs from the rest of her sex. She is a being who stands unique in the scale of creation;
it is wholly impossible to define her character; she acts from the impulse of taste-of
whim-of what you will please to call it; she delights in patronizing genius-in being
known as the liberal rewarder of talent." "Genius, talent," returned his companion; "but has she discrimination to discover
either?" "Of what material consequence is that, my good friend? She has vanity enough to
suppose that she has; and, flattered and courted by all around her, is it likely she should
know her own deficiencies? She selects all her acquaintances from those whom she
imagines to excel, and-" "Pray, Charles, may I ask you, for what particular excellence
were you placed so conspicuously on the list?" "Why faith, Montgomery, that question was not wholly unexpected; and you will
allow, that to select my follies for the objects of praise was a rare piece of discernment in
this fair damsel! You know my predilection for the stage: that, a buskin'd hero, I have
frequently strutted my little hour on a theatre of village declamation, y'clept a barn. In
one of my random moments, when whim took the place of judgment in my whirling
brain, as our company were quartered in the city of Coventry, a company of comedians (I
may call them fairly so, for the Tragic Muse must have flown at the first drawing up of
the curtain) were entertaining the public; and, pitying the poor devils, willing to draw
them a full barn-" "And willing, too, to show your own theatrical powers," said the
friend. "Why that is fairly put in, I believe, Montgomery; I plead guilty-but to go on
with my story, I volunteered my services, which were gratefully received, as you may
imagine, and 'the part of Romeo by Capt. Walwyn,' was soon blazoned in the bills, and
stuck up in every corner of the town. It chanced to meet the eye of the lady of whom we
are talking; she honoured the representation with her presence; pronounced my Romeo a
chef d'oeuvre; though, Heaven knows, it required all my heroism to make love to a fat and
brawny Juliet who cried out
"Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day;
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierc'd the fearful ollow of thine hears. Nightly she sits on yon pomegranate tree. Believe me, love, it was the nightingale!" I received a most charming billet from this fair, the next morning, and have ever
since been as it were domesticated at the--" "Does the lady ever exhibit her own
powers in the theatrical way?" interrupted Montgomery. "Oh, to enchantment. She does
every thing, or attempts it! Indeed, Montgomery, you will not feel any thing like ennui
whilst you are a resident under her roof; I defy you not to enjoy the motley groups, and
the medley of entertainments and amusements, which will be there offered to you-the
strangest, the most eccentric set, to be sure, which were ever huddled together; and I
know, my friend, that you have a taste for the perfectly ridiculous!" "But it is a taste
which I ought not to indulge," said Mr. Montgomery; "I always feel humbled in my own
opinion, when I have been amused with the follies of my fellow men; but that I have been
so too frequently, I will readily confess. There is something very tempting in ridicule; one
is generally encouraged to pursue it by the applause, and for the entertainment, of others;
and we insensibly forget that we are erring against the principles of benevolence and
rectitude." "Out, out upon your too tender conscience; I will not stop to hum and to haw,
and to consider first causes and secondary effects; I will laugh, I must laugh, where I can
and while I can-'Mirth, admit me of thy Crew.' But you will go with me, Frederic?" "I
confess that you have raised my curiosity so very high, that, maugre my tender
conscience, I must go!" "That's my very dear Fred," said his friend, eagerly shaking him
by the hand. Mary Cuthbert had been a silent hearer of this conversation, and had been
congratulating herself mentally at being placed in a more humble situation in life than the
lady whose large and independent fortune, and more independent manners, had been so
freely discussed in a stage-coach by two young men. She felt curious to know the lady's
name; and, Miss Moreton being in the habit of visiting in the neighbourhood, and being
likewise in the possession of a large fortune, she doubted not, but that she should have her
curiosity gratified, when she reached the Attic Villa. A reflecting and attentive mind
derives instruction from the most trivial occurrences. That levity and easiness of access
which had been laughed at in the lady who had been the subject of discourse, made Mary
Cuthbert more on the reserve towards her male companions, than she might otherwise
have been; and, though she answered every question which they addressed to her, with
the most undissembled sweetness, yet was it so chastened by modest reserve, as to draw
from them the greatest respect and attention. The coach soon stopped at an inn door in Coventry, from whence the passengers
having alighted, Mary Cuthbert curtsied to her companions; in obliging terms, refused
their offers of assistance, and retired to a private apartment to await the arrival of Miss
Moreton's carriage, which was to meet her at this place. In a few minutes a waiter
announced it, and Mary eagerly rose from her seat and followed him to the door. A
handsome landau and four, with postillions in white and silver, saluted her eye. But she
had time only for a cursory view; for surprise and astonishment had possession of every
faculty, when she saw the two gentlemen who had so recently been her fellow travellers
walk out from the inn door, followed by a footman in the same livery with the postillions,
who said with the most respectful air, as he addressed the gentleman who had been the

chief speaker in the stage coach, "Miss Moreton, Sir, desired me to present her most
particular compliments to you, and to say, that any civility you show this lady she shall
consider as an obligation conferred on herself." "Such a message must be wholly
unnecessary," returned the gentleman, bowing to Mary, and taking her hand to assist her
into the vehicle. She suffered him to do so in silent wonder and confusion. Both the
gentlemen jumped into the carriage after her, and it was bowling quickly along.-
"Fortune favours the bold, I have often heard, Charles," said Mr. Montgomery; "we, I
think, must just now rank high in the graces of that fickle Goddess; for who could have
supposed, when we just now took leave of this young lady, that we should so soon again
enjoy the pleasure of her company." "Are you acquainted with Miss Moreton, Sir?" asked
Mary, in some confusion. "I am not at present," said Mr. Montgomery, "but my friend
Walwyn is going to be my gentleman usher." "And is it possible then," (said Mary
Cuthbert, lifting up her hands and eyes with the most artless expression of concern,) "that
Miss Moreton is the lady of whom you, Sir, have been talking this morning," turning
herself towards Captain Walwyn for an answer. The hero of the greenroom seemed
embarrassed. "He pleads guilty, you find, Ma'am," said Mr. Montgomery; "but you must
excuse a great deal in my friend, who is so used to stage effect, that he is apt to give
himself poetical licence on all occasions." "I always speak in the highest terms of Miss
Moreton; Frederic, you will give me credit for this at least.-You are a friend of that
lady's, Ma'am?" looking at Mary Cuthbert with a painful air of inquiry. "I am her near
relative," said Mary. Walwyn started; Montgomery was perfectly unconcerned, and
laughingly said, "Trust me, this unwary pleasantry of thine will sooner or later bring thee
into scrapes and difficulties, which no after wit can extricate thee out of." "I have never
seen Miss Moreton," said Mary, pitying the evident confusion of Walwyn.-"I know
nothing of her character, except that her benevolence has induced her to offer her arms
and her heart to an orphan cousin." "May Heaven bless her for the deed," said
Montgomery with enthusiasm. The colour crimsoned the cheeks of Mary at the fervor of
his aspiration; but, recovering herself, she gracefully turned towards Walwyn, and said,
"Be assured, Sir, that I shall make no unjust use of the conversation which passed in my
hearing this morning, and I hope (oh, how earnestly do I hope,) to find that in the warmth
of your description you greatly overcharged the picture." "And why should you hope so,
fair lady," asked Walwyn; "surely, you heard me say nothing derogatory to the sterling
merit of Miss Moreton?" "Ah! Sir," said Mary, sighing, "self will always be uppermost in
the human breast. I have been cradled in solitude; brought up amidst the dear domestic
duties of a country parsonage; is it likely then-is it? "-she stopped, she burst into tears. Walwyn appeared as if he did not know what to say, and Montgomery looked as if he
could have wept with the lovely girl before him. Ashamed of her weakness, she hid her
face with her handkerchief, and tried to rally herself into some appearance of composure,
and to collect her thoughts for the introduction to Miss Moreton, but her truant thoughts
were taking a review of all she had heard in the morning, and she shrunk from the idea of
the miscellaneous group who kept open house at the Attic Villa. Mr. Walwyn's description must have been partly accurate, for did not Mary at this
moment perceive a defalcation from established modes, in the very circumstance of Miss
Moreton's having trusted her to the escort of two young men, both entire strangers to her,
and one of them equally unknown to her cousin? What had been the first advice of

Mary's ever to be regretted mother on the subject of female conduct?-"My dear child,
always avoid singularity; never wish to deviate from the beaten track; never imagine that
you show understanding in despising common terms, and those rules of decorum which
the world has prescribed to your sex. No situation ought to preclude a young woman from
acting in conformity to those laws of custom, and of prudence, which may in some sense
be called her fence of protection, and the bulwark of her every virtue." Walwyn soon recovered his presence of mind, and, with much fluency of speech,
began to relate many anecdotes to Mr. Montgomery, in praise of Miss Moreton's
benevolence and generosity. Mary Cuthbert had discernment sufficient to perceive that
these were meant wholly for her ear, hence they failed to make that impression on her
mind which had been produced by his unguarded remarks in the morning. But the Attic
Villa was now in sight. The heart of Mary bounded at her side; a thousand fearful and
humiliating sensations oppressed her; her colour went and came; and she put her head out
at the window to receive the freshness of the evening breeze, for she felt gasping for
breath. "A most charming situation," said Montgomery, putting his head out of the same
window, and pretending to be lost in admiration of the villa, at the moment that he
watched his interesting female companion; for he could read the "human face divine,"
and he feared the consequences of that excessive emotion so plainly depicted in her
countenance. "Here Freedom reign'd without the least alloy;
"Nor gossip's tale, nor ancient maiden's gall,
"Nor saintly spleen, durst murmur at our joy,
"And with envenom'd tongue our pleasures pall. "For why? There was but one great rule for all;
"To wit, that each shall work his own desire,
"And eat, drink, study, sleep, as it may fall,
"Or melt the time in love, or wake the lyre,
"And carol what, unbid, the Muses might inspire." THOMSON'S CASTLE OF INDOLENCE. AT length the carriage stopped, the step was let down, Walwyn hastily jumped out: Mary
Cuthbert trembled from head to foot as she gave him her hand; but there was no time
allowed her for reflection; she was led through the corridor, the door of an elegant
apartment was thrown open, Miss Moreton sprang from a sopha, and throwing back a
long veil, which half shaded her fine form, she pressed Mary Cuthbert to her bosom,
saying "Welcome! thrice welcome, my dear Mary, to my house and to my heart!" There
was something peculiarly grateful to the poor trembling girl in such a reception; she could
not speak her thanks, but she smiled through her tears, and when placed at the side of
Miss Moreton, she had time to observe her reception of the two gentlemen. Miss Moreton
stretched out her hand, in token of amity to Mr. Montgomery, assured him that she had
long wished for his acquaintance; and then, turning to Captain Walwyn, said in a style of
theatrical declamation, "Walwyn, at sight of thee my gloomy heart cheers up, and
gladness dawns within me! "-"And this long absence has been to me more tedious than a
twice told tale;" said Walwyn, kissing her hand gallantly, and answering in the tragic
strain. "But how comes it, that I see my fair alone?"