Amen with all
my heart--I quarrel with no man’s hobby, if he does not run it a tilt
against mine, and if he does--let him beware his eyes. What say you?--in
the language of the world and worldlings base, if you can condescend to
so mean a sphere, shall we stay or go?”

“In the language of selfishness, then, which is of course the language
of the world--let us go by all means.”

“Amen, amen, quo’ the Earl Marshall,” answered Oldbuck, as he exchanged
his slippers for a pair of stout walking shoes, with cutikins, as he
called them, of black cloth. He only interrupted the walk by a slight
deviation to the tomb of John o’ the Girnel, remembered as the last
bailiff of the abbey who had resided at Monkbarns. Beneath an old
oak-tree upon a hillock, sloping pleasantly to the south, and catching
a distant view of the sea over two or three rich enclosures, and the
Mussel-crag, lay a moss-grown stone, and, in memory of the departed
worthy, it bore an inscription, of which, as Mr. Oldbuck affirmed
(though many doubted), the defaced characters could be distinctly traced
to the following effect:--

                    Here lyeth John o’ ye Girnell;
                Erth has ye nit, and heuen ye kirnell. In hys tyme ilk wyfe’s hennis clokit,
             Ilka gud mannis herth wi’ bairnis was stokit. He deled a boll o’ bear in firlottis fyve,
        Four for ye halie kirke, and ane for puir mennis wyvis. “You see how modest the author of this sepulchral commendation was;--he
tells us that honest John could make five firlots, or quarters, as you
would say, out of the boll, instead of four,--that he gave the fifth to
the wives of the parish, and accounted for the other four to the abbot
and CHAPTER--that in his time the wives’ hens always laid eggs--and devil
thank them, if they got one-fifth of the abbey rents; and that honest
men’s hearths were never unblest with offspring--an addition to the
miracle, which they, as well as I, must have considered as perfectly
unaccountable. But come on--leave we Jock o’ the Girnel, and let us jog
on to the yellow sands, where the sea, like a repulsed enemy, is now
retreating from the ground on which he gave us battle last night.”

Thus saying, he led the way to the sands. Upon the links or downs close
to them, were seen four or five huts inhabited by fishers, whose boats,
drawn high upon the beach, lent the odoriferous vapours of pitch melting
under a burning sun, to contend with those of the offals of fish and
other nuisances usually collected round Scottish cottages. Undisturbed
by these complicated steams of abomination, a middle-aged woman, with a
face which had defied a thousand storms, sat mending a net at the door
of one of the cottages. A handkerchief close bound about her head, and
a coat which had formerly been that of a man, gave her a masculine air,
which was increased by her strength, uncommon stature, and harsh voice. “What are ye for the day, your honour?” she said, or rather screamed,
to Oldbuck; “caller haddocks and whitings--a bannock-fluke and a
cock-padle.”

“How much for the bannock-fluke and cock-padle?” demanded the Antiquary. “Four white shillings and saxpence,” answered the Naiad. “Four devils and six of their imps!” retorted the Antiquary; “do you
think I am mad, Maggie?”

“And div ye think,” rejoined the virago, setting her arms akimbo, “that
my man and my sons are to gae to the sea in weather like yestreen and
the day--sic a sea as it’s yet outby--and get naething for their fish, and
be misca’d into the bargain, Monkbarns? It’s no fish ye’re buying--it’s
men’s lives.”

“Well, Maggie, I’ll bid you fair--I’ll bid you a shilling for the fluke
and the cock-padle, or sixpence separately--and if all your fish are as
well paid, I think your man, as you call him, and your sons, will make a
good voyage.”

“Deil gin their boat were knockit against the Bell-Rock rather! it wad
be better, and the bonnier voyage o’ the twa. A shilling for thae twa
bonnie fish! Od, that’s ane indeed!”

“Well, well, you old beldam, carry your fish up to Monkbarns, and see
what my sister will give you for them.”

“Na, na, Monkbarns, deil a fit--I’ll rather deal wi’ yoursell; for though
you’re near enough, yet Miss Grizel has an unco close grip--I’ll gie ye
them” (in a softened tone) “for three-and-saxpence.”

“Eighteen-pence, or nothing!”

“Eighteen-pence!! !” (in a loud tone of astonishment, which declined into
a sort of rueful whine, when the dealer turned as if to walk away)--“Yell
no be for the fish then?”--(then louder, as she saw him moving off)--“I’ll
gie ye them--and--and--and a half-a-dozen o’ partans to make the sauce, for
three shillings and a dram.”

“Half-a-crown then, Maggie, and a dram.”

“Aweel, your honour maun hae’t your ain gate, nae doubt; but a dram’s
worth siller now--the distilleries is no working.”

“And I hope they’ll never work again in my time,” said Oldbuck. “Ay, ay--it’s easy for your honour, and the like o’ you gentle-folks to
say sae, that hae stouth and routh, and fire and fending and meat and
claith, and sit dry and canny by the fireside--but an ye wanted fire,
and meat, and dry claes, and were deeing o’ cauld, and had a sair heart,
whilk is warst ava’, wi’ just tippence in your pouch, wadna ye be glad
to buy a dram wi’t, to be eilding and claes, and a supper and heart’s
ease into the bargain, till the morn’s morning?”

“It’s even too true an apology, Maggie. Is your goodman off to sea this
morning, after his exertions last night?”

“In troth is he, Monkbarns; he was awa this morning by four o’clock,
when the sea was working like barm wi’ yestreen’s wind, and our bit
coble dancing in’t like a cork.”

“Well, he’s an industrious fellow. Carry the fish up to Monkbarns.”

“That I will--or I’ll send little Jenny, she’ll rin faster; but I’ll ca’
on Miss Grizzy for the dram mysell, and say ye sent me.”

A nondescript animal, which might have passed for a mermaid, as it was
paddling in a pool among the rocks, was summoned ashore by the shrill
screams of its dam; and having been made decent, as her mother called
it, which was performed by adding a short red cloak to a petticoat,
which was at first her sole covering, and which reached scantily below
her knee, the child was dismissed with the fish in a basket, and a
request on the part of Monkbarns that they might be prepared for dinner. “It would have been long,” said Oldbuck, with much self-complacency,
“ere my womankind could have made such a reasonable bargain with that
old skin-flint, though they sometimes wrangle with her for an hour
together under my study window, like three sea-gulls screaming
and sputtering in a gale of wind. But come, wend we on our way to
Knockwinnock.”







              Beggar?--the only freeman of your commonwealth;
              Free above Scot-free, that observe no laws,
                   Obey no governor, use no religion
           But what they draw from their own ancient custom,
           Or constitute themselves, yet they are no rebels. Brome. With our reader’s permission, we will outstep the slow, though sturdy
pace of the Antiquary, whose halts, as he, turned round to his companion
at every moment to point out something remarkable in the landscape, or
to enforce some favourite topic more emphatically than the exercise of
walking permitted, delayed their progress considerably. Notwithstanding the fatigues and dangers of the preceding evening, Miss
Wardour was able to rise at her usual hour, and to apply herself to her
usual occupations, after she had first satisfied her anxiety concerning
her father’s state of health. Sir Arthur was no farther indisposed than
by the effects of great agitation and unusual fatigue, but these were
sufficient to induce him to keep his bedchamber. To look back on the events of the preceding day, was, to Isabella, a
very unpleasing retrospect. She owed her life, and that of her father,
to the very person by whom, of all others, she wished least to be
obliged, because she could hardly even express common gratitude towards
him without encouraging hopes which might be injurious to them both. “Why should it be my fate to receive such benefits, and conferred at
so much personal risk, from one whose romantic passion I have so
unceasingly laboured to discourage? Why should chance have given him
this advantage over me? and why, oh why, should a half-subdued feeling
in my own bosom, in spite of my sober reason, almost rejoice that he has
attained it?”

While Miss Wardour thus taxed herself with wayward caprice, she, beheld
advancing down the avenue, not her younger and more dreaded preserver,
but the old beggar who had made such a capital figure in the melodrama
of the preceding evening. She rang the bell for her maid-servant. “Bring the old man up stairs.”

The servant returned in a minute or two--“He will come up at no rate,
madam;--he says his clouted shoes never were on a carpet in his life, and
that, please God, they never shall.--Must I take him into the servants’
hall?”

“No; stay, I want to speak with him--Where is he?” for she had lost sight
of him as he approached the house. “Sitting in the sun on the stone-bench in the court, beside the window
of the flagged parlour.”



“Bid him stay there--I’ll come down to the parlour, and speak with him at
the window.”

She came down accordingly, and found the mendicant half-seated,
half-reclining, upon the bench beside the window. Edie Ochiltree, old
man and beggar as he was, had apparently some internal consciousness
of the favourable, impressions connected with his tall form, commanding
features, and long white beard and hair. It used to be remarked of him,
that he was seldom seen but in a posture which showed these personal
attributes to advantage. At present, as he lay half-reclined, with his
wrinkled yet ruddy cheek, and keen grey eye turned up towards the sky,
his staff and bag laid beside him, and a cast of homely wisdom and
sarcastic irony in the expression of his countenance, while he gazed for
a moment around the court-yard, and then resumed his former look upward,
he might have been taken by an artist as the model of an old philosopher
of the Cynic school, musing upon the frivolity of mortal pursuits, and
the precarious tenure of human possessions, and looking up to the source
from which aught permanently good can alone be derived. The young lady,
as she presented her tall and elegant figure at the open window, but
divided from the court-yard by a grating, with which, according to the
fashion of ancient times, the lower windows of the castle were secured,
gave an interest of a different kind, and might be supposed, by a
romantic imagination, an imprisoned damsel communicating a tale of her
durance to a palmer, in order that he might call upon the gallantry of
every knight whom he should meet in his wanderings, to rescue her from
her oppressive thraldom. After Miss Wardour had offered, in the terms she thought would be most
acceptable, those thanks which the beggar declined as far beyond his
merit, she began to express herself in a manner which she supposed would
speak more feelingly to his apprehension. “She did not know,” she said,
“what her father intended particularly to do for their preserver, but
certainly it would be something that would make him easy for life; if he
chose to reside at the castle, she would give orders”--

The old man smiled, and shook his head. “I wad be baith a grievance
and a disgrace to your fine servants, my leddy, and I have never been a
disgrace to onybody yet, that I ken of.”

“Sir Arthur would give strict orders”--

“Ye’re very kind--I doubtna, I doubtna; but there are some things a
master can command, and some he canna--I daresay he wad gar them keep
hands aff me--(and troth, I think they wad hardly venture on that ony
gate)--and he wad gar them gie me my soup parritch and bit meat. But trow
ye that Sir Arthur’s command could forbid the gibe o’ the tongue or the
blink o’ the ee, or gar them gie me my food wi’ the look o’ kindness
that gars it digest sae weel, or that he could make them forbear a’
the slights and taunts that hurt ane’s spirit mair nor downright
misca’ing?--Besides, I am the idlest auld carle that ever lived; I downa
be bound down to hours o’ eating and sleeping; and, to speak the honest
truth, I wad be a very bad example in ony weel regulated family.”

“Well, then, Edie, what do you think of a neat cottage and a garden, and
a daily dole, and nothing to do but to dig a little in your garden when
you pleased yourself?”

“And how often wad that be, trow ye, my leddy? maybe no ance atween
Candlemas and Yule and if a’ thing were done to my hand, as if I was Sir
Arthur himsell, I could never bide the staying still in ae place,
and just seeing the same joists and couples aboon my head night after
night.--And then I have a queer humour o’ my ain, that sets a strolling
beggar weel eneugh, whase word naebody minds--but ye ken Sir Arthur has
odd sort o’ ways--and I wad be jesting or scorning at them--and ye wad be
angry, and then I wad be just fit to hang mysell.”

“O, you are a licensed man,” said Isabella; “we shall give you all
reasonable scope: So you had better be ruled, and remember your age.”

“But I am no that sair failed yet,” replied the mendicant. “Od, ance I
gat a wee soupled yestreen, I was as yauld as an eel. And then what wad
a’ the country about do for want o’ auld Edie Ochiltree, that
brings news and country cracks frae ae farm-steading to anither, and
gingerbread to the lasses, and helps the lads to mend their fiddles, and
the gudewives to clout their pans, and plaits rush-swords and grenadier
caps for the weans, and busks the laird’s flees, and has skill o’
cow-ills and horse-ills, and kens mair auld sangs and tales than a’ the
barony besides, and gars ilka body laugh wherever he comes? Troth, my
leddy, I canna lay down my vocation; it would be a public loss.”

“Well, Edie, if your idea of your importance is so strong as not to be
shaken by the prospect of independence”--

“Na, na, Miss--it’s because I am mair independent as I am,” answered the
old man; “I beg nae mair at ony single house than a meal o’ meat,
or maybe but a mouthfou o’t--if it’s refused at ae place, I get it at
anither--sae I canna be said to depend on onybody in particular, but just
on the country at large.”

“Well, then, only promise me that you will let me know should you ever
wish to settle as you turn old, and more incapable of making your usual
rounds; and, in the meantime, take this.”

“Na, na, my leddy: I downa take muckle siller at ance--it’s against
our rule; and--though it’s maybe no civil to be repeating the like o’
that--they say that siller’s like to be scarce wi’ Sir Arthur himsell,
and that he’s run himsell out o’ thought wi’ his honkings and minings
for lead and copper yonder.”

Isabella had some anxious anticipations to the same effect, but was
shocked to hear that her father’s embarrassments were such public talk;
as if scandal ever failed to stoop upon so acceptable a quarry as the
failings of the good man, the decline of the powerful, or the decay of
the prosperous.--Miss Wardour sighed deeply--“Well, Edie, we have enough
to pay our debts, let folks say what they will, and requiting you is one
of the foremost--let me press this sum upon you.”

“That I might be robbed and murdered some night between town and town? or, what’s as bad, that I might live in constant apprehension o’t?--I am
no”--(lowering his voice to a whisper, and looking keenly around him)--“I
am no that clean unprovided for neither; and though I should die at the
back of a dyke, they’ll find as muckle quilted in this auld blue gown
as will bury me like a Christian, and gie the lads and lasses a blythe
lykewake too; sae there’s the gaberlunzie’s burial provided for, and I
need nae mair. Were the like o’ me ever to change a note, wha the deil
d’ye think wad be sic fules as to gie me charity after that?--it wad flee
through the country like wildfire, that auld Edie suld hae done siccan
a like thing, and then, I’se warrant, I might grane my heart out or
onybody wad gie me either a bane or a bodle.”

“Is there nothing, then, that I can do for you?”

“Ou ay--I’ll aye come for my awmous as usual,--and whiles I wad be fain o’
a pickle sneeshin, and ye maun speak to the constable and ground-officer
just to owerlook me; and maybe ye’ll gie a gude word for me to Sandie
Netherstanes, the miller, that he may chain up his muckle dog--I wadna
hae him to hurt the puir beast, for it just does its office in barking
at a gaberlunzie like me. And there’s ae thing maybe mair,--but ye’ll
think it’s very bald o’ the like o’ me to speak o’t.”

“What is it, Edie?--if it respects you it shall be done if it is in my
power.”

“It respects yoursell, and it is in your power, and I maun come
out wi’t. Ye are a bonny young leddy, and a gude ane, and maybe a
weel-tochered ane--but dinna ye sneer awa the lad Lovel, as ye did a
while sinsyne on the walk beneath the Briery-bank, when I saw ye baith,
and heard ye too, though ye saw nae me. Be canny wi’ the lad, for he
loes ye weel, and it’s to him, and no to anything I could have done for
you, that Sir Arthur and you wan ower yestreen.”

He uttered these words in a low but distinct tone of voice; and without
waiting for an answer, walked towards a low door which led to the
apartments of the servants, and so entered the house. Miss Wardour remained for a moment or two in the situation in which
she had heard the old man’s last extraordinary speech, leaning, namely,
against the bars of the window; nor could she determine upon saying even
a single word, relative to a subject so delicate, until the beggar was
out of sight. It was, indeed, difficult to determine what to do. That
her having had an interview and private conversation with this young and
unknown stranger, should be a secret possessed by a person of the last
class in which a young lady would seek a confidant, and at the mercy
of one who was by profession gossip-general to the whole neighbourhood,
gave her acute agony. She had no reason, indeed, to suppose that the old
man would wilfully do anything to hurt her feelings, much less to
injure her; but the mere freedom of speaking to her upon such a subject,
showed, as might have been expected, a total absence of delicacy; and
what he might take it into his head to do or say next, that she was
pretty sure so professed an admirer of liberty would not hesitate to do
or say without scruple. This idea so much hurt and vexed her, that she
half-wished the officious assistance of Lovel and Ochiltree had been
absent upon the preceding evening. While she was in this agitation of spirits, she suddenly observed
Oldbuck and Lovel entering the court. She drew instantly so far back
from the window, that she could without being seen, observe how the
Antiquary paused in front of the building, and pointing to the various
scutcheons of its former owners, seemed in the act of bestowing upon
Lovel much curious and erudite information, which, from the absent look
of his auditor, Isabella might shrewdly guess was entirely thrown away. The necessity that she should take some resolution became instant and
pressing;--she rang, therefore, for a servant, and ordered him to show
the visitors to the drawing-room, while she, by another staircase,
gained her own apartment, to consider, ere she made her appearance, what
line of conduct were fittest for her to pursue. The guests, agreeably
to her instructions, were introduced into the room where company was
usually received. --The time was that I hated thee,
                And yet it is not that I bear thee love. Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
                            I will endure--
                But do not look for further recompense. As You Like It. Miss Isabella Wardour’s complexion was considerably heightened, when,
after the delay necessary to arrange her ideas, she presented herself in
the drawing-room. “I am glad you are come, my fair foe,” said the Antiquary greeting
her with much kindness, “for I have had a most refractory, or at least
negligent auditor, in my young friend here, while I endeavoured to make
him acquainted with the history of Knockwinnock Castle. I think the
danger of last night has mazed the poor lad. But you, Miss Isabel,--why,
you look as if flying through the night air had been your natural and
most congenial occupation; your colour is even better than when you
honoured my hospitium yesterday. And Sir Arthur--how fares my good old
friend?”

“Indifferently well, Mr. Oldbuck; but I am afraid, not quite able to
receive your congratulations, or to pay--to pay--Mr. Lovel his thanks for
his unparalleled exertions.”

“I dare say not--A good down pillow for his good white head were more
meet than a couch so churlish as Bessy’s-apron, plague on her!”

“I had no thought of intruding,” said Lovel, looking upon the ground,
and speaking with hesitation and suppressed emotion; “I did not--did
not mean to intrude upon Sir Arthur or Miss Wardour the presence of
one who--who must necessarily be unwelcome--as associated, I mean, with
painful reflections.”

“Do not think my father so unjust and ungrateful,” said Miss Wardour. “I
dare say,” she continued, participating in Lovel’s embarrassment--“I dare
say--I am certain--that my father would be happy to show his gratitude--in
any way--that is, which Mr. Lovel could consider it as proper to point
out.”

“Why the deuce,” interrupted Oldbuck, “what sort of a qualification is
that?--On my word, it reminds me of our minister, who, choosing, like a
formal old fop as he is, to drink to my sister’s inclinations, thought
it necessary to add the saving clause, Provided, madam, they be
virtuous. Come, let us have no more of this nonsense--I dare say Sir
Arthur will bid us welcome on some future day. And what news from the
kingdom of subterranean darkness and airy hope?--What says the swart
spirit of the mine? Has Sir Arthur had any good intelligence of his
adventure lately in Glen-Withershins?”

Miss Wardour shook her head--“But indifferent, I fear, Mr. Oldbuck; but
there lie some specimens which have lately been sent down.”

“Ah! my poor dear hundred pounds, which Sir Arthur persuaded me to give
for a share in that hopeful scheme, would have bought a porter’s load of
mineralogy--But let me see them.”

And so saying, he sat down at the table in the recess, on which the
mineral productions were lying, and proceeded to examine them, grumbling
and pshawing at each which he took up and laid aside. In the meantime, Lovel, forced as it were by this secession of Oldbuck,
into a sort of tete-a’-tete with Miss Wardour, took an opportunity of
addressing her in a low and interrupted tone of voice. “I trust
Miss Wardour will impute, to circumstances almost irresistible, this
intrusion of a person who has reason to think himself--so unacceptable a
visitor.”

“Mr. Lovel,” answered Miss Wardour, observing the same tone of caution,
“I trust you will not--I am sure you are incapable of abusing the
advantages given to you by the services you have rendered us, which, as
they affect my father, can never be sufficiently acknowledged or repaid. Could Mr. Lovel see me without his own peace being affected--could he
see me as a friend--as a sister--no man will be--and, from all I have ever
heard of Mr. Lovel, ought to be, more welcome but”--

Oldbuck’s anathema against the preposition but was internally echoed by
Lovel. “Forgive me if I interrupt you, Miss Wardour; you need not
fear my intruding upon a subject where I have been already severely
repressed;--but do not add to the severity of repelling my sentiments the
rigour of obliging me to disavow them.”

“I am much embarrassed, Mr. Lovel,” replied the young lady, “by your--I
would not willingly use a strong word--your romantic and hopeless
pertinacity. It is for yourself I plead, that you would consider the
calls which your country has upon your talents--that you will not waste,
in an idle and fanciful indulgence of an ill-placed predilection, time,
which, well redeemed by active exertion, should lay the foundation
of future distinction. Let me entreat that you would form a manly
resolution”--

“It is enough, Miss Wardour;--I see plainly that”--

“Mr. Lovel, you are hurt--and, believe me, I sympathize in the pain
which I inflict; but can I, in justice to myself, in fairness to you,
do otherwise? Without my father’s consent, I never will entertain the
addresses of any one, and how totally impossible it is that he should
countenance the partiality with which you honour me, you are yourself
fully aware; and, indeed”--

“No, Miss Wardour,” answered Lovel, in a tone of passionate entreaty;
“do not go farther--is it not enough to crush every hope in our present
relative situation?--do not carry your resolutions farther--why urge what
would be your conduct if Sir Arthur’s objections could be removed?”

“It is indeed vain, Mr. Lovel,” said Miss Wardour, “because their
removal is impossible; and I only wish, as your friend, and as one who
is obliged to you for her own and her father’s life, to entreat you to
suppress this unfortunate attachment--to leave a country which affords
no scope for your talents, and to resume the honourable line of the
profession which you seem to have abandoned.”

“Well, Miss Wardour, your wishes shall be obeyed;--have patience with me
one little month, and if, in the course of that space, I cannot show you
such reasons for continuing my residence at Fairport, as even you shall
approve of, I will bid adieu to its vicinity, and, with the same breath,
to all my hopes of happiness.”

“Not so, Mr. Lovel; many years of deserved happiness, founded on a more
rational basis than your present wishes, are, I trust, before, you. But it is full time, to finish this conversation. I cannot force you to
adopt my advice--I cannot shut the door of my father’s house against the
preserver of his life and mine; but the sooner Mr. Lovel can teach his
mind to submit to the inevitable disappointment of wishes which have
been so rashly formed, the more highly he will rise in my esteem--and, in
the meanwhile, for his sake as well as mine, he must excuse my putting
an interdict upon conversation on a subject so painful.”

A servant at this moment announced that Sir Arthur desired to speak to
Mr. Oldbuck in his dressing-room. “Let me show you the way,” said Miss Wardour, who apparently dreaded
a continuation of her tete-a-tete with Lovel, and she conducted the
Antiquary accordingly to her father’s apartment. Sir Arthur, his legs swathed in flannel, was stretched on the couch. “Welcome, Mr. Oldbuck,” he said; “I trust you have come better off than
I have done from the inclemency of yesterday evening?”

“Truly, Sir Arthur, I was not so much exposed to it--I kept terra
firma--you fairly committed yourself to the cold night-air in the most
literal of all senses. But such adventures become a gallant knight
better than a humble esquire,--to rise on the wings of the night-wind--to
dive into the bowels of the earth. What news from our subterranean Good
Hope!--the terra incognita of Glen-Withershins?”

“Nothing good as yet,” said the Baronet, turning himself hastily, as if
stung by a pang of the gout; “but Dousterswivel does not despair.”

“Does he not?” quoth Oldbuck; “I do though, under his favour. Why, old
Dr. H--n told me, when I was in Edinburgh, that we should never find
copper enough, judging from the specimens I showed him, to make a pair
of sixpenny knee-buckles--and I cannot see that those samples on the
table below differ much in quality.”

 Probably Dr. Hutton, the celebrated geologist. “The learned doctor is not infallible, I presume?”

“No; but he is one of our first chemists; and this tramping philosopher
of yours--this Dousterswivel--is, I have a notion, one, of those learned
adventurers described by Kirchner, Artem habent sine arte, partem sine
parte, quorum medium est mentiri, vita eorum mendicatum ire; that is to
say, Miss Wardour”--

“It is unnecessary to translate,” said Miss Wardour--“I comprehend your
general meaning; but I hope Mr. Dousterswivel will turn out a more
trustworthy character.”

“I doubt it not a little,” said the Antiquary,--“and we are a foul way
out if we cannot discover this infernal vein that he has prophesied
about these two years.”

“You have no great interest in the matter, Mr. Oldbuck,” said the
Baronet. “Too much, too much, Sir Arthur; and yet, for the sake of my fair foe
here, I would consent to lose it all so you had no more on the venture.”

There was a painful silence of a few moments, for Sir Arthur was too
proud to acknowledge the downfall of his golden dreams, though he could
no longer disguise to himself that such was likely to be the termination
of the adventure. “I understand,” he at length said, “that the young
gentleman, to whose gallantry and presence of mind we were so much
indebted last night, has favoured me with a visit--I am distressed that I
am unable to see him, or indeed any one, but an old friend like you, Mr.
Oldbuck.”

A declination of the Antiquary’s stiff backbone acknowledged the
preference. “You made acquaintance with this young gentleman in Edinburgh, I
suppose?”

Oldbuck told the circumstances of their becoming known to each other. “Why, then, my daughter is an older acquaintance, of Mr. Lovel than you
are,” said the Baronet. “Indeed! I was not aware of that,” answered Oldbuck somewhat surprised. “I met Mr. Lovel,” said Isabella, slightly colouring, “when I resided
this last spring with my aunt, Mrs. Wilmot.”

“In Yorkshire?--and what character did he bear then, or how was he
engaged?” said Oldbuck,--“and why did not you recognise him when I
introduced you?”

Isabella answered the least difficult question, and passed over the
other--“He had a commission in the army, and had, I believe, served with
reputation; he was much respected, as an amiable and promising young
man.”

“And pray, such being the case,” replied the Antiquary, not disposed
to take one reply in answer to two distinct questions, “why did you not
speak to the lad at once when you met him at my house? I thought you had
less of the paltry pride of womankind about you, Miss Wardour.”

“There was a reason for it,” said Sir Arthur with dignity; “you know the
opinions--prejudices, perhaps you will call them--of our house concerning
purity of birth. This young gentleman is, it seems, the illegitimate
son of a man of fortune; my daughter did not choose to renew their
acquaintance till she should know whether I approved of her holding any
intercourse with him.”

“If it had been with his mother instead of himself,” answered Oldbuck,
with his usual dry causticity of humour, “I could see an excellent
reason for it. Ah, poor lad! that was the cause, then, that he seemed so
absent and confused while I explained to him the reason of the bend of
bastardy upon the shield yonder under the corner turret!”

“True,” said the Baronet, with complacency--“it is the shield of Malcolm
the Usurper, as he is called. The tower which he built is termed, after
him, Malcolm’s Tower, but more frequently Misticot’s Tower, which I
conceive to be a corruption for Misbegot. He is denominated, in the
Latin pedigree of our family, Milcolumbus Nothus; and his temporary
seizure of our property, and most unjust attempt to establish his own
illegitimate line in the estate of Knockwinnock, gave rise to such
family feuds and misfortunes, as strongly to found us in that horror and
antipathy to defiled blood and illegitimacy which has been handed down
to me from my respected ancestry.”

“I know the story,” said Oldbuck, “and I was telling it to Lovel this
moment, with some of the wise maxims and consequences which it has
engrafted on your family politics. Poor fellow! he must have been much
hurt: I took the wavering of his attention for negligence, and was
something piqued at it, and it proves to be only an excess of feeling. I hope, Sir Arthur, you will not think the less of your life because it
has been preserved by such assistance?”

“Nor the less of my assistant either,” said the Baronet; “my doors and
table shall be equally open to him as if he had descended of the most
unblemished lineage.”

“Come, I am glad of that--he’ll know where he can get a dinner, then, if
he wants one. But what views can he have in this neighbourhood? I must
catechise him; and if I find he wants it--or, indeed, whether he does or
not--he shall have my best advice.” As the Antiquary made this liberal
promise, he took his leave of Miss Wardour and her father, eager to
commence operations upon Mr. Lovel. He informed him abruptly that Miss
Wardour sent her compliments, and remained in attendance on her father,
and then, taking him by the arm, he led him out of the castle. Knockwinnock still preserved much of the external attributes of a
baronial castle. It had its drawbridge, though now never drawn up, and
its dry moat, the sides of which had been planted with shrubs, chiefly
of the evergreen tribes. Above these rose the old building, partly from
a foundation of red rock scarped down to the sea-beach, and partly from
the steep green verge of the moat. The trees of the avenue have been
already mentioned, and many others rose around of large size,--as if to
confute the prejudice that timber cannot be raised near to the ocean. Our walkers paused, and looked back upon the castle, as they attained
the height of a small knoll, over which lay their homeward road; for it
is to be supposed they did not tempt the risk of the tide by returning
along the sands. The building flung its broad shadow upon the tufted
foliage of the shrubs beneath it, while the front windows sparkled in
the sun. They were viewed by the gazers with very different feelings. Lovel, with the fond eagerness of that passion which derives its food
and nourishment from trifles, as the chameleon is said to live on the
air, or upon the invisible insects which it contains, endeavoured to
conjecture which of the numerous windows belonged to the apartment now
graced by Miss Wardour’s presence. The speculations of the Antiquary
were of a more melancholy cast, and were partly indicated by the
ejaculation of cito peritura! as he turned away from the prospect. Lovel, roused from his reverie, looked at him as if to inquire the
meaning of an exclamation so ominous. The old man shook his head. “Yes,
my young friend,” said he, “I doubt greatly--and it wrings my heart to
say it--this ancient family is going fast to the ground!”

“Indeed!” answered Lovel--“you surprise me greatly.”

“We harden ourselves in vain,” continued the Antiquary, pursuing his own
train of thought and feeling--“we harden ourselves in vain to treat with
the indifference they deserve, the changes of this trumpery whirligig
world. We strive ineffectually to be the self-sufficing invulnerable
being, the teres atque rotundus of the poet;--the stoical exemption which
philosophy affects to give us over the pains and vexations of human
life, is as imaginary as the state of mystical quietism and perfection
aimed at by some crazy enthusiasts.”

“And Heaven forbid that it should be otherwise!” said Lovel,
warmly--“Heaven forbid that any process of philosophy were capable so
to sear and indurate our feelings, that nothing should agitate them but
what arose instantly and immediately out of our own selfish interests! I would as soon wish my hand to be as callous as horn, that it might
escape an occasional cut or scratch, as I would be ambitious of the
stoicism which should render my heart like a piece of the nether
millstone.”

The Antiquary regarded his youthful companion with a look half of pity,
half of sympathy, and shrugged up his shoulders as he replied--“Wait,
young man--wait till your bark has been battered by the storm of sixty
years of mortal vicissitude: you will learn by that time, to reef your
sails, that she may obey the helm;--or, in the language of this world,
you will find distresses enough, endured and to endure, to keep your
feelings and sympathies in full exercise, without concerning yourself
more in the fate of others than you cannot possibly avoid.”

“Well, Mr. Oldbuck, it may be so;--but as yet I resemble you more in your
practice than in your theory, for I cannot help being deeply interested
in the fate of the family we have just left.”

“And well you may,” replied Oldbuck. “Sir Arthur’s embarrassments have
of late become so many and so pressing, that I am surprised you have not
heard of them. And then his absurd and expensive operations carried on
by this High-German landlouper, Dousterswivel”--

“I think I have seen that person, when, by some rare chance, I
happened to be in the coffee-room at Fairport;--a tall, beetle-browed,
awkward-built man, who entered upon scientific subjects, as it appeared
to my ignorance at least, with more assurance than knowledge--was very
arbitrary in laying down and asserting his opinions, and mixed the terms
of science with a strange jargon of mysticism. A simple youth whispered
me that he was an Illumine’, and carried on an intercourse with the
invisible world.”

“O, the same--the same. He has enough of practical knowledge to speak
scholarly and wisely to those of whose intelligence he stands in awe;
and, to say the truth, this faculty, joined to his matchless impudence,
imposed upon me for some time when I first knew him. But I have since
understood, that when he is among fools and womankind, he exhibits
himself as a perfect charlatan--talks of the magisterium--of sympathies
and antipathies--of the cabala--of the divining-rod--and all the trumpery
with which the Rosicrucians cheated a darker age, and which, to our
eternal disgrace, has in some degree revived in our own. My friend
Heavysterne knew this fellow abroad, and unintentionally (for he, you
must know, is, God bless the mark! a sort of believer) let me into a
good deal of his real character. Ah! were I caliph for a day, as Honest
Abon Hassan wished to be, I would scourge me these jugglers out of the
commonwealth with rods of scorpions. They debauch the spirit of the
ignorant and credulous with mystical trash, as effectually as if they
had besotted their brains with gin, and then pick their pockets with the
same facility. And now has this strolling blackguard and mountebank put
the finishing blow to the ruin of an ancient and honourable family!”

“But how could he impose upon Sir Arthur to any ruinous extent?”

“Why, I don’t know. Sir Arthur is a good honourable gentleman; but, as
you may see from his loose ideas concerning the Pikish language, he is
by no means very strong in the understanding. His estate is strictly
entailed, and he has been always an embarrassed man. This rapparee
promised him mountains of wealth, and an English company was found
to advance large sums of money--I fear on Sir Arthur’s guarantee. Some
gentlemen--I was ass enough to be one--took small shares in the concern,
and Sir Arthur himself made great outlay; we were trained on by specious
appearances and more specious lies; and now, like John Bunyan, we awake,
and behold it is a dream!”

“I am surprised that you, Mr. Oldbuck, should have encouraged Sir Arthur
by your example.”

“Why,” said Oldbuck, dropping his large grizzled eyebrow, “I am
something surprised and ashamed at it myself; it was not the lucre of
gain--nobody cares less for money (to be a prudent man) than I do--but I
thought I might risk this small sum. It will be expected (though I am
sure I cannot see why) that I should give something to any one who
will be kind enough to rid me of that slip of womankind, my niece, Mary
M’Intyre; and perhaps it may be thought I should do something to get
that jackanapes, her brother, on in the army. In either case, to treble
my venture, would have helped me out. And besides, I had some idea that
the Phoenicians had in former times wrought copper in that very spot. That cunning scoundrel, Dousterswivel, found out my blunt side, and
brought strange tales (d--n him) of appearances of old shafts, and
vestiges of mining operations, conducted in a manner quite different
from those of modern times; and I--in short, I was a fool, and there
is an end. My loss is not much worth speaking about; but Sir Arthur’s
engagements are, I understand, very deep, and my heart aches for him and
the poor young lady who must share his distress.”

Here the conversation paused, until renewed in the next CHAPTER. If I may trust the flattering eye of sleep,
              My dreams presage some joyful news at hand:
              My bosom’s lord sits lightly on his throne,
                 And all this day, an unaccustomed spirit
              Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts. Romeo and Juliet. The account of Sir Arthur’s unhappy adventure had led Oldbuck somewhat
aside from his purpose of catechising Lovel concerning the cause of
his residence at Fairport. He was now, however, resolved to open the
subject. “Miss Wardour was formerly known to you, she tells me, Mr.
Lovel?”

“He had had the pleasure,” Lovel answered, “to see her at Mrs. Wilmot’s,
in Yorkshire.”

“Indeed! you never mentioned that to me before, and you did not accost
her as an old acquaintance.”

“I--I did not know,” said Lovel, a good deal embarrassed, “it was the
same lady, till we met; and then it was my duty to wait till she should
recognise me.”

“I am aware of your delicacy: the knight’s a punctilious old fool, but
I promise you his daughter is above all nonsensical ceremony and
prejudice. And now, since you have, found a new set of friends here, may
I ask if you intend to leave Fairport as soon as you proposed?”

“What if I should answer your question by another,” replied Lovel, “and
ask you what is your opinion of dreams?”

“Of dreams, you foolish lad!--why, what should I think of them but as
the deceptions of imagination when reason drops the reins? I know no
difference betwixt them and the hallucinations of madness--the unguided
horses run away with the carriage in both cases, only in the one the
coachman is drunk, and in the other he slumbers. What says our
Marcus Tullius--Si insanorum visis fides non est habenda, cur credatur
somnientium visis, quae multo etiam perturbatiora sunt, non intelligo.”

“Yes, sir; but Cicero also tells us, that as he who passes the whole day
in darting the javelin must sometimes hit the mark, so, amid the cloud
of nightly dreams, some may occur consonant to future events.”

“Ay--that is to say, you have hit the mark in your own sage opinion? Lord! Lord! how this world is given to folly! Well, I will allow for
once the Oneirocritical science--I will give faith to the exposition of
dreams, and say a Daniel hath arisen to interpret them, if you can
prove to me that that dream of yours has pointed to a prudent line of
conduct.”

“Tell me, then,” answered Lovel, “why when I was hesitating whether to
abandon an enterprise, which I have perhaps rashly undertaken, I
should last night dream I saw your ancestor pointing to a motto which
encouraged me to perseverance?--why should I have thought of those words
which I cannot remember to have heard before, which are in a language
unknown to me, and which yet conveyed, when translated, a lesson which I
could so plainly apply to my own circumstances?”

The Antiquary burst into a fit of laughing. “Excuse me, my young
friend--but it is thus we silly mortals deceive ourselves, and look out
of doors for motives which originate in our own wilful will. I think I
can help out the cause of your vision. You were so abstracted in your
contemplations yesterday after dinner, as to pay little attention to the
discourse between Sir Arthur and me, until we fell upon the controversy
concerning the Piks, which terminated so abruptly;--but I remember
producing to Sir Arthur a book printed by my ancestor, and making
him observe the motto; your mind was bent elsewhere, but your ear had
mechanically received and retained the sounds, and your busy fancy,
stirred by Grizel’s legend I presume, had introduced this scrap of
German into your dream. As for the waking wisdom which seized on so
frivolous a circumstance as an apology for persevering in some course
which it could find no better reason to justify, it is exactly one of
those juggling tricks which the sagest of us play off now and then, to
gratify our inclination at the expense of our understanding.”

“I own it,” said Lovel, blushing deeply;--“I believe you are right, Mr.
Oldbuck, and I ought to sink in your esteem for attaching a moment’s
consequence to such a frivolity;--but I was tossed by contradictory
wishes and resolutions, and you know how slight a line will tow a boat
when afloat on the billows, though a cable would hardly move her when
pulled up on the beach.”

“Right, right,” exclaimed the Antiquary. “Fall in my opinion!--not a
whit--I love thee the better, man;--why, we have story for story against
each other, and I can think with less shame on having exposed myself
about that cursed Praetorium--though I am still convinced Agricola’s camp
must have been somewhere in this neighbourhood. And now, Lovel, my good
lad, be sincere with me--What make you from Wittenberg?--why have you left
your own country and professional pursuits, for an idle residence in
such a place as Fairport? A truant disposition, I fear.”

“Even so,” replied Lovel, patiently submitting to an interrogatory which
he could not well evade. “Yet I am so detached from all the world, have
so few in whom I am interested, or who are interested in me, that my
very state of destitution gives me independence. He whose good or evil
fortune affects himself alone, has the best right to pursue it according
to his own fancy.”

“Pardon me, young man,” said Oldbuck, laying his hand kindly on his
shoulder, and making a full halt--“sufflamina--a little patience, if you
please. I will suppose that you have no friends to share or rejoice in
your success in life--that you cannot look back to those to whom you owe
gratitude, or forward to those to whom you ought to afford protection;
but it is no less incumbent on you to move steadily in the path of
duty--for your active exertions are due not only to society, but in
humble gratitude to the Being who made you a member of it, with powers
to serve yourself and others.”

“But I am unconscious of possessing such powers,” said Lovel, somewhat
impatiently. “I ask nothing of society but the permission of walking
innoxiously through the path of life, without jostling others, or
permitting myself to be jostled. I owe no man anything--I have the means
of maintaining, myself with complete independence; and so moderate
are my wishes in this respect, that even these means, however limited,
rather exceed than fall short of them.”

“Nay, then,” said Oldbuck, removing his hand, and turning again to
the road, “if you are so true a philosopher as to think you have money
enough, there’s no more to be said--I cannot pretend to be entitled to
advise you;--you have attained the acme’--the summit of perfection. And
how came Fairport to be the selected abode of so much self-denying
philosophy? It is as if a worshipper of the true religion had set up his
staff by choice among the multifarious idolaters of the land of Egypt. There is not a man in Fairport who is not a devoted worshipper of the
Golden Calf--the mammon of unrighteousness. Why, even I, man, am so
infected by the bad neighbourhood, that I feel inclined occasionally to
become an idolater myself.”

“My principal amusements being literary,” answered Lovel, “and
circumstances which I cannot mention having induced me, for a time at
least, to relinquish the military service, I have pitched on Fairport
as a place where I might follow my pursuits without any of those
temptations to society which a more elegant circle might have presented
to me.”

“Aha!” replied Oldbuck, knowingly,--“I begin to understand your
application of my ancestor’s motto. You are a candidate for public
favour, though not in the way I first suspected,--you are ambitious to
shine as a literary character, and you hope to merit favour by labour
and perseverance?”

Lovel, who was rather closely pressed by the inquisitiveness of the old
gentleman, concluded it would be best to let him remain in the error
which he had gratuitously adopted. “I have been at times foolish enough,” he replied, “to nourish some
thoughts of the kind.”

“Ah, poor fellow! nothing can be more melancholy; unless, as young
men sometimes do, you had fancied yourself in love with some trumpery
specimen of womankind, which is indeed, as Shakspeare truly says,
pressing to death, whipping, and hanging all at once.”

He then proceeded with inquiries, which he was sometimes kind enough to
answer himself. For this good old gentleman had, from his antiquarian
researches, acquired a delight in building theories out of premises
which were often far from affording sufficient ground for them; and
being, as the reader must have remarked, sufficiently opinionative,
he did not readily brook being corrected, either in matter of fact or
judgment, even by those who were principally interested in the subjects
on which he speculated. He went on, therefore, chalking out Lovel’s
literary career for him. “And with what do you propose to commence your debut as a man of
letters?--But I guess--poetry--poetry--the soft seducer of youth. Yes! there
is an acknowledging modesty of confusion in your eye and manner. And
where lies your vein?--are you inclined to soar to the higher regions of
Parnassus, or to flutter around the base of the hill?”

“I have hitherto attempted only a few lyrical pieces,” said Lovel. “Just as I supposed--pruning your wing, and hopping from spray to spray. But I trust you intend a bolder flight. Observe, I would by no means
recommend your persevering in this unprofitable pursuit--but you say you
are quite independent of the public caprice?”

“Entirely so,” replied Lovel. “And that you are determined not to adopt a more active course of life?”

“For the present, such is my resolution,” replied the young man. “Why, then, it only remains for me to give you my best advice and
assistance in the object of your pursuit.