After fits of fondness,
anxiety and disinterestedness inexpressible, my mind, exhausted with cares, would sometimes recoil on itself; and I pretended, in the bitterness of my heart,

to cast up my gains. It is true, said I, I love Mary; I cannot help it; this love is the star of my ascendant for the rest of my days. But what am I the
better
for it? What are her merits? What have I ever experienced from her but thwarting and disappointment? I feel

that I have lost the freedom which was once my portion; and without freedom what is life? Mary, as I have said, was exceedingly anxious to conceal from me the uneasiness under which she laboured. Symptoms occasionally appeared in her which alarmed
me, and which seemed to partake of an alienation of the understanding. Though generally comfortless and sad, she would now and then break into an opposite
tone
of mind, and be seized with fits of merriment and laughter. I can conceive nothing more horrible than this laughter; it expressed misery more strikingly,
than
all the sighs and tears and groans in the world could have done. My wife slept little; and her short and unfrequent slumbers were exceedingly disturbed. She talked in her sleep; her words were murmuring, indistinct and
incoherent; but they referred

to her family; particularly to her mother. Mary, said I, you will break my heart. What can I do to comfort you? Your mother I cannot restore to you; I cannot compel the occan to give back her dead. But
all that I can, I will do. I will in all things study your inclinations; I will never thwart and oppose you, as I have done; I will bestow all my thoughts in

the effort to relieve you; I will seek for still new pleasures, till I find some that shall be cordial to your bosom. My dear Fleetwood, she replied, never mind me. Do not give yourself this uneasiness about me. All will be well. I feel a weight just here (clapping her hand to
her head); but it is only a cloud, that will blow away, and the sun will shine again. I will talk to myself, and bring my temper into better order. I am
ashamed, that I should thus torment

you, who ought to be your comfort and your helper. It shall not be thus long. At other times I talked to her in a style, partaking of reproach.---Would to God, Mary, you loved me, as I love you! Your thoughts would not then be all upon
the things you have lost and cannot regain. You would sometimes think of me, and be happy. To me you are every thing; I think of you as an angel, and think
of
nothing else; having you, I want nothing; friends, fortune, country, all the gratifications of life, I should never regret, if blessed with your affection. Hard is the fate of him, whose passion is unreturned by the object of his love; or who, when his bosom burns with all the ardour of attachment, obtains
nothing
but a moderate and glimmering kindness, insufficient to awake contentment in the mistress of his heart! There were occasions, when I talked to her in a stronger style. I told her,

that the weakness she indulged was unworthy of her education and her powers. I described it as the characteristic of a feeble mind and a vacant understanding,
to dwell thus obstinately upon what was now placed beyond the reach of fate. I exhorted her peremptorily to oppose the foe that had invaded her peace. I told

her, that human creatures had a being and duties of their own, and that it became every one who would escape the contempt of his fellow-men, to rouse himself

to the consideration of them. One further circumstance occurred in the progress of Mary's distemper. She would steal from her bed in the middle of the night when no one perceived it, and
make her escape out of the house. The first time this accident occurred, I was exceedingly alarmed. I awoke, and found that the beloved of my soul was gone. I
sought her in her closet, in the parlour, and in the library. I then

called up the servants. The night was dark and tempestuous; the wind blew a hollow blast; and the surges roared and stormed as they buffeted against the
hurricane. A sort of sleet blew sharp in our faces when we opened the door of the house. I went myself in one direction, and dispatched the servants in
others,
to call and search for their mistress. After two hours she was brought back by one of my people, who, having sought in vain at a distance, had discovered her

on his return, not far from the house. Her hair was dishevelled; her countenance as white as death; her limbs cold; she was languid and speechless. We got
her,
as quickly as we could, to bed. This happened a second time. At length I extorted her secret from her. She had been to the beach of the sea to seek the bodies of her parents. On the sea-shore
she seemed to converse with their spirits. She owned, she had been

tempted to plunge herself into the waves to meet them. She heard their voices speaking to her in the hollow wind, and saw their faces riding on the top of the
waves, by the light of the moon as it peeped precariously through the storm. They called to her, and bid her come along, and chid her for her delay. The
words
at first sounded softly, so that it seemed difficult to bear them, but afterward changed to the most dolorous and piercing shrieks. In the last instance a
figure had approached her, and, seizing her garment, detained her, just as she was going to launch herself into the element.---The servants talked something
of
a gentleman, who had quitted Mary, precisely as they came up to conduct her home. She confessed that, whenever the equinoctial wind sounded in her ears, it gave a sudden turn to her blood and spirits. As she listened alone to the

roaring of the ocean, her parents and her sisters immediately stood before her. More than once she had been awaked at midnight by the well-known sound; and,
looking out of bed, she saw their bodies strewed on the floor, distended with the element that filled them, and their features distorted with death. This
spectacle she could not endure; she had crept silently out of bed, and, drawing a few clothes about her, had found her way into the air. She felt nothing of

the storm; and, led on by an impulse she could not resist, had turned her steps toward the sea. This was a terrible story. I saw that some immediate and decisive remedy was indispensible. I saw that the state of mind she was in, if not effectually
changed, led in direct course to one of two issues, derangement of intellect, or suicide. Poor Mary! How deep an

impression the fatal catastrophe of her family had made upon her mind! I was of all men most inexcusable in having forgotten this. I had seen the whole
progress of the impression, and with what difficulty she had been recalled to the world at first. If, in the warm affection she had conceived for me, in her

marriage and subsequent prospects with the man of her choice, she had in some degree risen from the tomb, and come away from the recent graves of those she
loved, did that form an excuse for me? On the contrary, it laid me under the highest and most indelible obligation. What a proof of love! Did ever wife give
to
her husband, or mistress to the most devoted of her admirers, a more incontrovertible evidence of attachment? And I, in my ingratitude and insensibility, had

shut my eyes upon the true merit of this conduct, and treated with rudeness and asperity the amiable devotee! Change of scene was a medicine which the case obviously required. She must not be within reach of the sea. She must be, where it was impossible for the ear to
catch the roaring of the waters. I further conceived that it was desirable to convey her to some place, where variety of amusement should draw off her
attention, from the horrible imaginings with which she had lately been haunted. Mary was young; and there is something in the spring and first unfolding of
life, which seems particularly to demand the interposition of diversified objects and vivacious entertainment. In the present case nature herself appeared to

point out the remedy. Mary had shown a decisive partiality for visits and assemblies

and crowds. I now believed, that it was an indistinct consciousness that she could not support herself without these aids, that had directed her choice. I
fixed upon a removal to Bath. My wife derived great and evident benefit from this transplanting. Some languor remained for a few days; but it speedily disappeared. It is impossible to conceive with what joy I hailed her return to health. I had had the most horrible prospect before me. I had seen the wife of my bosom given
up to the agonies of a distracted spirit. I had felt a remorse and oppression of mind, to which till that hour I had been a stranger. I accused myself as the

author of her calamity. The tenderest flower in nature's garden had been committed to my care, and I was deeply responsible for the manner in which I had
treated it. If she seemed to have forgotten the premature destruction

of her family, I ought not to have forgotten it. I ought to have considered her as a convalescent, that required every art to defend from a relapse, and to
lure away from the action of those causes which had produced her disease. For many days I fed upon the pleasure which her recovery afforded me. I saw, with extacies of delight, the roses once more unfolding their bloom upon those
cheeks, late so livid and so pale. For several weeks before we left Merionethshire, Mary had gradually become more and more dejected; and, if at any time she

smiled, her smiles, as I have said, had in them something more sad and terrible to my heart, than tears in any other case would have suggested. Now I saw in

them, once again, the honest expression of a mind accessible to amusement and pleasure. I saw those gathering clouds, which had been felt by me like the end
of
the world, dispersed

and clearing away, as if they had never been. I thanked her a thousand times; I kissed the new-blown roses; I clasped her in my transported arms. Mary, said I, you have brought me back from the very dens of despair. Oh, Mary, what alarms have I felt! It is indeed an awful thing, to be in love!--- Poor
creature, how much must you have suffered! Do you remember, when you sallied forth on that terrible night? Do you remember, when, as you said, some friendly,

unknown hand snatched you back, just as you were going to be swallowed up by the billows?---No, I will mention the subject no more. I will be the most
cautious
and attentive of husbands. Brute that I was, I had not considered how much delicacy and forbearance your sweet frame demanded. You are an angel, and I
treated
you like a mortal. Will you forgive me? I wish this recovery had taken place

less rapidly. Mary passed from one extreme to the other, without almost an interval between. She made acquaintances, she resorted to all public places; she was
involved in a perpetual round of engagements; she laughed, and talked, and danced, and sung, for ever; at least so it appeared to my sickly apprehension. Yet
I
was upon my guard, not to check, or seem to disapprove, as I had formerly done, the avocations she chose. Sometimes indeed, with ever-subtle anxiety, I was
alarmed for the sanity of her intellect. Once or twice I hinted to my charmer in an obscure and distant way, that she was over-acting her part. On these
occasions she looked at me with a wistful and wintry smile, that brought back to my recollection all the horrible apprehensions I had lately entertained. I
kissed her, and told her, I saw she was right. Here then I was, torn, not now from

my closet and my private stair-case, but from my paternal mansion, and the haunts, where once my careless childhood strayed. Lately the most independent man
alive, I was become a mere appendage to that tender and charming trifle, a pretty woman. I adored my wife; but I had cultivated high ideas of the
prerogatives
of my sex, and I did not altogether relish the being thus reduced to a cipher. My geographical situation was now the offspring of necessity, not of choice. I

felt like the persons I have somewhere read of, acted upon by a magnetic influence, who wore no chains or fetters, and yet were prisoners, struggling perhaps

to advance in an opposite direction, but always compelled to follow the steps of him who exerted this ascendancy over them. Bath, of all places on earth, I detested. I had some unpleasing associations respecting it, arising from certain trivial

adventures, which I have not thought it necessary to record in this history. But, independently of these, I had been, through life, with very few
interruptions, a lover of nature, of her romantic and magnificent scenery, of her simple and unvitiated manners. Bath appeared to me the very focus of
artificial society, of every thing that was frivolous, affected, impertinent, overreaching and licentious. Deeply in love as I was, I could not help speculating, with no agreeable reflections, from the new lights I had derived on the character of my wife. Fickle and
capricious I judged her; and, thus judging, I could not avoid sometimes viewing her under the notion of a beautiful toy, a plume of costly feathers, or a
copious train of thinnest gauze, which nods gracefully, or floats in a thousand pleasing folds, but which is destitute of substance, firmness or

utility. There must be something, I thought, radically defective, in so fluctuating a character. She acted (thus I construed her demeanour) inconsiderately and
idly; she could be induced to no fixed spirit of attention; she was at one moment sunk in the lowest depths of misery, and at another wild with extravagant
gaiety, with no interval to qualify the transition, with no self-government to give propriety or moderation to either. A being acting thus, was it entitled
to
be ranked in the scale of moral existences? What dependence could be placed upon the consistency of any thing so versatile? What principles could dwell in
the
bosom of so mere a woman?--- All these reasonings brought back to my mind mrs. Comorin, the marchioness de L. and the countess of B.; and I reverted to my
long
established sentiment, that the sex were all alike. What

a fool was I, ever to have doubted it! Indulging this ill-humoured and inequitable estimate of my wife, it was natural that I should be displeased with the figure I made on the present occasion. Once, said I to myself, I was a man! Ambition had its dwelling-place in this bosom. How many thoughts and projects and inventions, for fame and for
usefulness,
have passed through my mind? In reality, it was this ardent desire to be something, to record myself on the rolls of my species for some praise-worthy deed,

that had haunted me for ever, and poisoned my tranquillity in every stage. My father and my grandfather were admirable men. What maters it, that they were
merely opulent English merchants? Not to introduce here many other anecdotes scarcely less honourable to their characters, the senior

who took up the little vagrant Ruffigny and made him his son, and the junior who willingly yielded that this vagrant should enter into the joint possession of
his inheritance, were no ordinary men. Ruffigny himself and Macneil, the two most distinguished of my friends, were of that stamp, who did nothing for fame,

but every thing for utility, for venerable simplicity, and for virtue. It was not the loud blast of applause that I demanded; it was, that I might look on
myself with a satisfied mind; and that those who knew me most, might love me, and who could judge me best, might say, He has not lived in vain! And were all my projects, and was the never-resting anxiety of my bosom, reduced to this? Formerly I said, I am nothing; because no achievement I ever
performed came up to my own ideas of what became me. Now I might say, I

am nothing; because, with regard to any such ideas, I was literally palsied. I was a lover. Alas, I was past the age, when a man can rest satisfied with this
one frivolous passion, and see in the world only his Julia! Love, is a passion in which soul and body hold divided empire. The meaner half of our nature is
essential to its support. It is sex, it is "a set of features and complexion, the tincture of a skin," that constitutes its origin and principle. Considered
in
this light, it is, all through, a selfish sentiment, the pampering of a weakness, a delicious scheme for beguiling the hours and weeks of our existence. Certainly man, particularly the man whom heaven has endowed with inventive faculties and a comprehensive intellect, was made for something better than this. I
was now engrossed by a single individual; I was playing a subservient and humble part in her train; and even the character and

attributes of this individual did not at all times command my approbation. Assuredly I did not always look back upon this, with complacence, or with
patience. It was at Bath that I first reduced to practice the other part of the advice of my deceased Mentor, the calling about me my distant relations, young men who,
from the regulations of society, had the best claim upon my assistance. I had had a kinswoman, descended from a sister of my grandfather, with whom we had preserved little intercourse, because we had always considered her character
as by no means calculated to do credit, to any one who should be connected with her. The woman was now dead; but, while living, she had run a singular
career. She had been given in first marriage to a wealthy esquire of Wales, of the name of Gifford. This man she had led for several

years a weary life. She was of exquisite beauty, tall, graceful and captivating. Her tastes were expensive, and her manners gay. Her demeanour was spirited and
impressive, her passions volatile, and her temper violent. With all this, she was by no means destitute of capacity. She was eloquent, witty and sarcastic;
exhibiting, when she pleased, the highest breeding, and delivering her remarks with inexpressible vivacity and grace. Thus endowed, she was surrounded,
wherever she appeared, with a little army of suitors. Every youth of fashion, who had the courage to look up to her, became her professed admirer; and, among

these admirers, it was pretty universally believed that all had not offered up their incense in vain. At length, impunity made her heedless; she was caught
in
a situation with a young officer, a Creole by birth, which admitted of no ambiguity; her husband

could no longer overlook her offence; and a divorce was the result. Her character being thus blasted, she gave full scope to her appetite for pleasure; she
retreated to London, and occupied a very elegant mansion, which was for some time a favourite haunt for the most dissipated of our young nobility. While the

divorce was depending, she was allowed, by the ecclesiastical court, a tolerably handsome income out of her husband's estates; and, when this ceased, the
defect was understood to be supplied by the more opulent of her guests. This prosperity however did not last for ever. Mrs. Gifford's charms, by the effect of late hours and incessant dissipation, rapidly subsided. She was no
longer a novelty. She had had many fortunate lovers; but she had not been lucky enough to secure one, who, by the entanglement of habit or otherwise, should
be
inclined to preserve the autumn

of her days from indigence. She retired, with a dejected heart, and an empty purse, into Wales, and took up her residence in a market-town, in the very next
county to that where my father lived. But, though mrs. Gifford was no longer handsome enough for Rotten-Row or Pall-Mall, she made a great figure in the
remote
quarter of the world which now received her. Her recommendations, as I have already said, were not merely those of person; she possessed understanding,
animation and taste. She had seen much of the high world, and she had eminently the talent of giving poignancy to her anecdotes and remarks. In the town where she dwelt, lived also a mr. Kenrick, a surgeon, of great skill and ability in his profession. This man was beloved by all the country round,
not only on account of his art, and the humane and liberal style in

which he dispensed its benefits, but for his manners, which were in the most striking form of artlessness and simplicity. With an uncommon fund of good sense
and profound sagacity, he was, as to all the affairs of the living world, a child. He was imposed upon by every artful story, and his purse was open alike to

relieve distress and gratify imposture. He could not find in his heart to be severe to any one; and the wretch who had ten times deceived him, was sure, if
detected, to be dismissed at worst with nothing harder than a patriarchal rebuke. Add to this, he was subject to the strangest fits of absence, which often
involved him in incredible mistakes and absurdities; though, as if by the interposition of a good genius for ever watchful over the steps of this admirable
creature, his distractions had never been known to produce a pernicious effect in the exercise of his profession. My worthy kinswoman saw at once into the value of this memorable person. She thought him as exactly fitted to become her second husband, as if he had been made
for the purpose. Poor fellow, he had perhaps never in his life bestowed a single thought upon love and marriage. But mrs. Gifford knew, that the man who
cannot
be brought to enact the personage of a suitor, may, by a dextrous change of the character of the sexes, be an admirable subject for a clever woman, who
should
think proper to pay her addresses to him. The ladies of Llanvelling refused to admit the visits of this interesting Magdalene, and therefore she had no
chance
to meet the doctor at a third place; but that obstacle was immediately removed, when mrs. Gifford opportunely fell ill of a languishing distemper. She had
great address in conducting the symptoms of her indisposition, as she had address in every

thing she seriously undertook; poor Kenrick could not tell what to make of it. One thing however the better understood, the charms of her conversation: she
exerted all her talents to fix herself in his good opinion; and never perhaps in her life had she failed in an attempt of that sort. She did not chuse to
have
a tedious illness; for it was not to her purpose that he should regard her as a decided invalid. She was ill long enough, however, to secure poor Kenrick's
partiality. He had never before experienced in any eminent degree the pleasures of female society; the Welch ladies were not calculated to afford them to a
man
of science. Mrs. Gifford's fire-side was a most delightful retreat to the rural surgeon, after the labours of the day; if he was not there every evening, he

every evening wished to be there. The lady, on the other hand, took every precaution to remove his diffidence; she showed

him, not so much by words, as by affectionate expressions, and a seeming overflowing of the soul in his company, that he could not visit her too often. Kenrick
had been a total stranger to this species of flattery, not because his neighbours did not honour his merit, but because they wanted the skill to honour it in

this way; and he was so much the more passive and defenceless to its operations. All this coquetry terminated in marriage; but the man of medicine found mrs. Kenrick a very different sort of woman from what mrs. Gifford had appeared. The
bent of his mind rendered him incapable of the habits of accumulation; but the income of his professional labours was far from despicable. When mrs. Gifford

had come down into Wales, fifty pounds constituted the whole fortune, principal and interest, that she possessed. So circumstanced, it was impossible for any

woman to have more unexpensive tastes, or a more decisive

relish for rural retirement. No sooner however had fortune changed, than she resumed her former propensities. She began with adding an elegant saloon to her
husband's house, and decorating his little grounds in a sort of Versailles style. It was in vain for Kenrick to remonstrate; she was dashing and peremptory;
he
gentle, forbearing, and unqualified to contend. She soon grew tired of the delights of Montgomeryshire. One morning she read in the papers of the death of a

surgeon of the first eminence at Bath; she found that this afforded an opening of the most auspicious nature for her husband, and insisted upon his removing

thither. Kenrick's talents and knowledge of his profession would have made their way any where; but his wife was a clog hung about his neck, that made it
impossible for him to rise. She filled his house with assemblies of demireps and debauchees; desperate as to the recovery of any character in the

world, she resolved to make that figure by dissoluteness and effrontery, which, if she had set out right in life, she might have made by elegance,
accomplishments and virtue. Kenrick lost his courage, his activity, and his employers. Death came at a convenient moment, and, by means of the disease,
usually
styled a broken heart, rescued him from the horrors of poverty. His wife had taken no care in the seasons of her prosperity, to provide for an evil day. She

sunk into obscurity, by all neglected and by all despised; and, after several years of wretchedness, terminated her existence in a parish-workhouse. This woman had two sons. The fate of both was singular. Born, the eldest under the roofs of magnificence, and the second in the mansion of competence and
plenty, they were reduced at an early age to absolute want. The former bore the name of Gifford. After several years

of marriage without the least promise of offspring, his mother had at length presented this son to her first husband. But, in the ecclesiastical proceedings
which took place soon after his birth, it was proved to the satisfaction of the court that he was illegitimate, and he was cut off by act of parliament from

the large inheritance to which he seemed to have been born. Her second son was the offspring of the excellent and guileless Kenrick; and he was ruined,
equally
with his elder brother, by the unhappy issue of his father's professional life. Between these two youths there had been an antipathy from the earliest period of the existence of the latter; at least it was deeply felt by Gifford for his
unwelcome cadet. Gifford was a youth of a dark complexion, and elegant figure, sagacious, shrewd, supple and insinuating. He had been only seven years of age

at the period of his mother's second

marriage. She had never loved her son; for she beheld him as the innocent instrument of her disgrace. He harboured in his childish bosom a secret abhorrence of
his mother. The extraordinary change which had taken place in his fortunes in infancy, had probably, when he came to know it, served in a wonderful degree to

sharpen his faculties. His nurses and attendants did not fail to tell him, that he had, during the early months of his existence, been looked upon as the
heir
to twenty thousand a year. The eternal recollection that the open misconduct of his mother had been the cause of his losing this, made him look upon her with

the sentiments of a demon. Extraordinary as it may seem, long before he was seven years of age, he understood all he had suffered, or at least felt it as
deeply, as a man of forty might have done. This boyish impression of dislike to her on whom he solely

depended, taught him early habits of hypocrisy. Two or three times, in the beginning, his feelings of antipathy had broken out; but the haughty and imperious
temper of his mother had crushed them, with such terrors as no school-boy courage could withstand. From this time he learned the tones of submission, and
even
of reverence; and, being of a remarkably quick capacity, no Roscius or Richard could have played the character he assumed more consummately. Even the
penetrating observation of mrs. Gifford was deceived, and she was persuaded that this viper doted on her to distraction. Love, in an infinite majority of
cases, begets love. Perceiving how much the boy seemed attached to her, and remorseful perhaps for the great injury he had suffered from her licentiousness,

she became tolerant and even kind to him. His figure was graceful and prepossessing; his capacity was

every where remarked with sentiments of astonishment; the mother gradually became proud of her son. She introduced him into the family of the mild Kenrick, and caused him to be treated as the proper heir of all he saw. The age at which mrs. Gifford had
arrived, rendered it somewhat improbable that she should have any child by her second marriage; the habits of her past life seemed to have increased this
improbability. The boy, of course, did not exactly understand the state of his step-father's fortune. He saw every thing in plenty about him; and meditated
in
his youthful heart, to give himself full scope in enjoying all at present, and to possess the same means, sole and uncontroled, when the present proprietors

were gone off the stage. It was therefore with a sort of despair, that he found that his mother became pregnant in the second year of her marriage. A
thousand
plans

for removing this infant-rival, whom he regarded as destined by law the proprietor of those funds which he had so lately counted for his own, suggested
themselves to his working brain. Again and again he had had thoughts of removing him by poison; Gifford was a coward; but he was also too good a calculator
not
to give due weight to the chances that this action might conduct him to the gallows. While these sentiments were ever uppermost in his mind, he carried every

thing with an external smoothness; and often nursed, and seemed to fondle the child, whom he wished to strangle. The mother of these youths was five summers the wife of Kenrick; when the honest surgeon died, the dreams of wealth immediately vanished, which had for years
occasioned the little Gifford so many heart-burnings. He saw that his poor half-brother was no better off than

himself: there was no dispute about the succession, for there was nothing to inherit. Young Kenrick however was taken home by his father's relations in the
neighbourhood of Llanvelling; they were in narrow circumstances, but exceedingly honest. Gifford was owned by nobody; unhappy in the incident of his birth,
he
was akin to no living creature, but his profligate mother. Once, in the decline of her life, I made enquiry into her situation, and sent her a handsome
present: afterward I lost sight of her. It has been seen how wandering and uncertain a life I led; add to which, she had relations by the father's side,
nearer
to her than myself, and fully, or nearly, equal to me in point of fortune. They neglected her; they pretended to feel paroxysms of wrath at the very mention
of
her name; they would extend no indulgence or assistance to the progeny of her adulterous amours. When this wretched woman was taken to the parish-workhouse, it was proposed by the churchwardens, to bind her son apprentice, as it was called, to a
neighbouring farmer; that is, to sell him for a term of years to perform the most oppressive and brutish offices of rural drudgery. A neighbouring clergyman,

of considerable learning and a liberal mind, had seen the boy occasionally, and observed in him the tokens of a superior understanding. He took him from the

situation to which he was condemned, received him into his house, and determined by his own exertions to cultivate and improve the faculties he discerned. The mind of Gifford had been deeply affected by every successive revolution in his circumstances. He had written, with his mother's connivance, divers very
supple and insinuating letters to her relations by the father's side: without her consent, and in defiance of her

prohibition (for in her deepest distress, she still felt an ingenuous pride, which forbad her offering any supplications in this quarter), he wrote to his
nominal father. In all things the boy discovered a sagacity beyond his years. As long as there was a hope of obtaining any thing from his mother's relations,

he was in appearance filial and dutiful to her. When every prospect of that kind was at an end, and he seemed condemned to obscurity and misery for ever, the

bitterness of his nature broke out. He reviled her in language so harsh and horrible, that it appeared wonderful where he had acquired his fecundity of
invective. In cursing to her face the mother who bore him, he seemed to find ease for the disappointments and adversity he endured. A part of every day he
devoted to this gratification; and the once proud and haughty mrs. Gifford, now reduced

by misery and hunger, had not spirits to stand up against this unnatural usage. It was universally believed by those who witnessed the scenes, that the son had
thus succeeded to shorten the life of his parent. When young Gifford was admitted under the roof of the benevolent clergyman who seemed to intend to adopt him for his own, he may be considered as already
consummate in every vicious disposition. He had not however lost his talent for hypocrisy; and, as the world now began again to smile upon him, he became
more
smooth and insinuating than ever. During his residence in this house, his patron was seized with a dangerous fit of sickness, and with great difficulty
recovered. A short time after, the clergyman discovered, by an extraordinary train of accidents, that little Gifford had entered into

a plot with a knavish attorney, if he had died when it was expected he would, to rob the wife and only daughter of his patron, of all they should possess. This
discovery cured mr. Parkhurst of his fondness for this extraordinary inmate. He sent him to sea, where Gifford speedily acquired the favour of his superior;

and at the age of twenty-eight, at which I invited him to my house in Bath, he had passed through a series of adventures, scarcely less diversified than
those
of Gilblas or Gusman d'Alfarache. His evil genius meanwhile still pursued him; and, however deep were the schemes he had laid, he had not made that progress
in
life, which assuredly his talents would have obtained, could he have confined himself to the character of an honest man. One however of the circumstances,
not
the least extraordinary, that attended him, was that he was still followed by the good word of at least

half the persons with whom he connected himself. It was not till a considerable time after, that I learned the particulars concerning him which I have here
related. Influenced , as I have said, by what I may call the testamentary advice of the generous Macneil, and desirous of calling about me my nearest existing
relations, my mind immediately recurred to the two sons of my frail kinswoman. Previously to this time I had not been wholly inattentive to their interests. Gifford, whose life was wandering and unsettled, I had never seen; but the little Kenrick, who dwelt with his relatives not more than twenty miles from my
residence, had often drawn from me the marks of my personal attention. He was a florid and beautiful boy, alert and nimble in his motions, and singularly
open
and ingenuous in his demeanour. A school-fellow of his, a favourite companion, had

been destined by his parents for the army; in their youthful frolics they had played at soldiers; and little Kenrick had often, in his artless prattle, and
looking at me with one of his innocent looks, intreated me to let him be a general. I indulged his youthful preference, and at the proper period bought him a

pair of colours. A more gallant and kind-hearted soldier the world never saw. There was a brilliancy in his eye, a modest blush in his check, and a
sensibility
in his accent, that, all together, constituted one of the most interesting objects that can be imagined. These two young men I, at one and the same time, invited to come to me at Bath. Gifford was at present out of employment, and to be provided for. The
profession in which he was most exercised, though he had left it for considerable periods and returned to it again, was that of the sea; and, if I thought

proper to push him forward in the path of independence, I might in no long time be able to make him a captain in the navy. Kenrick was engaged; he was recently
entered in the army; and, at my invitation, obtained a leave of absence for two months, to visit his wealthy kinsman. Though born of the same mother, it was impossible for two human beings to exhibit a stronger contrast to each other. When Kenrick appeared before me for the
first time at Bath, dressed in the uniform of his regiment, and glowing with all the bloom of eighteen, I thought I had never beheld so prepossessing a
creature. His address was irresistible; his words seemed the image of his heart; and the tone of his voice, when he accosted me, implicitly told the love,
gratitude and respect he entertained for me. The entrance of Gifford, whom I now saw for the first time, by no means

impressed me in the same way. His dark complexion, approaching to the mulatto, was no agreeable portent. There was a roving in his eye, which seemed to warn me
to put myself upon my guard against him. His general physiognomy conveyed the idea of something obscure and problematical, which I was at a loss to expound. He
was ten years older than Kenrick; and, if his understanding even in infancy had been premature, it may well be supposed that he had by this time lost all
vestige of juvenile simplicity. I did not like him. I said to myself, "Gifford, you shall not stay a week under the roof of your patron." These were first impressions. As I observed more of these young men, my feelings toward them became essentially altered. Kenrick was full of gay and volatile
spirits, which, though qualified with the best heart in the world, rather

shocked with the gravity of my age, and the saturnine turn of my disposition. As a boy, I felt kindly toward him; but I soon found that he was by no means
fitted to be my companion. Gifford on the contrary was serious and of wide information; had read much, and thought more; his researches, especially into the

human heart, were profound. He talked like an oracle; and I soon learned to place a great dependence upon his judgment. His sentiments in many respects had a

striking similarity to my own. But what was most material, he flattered me in my notions and weaknesses, with the greatest imaginable address. It had so
happened, that I hitherto had little experience of this sort of flattery. I had been too singular and solitary in my habits, and too frequent in my changes
of
abode, to have been exposed to this kind of attack so much as men of my fortune usually are. Before many days had

elapsed, my two kinsmen fell naturally into their places. Kenrick, who had no secret ends in pursuit, desired nothing on his part but to preserve a complying
and respectful carriage toward me. Gifford purposed, from the moment he entered my house, to possess me entirely to himself, and proceeded accordingly. That

insinuating voice and dextrous artifice I have before described in him, he now employed with unwearied diligence. It is surprising how soon I lost sight of
those prepossessions against him, which his first appearance had inspired. I no longer perceived the portentous roving of his eye, or the mysterious
significations of his brow: and the graces of his figure, and the admirable subtlety of his understanding, pleaded strongly with me in his favour. He no sooner crossed my threshold, than, agreeably to the uniform tenour of his life, he looked round upon all the individuals

who dwelt there, for the purpose of discovering where, and toward whom, the craftiness of his nature might be directed to the greatest advantage. A visit paid
to a man so rich as I was, and who had no nearer relation than himself, except so far as depended upon my recent marriage, was an epoch in his life. The
first
question he asked himself, as he set his foot beneath my roof, was, How can I make myself, by succession or otherwise, the possessor of the estate of my
kinsman? The persons principally entitled to his attention, when he sat down to the solution of this question, were myself, my wife, and the thoughtless, but amiable. Kenrick. The latter he scarcely deigned to think of as a rival, but rather as an instrument by which his plots might be forwarded. He felt his genius soar
above the opposition of such a minor. Mary was at this time with child. She

was little advanced in her pregnancy; and I can scarcely think that Gifford, when he first entered my house, was aware of her condition. As soon as he was so,
his machinations became principally directed against his unborn adversary. He felt, I believe, an unreal and anticipated resemblance between the
circumstances
of this creature beginning to exist, and those under which he had himself been born: and he resolved that, as he, in the early months of his infancy, had
been
cut off from an inheritance of twenty thousand a year, so should this child be disinherited and abandoned to the world, before it became acquainted with the

first elements of speech or of reason. One of the main artifices of Gifford through life was, if he felt animosity toward any one, to personate a more than usual affection and kindness to that
individual. By this method he gained

possession of that person's secrets, and insinuated himself into his confidence; while at the same time this ostentatious show of regard gave treble weight to
the tales, which the hypocrite seemed reluctantly to utter against his ally. I have already said, that Gifford nourished an inextinguishable antipathy to
Kenrick. For this very reason, he assumed the appearance, from the hour they met, of attaching himself to his interests; and the demonstrations of that
attachment were constantly accompanied with notoriety and eclat. Kenrick had a certain air of levity and giddiness about him, though the goodness of his
heart
prevented him from falling into the excesses to which such dispositions too frequently lead; and Gifford, who was ten years his senior, voluntarily undertook

to be his monitor. The ingenuous and upright character of Kenrick made him receive these offices with the utmost gratitude;

while I myself could not help being edified with this disinterested conduct in the elder brother, where an ungenerous mind would rather have felt envy and a
sentiment of competition. Gifford early remarked the grave turn of my disposition, as well as the volatility of that of his brother; and he resolved to improve and heighten these hints
of contrast.