said she, at length. 'No, ma'am,' answered I. 'Ah, why don't you?' said she. 'I can't, ma'am,' said I; 'I can't.' 'Ah, do,' said she. 'Upon my word, I can't,' said I: 'sure I am trying all I can. But,
bless me, how desperately you are crying. Your tears are running down
my bosom like a torrent, and boiling hot too. Excuse me, ma'am, but you
will give me my death of cold.' 'Ah, my fondling,' said she, raising herself from my neck; 'tears are
my sole consolation. Ofttimes I sit and weep, I know not why; and then
I weep to find myself weeping. Then, when I can weep, I weep at having
nothing to weep at; and then, when I have something to weep at, I weep
that I cannot weep at it. This very morning I bumpered a tulip with my
tears, while reading a dainty ditty that I must now repeat to you. '_The moon had just risen, as a maid parted from her lover. A
    sylph was pursuing her sigh through the deserts of air, bathing in
    its warmth, and enhaling its odours. As he flew over the ocean, he
    saw a sea-nymph sitting on the shore, and singing the fate of a
    shipwreck, that appeared at a distance, with broken masts, and
    floating rudder. Her instrument was her own long and blue tresses,
    which she had strung across rocks of coral. The sparkling spray
    struck them, and made sweet music. He saw, he loved, he hovered
    over her. But invisible, how could he attract her eyes? Incorporeal, how could he touch her? Even his voice could not be
    heard by her amidst the dashing of the waves, and the melody of her
    ringlets. The sylphs, pitying his miserable state, exiled him to a
    bower of woodbine. There he sits, dips his pen of moonshine in the
    subtle dew ere it falls, and writes his love on the bell of a
    silver lily._'

This charming tale led us to talk of moonshine. We moralized on the
uncertainty of it, and of life; discussed sighs, and agreed that they
were charming things; enumerated the various kinds of tresses--flaxen,
golden, chesnut, amber, sunny, jetty, carroty; and I suggested two new
epithets,--sorrel hair and narcissine hair. Such a flow of soul never
was. At last she rose to depart. 'Now, my love,' said she, 'I am in momentary expectation of Sir Charles
Grandison, Mortimer Delville, and Lord Mortimer, with their amiable
wives. Will you permit them, during the baron's absence, to spend an
hour with you this evening? They will not betray us. I shall be proud
of showing you to them, and you will receive much delight and
edification from their society.' I grasped at the proposal with eagerness; she flitted out of the
chamber with a promissory smile; and I was so charmed, that I began
frisking about, and snapping my fingers, in a most indecorous manner. What an angel is this Sympathina! Her face has the contour of a Madona,
with the sensibility of a Magdalen. Her voice is soft as the last
accents of a dying maid. Her language is engaging, her oh is sublime,
and her ah is beautiful. Adieu. Towards night I heard the sound of several steps approaching the
chamber. The bolts were undrawn, and Lady Sympathina, at the head of
the company, entered, and announced their names. 'Bless me!' said I, involuntarily; for such a set of objects never were
seen. Sir Charles Grandison came forward the first. He was an emaciated old
oddity in flannels and a flowing wig. He bowed over my hand, and kissed
it--his old custom, you know. Lady Grandison leaned on his arm, bursting with fat and laughter, and
so unlike what I had conceived of Harriet Byron, that I turned from her
in disgust. Mortimer Delville came next; and my disappointment at finding him a
plain, sturdy, hard-featured fellow, was soon absorbed in my still
greater regret at seeing his Cecilia,--once the blue-eyed, sun-tressed
Cecilia,--now flaunting in all the reverend graces of a painted
grandmother, and leering most roguishly. After them, Lord Mortimer and his Amanda advanced; but he had fallen
into flesh; and she, with a face like scorched parchment, appeared both
broken-hearted and broken-winded; such a perpetual sighing and wheezing
did she keep. I was too much shocked and disappointed to speak; but Sir Charles soon
broke silence; and after the most tedious sentence of compliment that I
had ever heard, he thus continued:

'Your ladyship may recollect I have always been celebrated for giving
advice. Let me then advise you to relieve yourself from your present
embarrassment, by marrying Lord Montmorenci. It seems you do not love
him. For that very reason marry him. Trust me, love before marriage is
the surest preventive of love after it. Heroes and heroines exemplify
the proposition. Why do their biographers always conclude the book just
at their wedding? Simply because all beyond it is unhappiness and
hatred.' 'Surely, Sir Charles,' said I, 'you must be mistaken. Their biographers
(who have such admirable information, that they can even tell the
thoughts and actions of dying personages, when not a soul is near
them), these always end the book with declaring that the connubial
lives of their heroes and heroines are like unclouded skies, or
unruffled streams, or summer all the year through, or some gentle
simile or other.' 'That is all irony,' replied Sir Charles. 'But I know most of these
heroes and heroines myself; and I know that nothing can equal their
misery.' 'Do you know Lord Orville and his Evelina?' said I; 'and are not they
happy?' 'Happy!' cried he, laughing. 'Have you really never heard of their
notorious miffs? Why it was but yesterday that she flogged him with a
boiled leg of mutton, because he had sent home no turnips.' 'Astonishment!' exclaimed I. 'And she, when a girl, so meek.' 'Ay, there it is,' said he. 'One has never seen a white foal or a cross
girl; but often white horses and cross wives. Let me advise you against
white horses.' 'But pray,' said I, addressing Amanda, 'is not your brother Oscar happy
with his Adela?' 'Alas, no,' cried she. 'Oscar became infatuated with the charms of
Evelina's old governess, Madam Duval; so poor Adela absconded; and
she, who was once the soul of mirth, has now grown a confirmed
methodist; curls a sacred sneer at gaiety, loves canting and
decanting, piety and _eau de vie_. In short, the devil is very busy
about her, though she sometimes drives him away with a thump of the
Bible.' 'Well, Rosa, the gentle beggar-girl,--what of her?' said I. 'Eloped with one Corporal Trim,' answered Sir Charles. 'How shocking!' cried I. 'But Pamela, the virtuous Pamela?' ----

'Made somewhat a better choice,' said Sir Charles; 'for she ran off
with Rasselas, Prince of Abyssinia, when he returned to the happy
valley.' 'Dreadful accounts, indeed!' said I. 'So dreadful,' said Sir Charles, bowing over my hand, 'that I trust
they will determine you to marry Montmorenci. 'Tis true, he has lost
two teeth, and you do not love him; but was not Walstein a cripple? And
did not Caroline of Lichfield fall in love with him after their
marriage, though she had hated him before it?' 'Recollect,' cried Cecilia, 'what perils environ you here. The baron is
the first murderer of the age.' 'Look at yonder blood,' cried old Mortimer Delville. 'Remember the bandit last night,' cried old Lord Mortimer. 'Think of the tremendous spectre that haunts this apartment,' cried
Lady Grandison. 'And above all,' cried the Lady Sympathina, 'bear in mind that this
chamber may be the means of your waking some morning with a face like a
pumpkin.' 'Heavens!' exclaimed I, 'what do you mean? My face like a pumpkin?' 'Yes,' said she. 'The dampness of the room would swell it up like a
pumpkin in a single night.' 'Oh! ladies and gentlemen,' cried I, dropping on my knees, 'you see
what shocking horrors surround me here. Oh! let me beseech of you to
pity and to rescue me. Surely, surely you might aid me in escaping!' 'It is out of the nature of possibilities,' said Lady Sympathina. 'At least, then,' cried I, 'you might use your influence to have me
removed from this vile room, that feels like a well.' 'Fly!' cried Dame Ursulina, running in breathless. 'The baron has just
returned, and is searching for you all. And he has already been through
the chapel, and armoury, and gallery; and the west tower, and east
tower, and south tower; and the cedar chamber, and oaken chamber, and
black chamber, and grey, brown, yellow, green, pale pink, sky blue; and
every shade, tinge, and tint of chamber in the whole castle. Benedicite, Santa Maria; how the times have degenerated! Come, come,
come.' The guests vanished, the door was barred, and I remained alone. I sat ruminating in sad earnest, on the necessity for my consenting to
this hateful match; when (and I protest to you, I had not thought it
was more than nine o'clock), a terrible bell, which I never heard
before, tolled, with an appalling reverberation, that rang through my
whole frame, the frightful hour of ONE! At the same moment I heard a noise; and looking towards the opposite
end of the chamber, I beheld the great picture on a sudden disappear;
and, standing in its stead, a tall figure, cased in blood-stained
steel, and with a spectral visage, the perfect counterpart of the
baron's. I sat gasping. It uttered these sepulchral intonations. '_I am the spirit of the murdered Alphonso. Lord Montmorenci deserves
thee. Wed him, or in two days thou liest a corpse. To-morrow night I
come again._'

The superhuman appearance spoke; and (oh, soothing sound) uttered a
human sneeze! 'Damnation!' it muttered. 'All is blown!' And immediately the picture
flew back to its place. Well, I had never heard of a ghost's sneezing before: so you may judge
I soon got rid of my terror, and felt pretty certain that this was no
bloodless and marrowless apparition, but the baron himself, who had
adopted the ghosting system, so common in romances, for the purpose of
frightening me into his schemes. However, I had now discovered a concealed door, and with it a chance of
escape. I must tell you, that escape by the public door is utterly
impracticable, as a maid always opens it for those that enter, and
remains outside till they return. However, I have a plan about the
private door; which, if the ghost should appear again, as it promised,
is likely to succeed. I was pondering upon this plan, when in came Dame Ursulina, taking
snuff, and sneezing at a furious rate. 'By the mass,' said she, 'it rejoiceth the old cockles of my heart to
see your ladyship safe; for as I passed your door just now, methought I
heard the ghost.' 'You might well have heard it,' said I, pretending infinite faintness,
'for I have seen it; and it entered through yonder picture.' 'Benedicite!' cried she, 'but it was a true spectre!' 'A real, downright apparition,' said I, 'uncontaminated with the
smallest mixture of mortality.' 'And didn't your ladyship hear me sneeze at the door?' said she. 'I was too much alarmed to hear anything,' answered I. 'But pray have
the goodness to lend me that snuff-box, as a pinch or two may revive me
from my faintness.' I had my reasons for this request. 'A heroine take snuff!' cried she, laying the box on the table. 'Lack-a-daisy, how the times are changed! But now, my lady, don't be
trying to move or cut that great picture; for though the ghost comes
into the chamber through it, no mortal can. I know better than to let
you give me the slip; and I will tell a story to prove my knowledge of
bolts and bars. When I was a girl, a young man lodged in the house; and
one night he stole the stick that I used to fasten the hasp and staple
of my door with. Well, my mother bade me put a carrot (as there was
nothing else) in its place. So I put in a carrot--for I was a dutiful
daughter; but I put in a boiled carrot--for I was a love-sick maiden. Eh, don't I understand the doctrine of bolts and bars?' 'You understand a great deal too much,' said I, as the withered wanton
went chuckling out of the chamber. I must now retire to rest. I do not fear being disturbed by a bravo
to-night; but I am uneasy, lest I should wake in the morning with a
face like a pumpkin. Adieu. About noon the Baron Hildebrand paid me a visit, to hear, as he said,
my final determination respecting my marriage with Montmorenci. I had
prepared my lesson, and I told him that my mind was not yet entirely
reconciled to such an event; but that it was much swayed by a most
extraordinary circumstance which had occurred the night before. He
desired me to relate it; and I then, with apparent agitation, recounted
the particulars of the apparition, and declared that if it should come
again I would endeavour to preserve my presence of mind, and enter into
conversation with it; in order (as it appeared quite well informed of
the picture) to learn whether my marriage with his lordship would prove
fortunate or otherwise. I then added, that if its answer should be
favourable, I would not hesitate another moment to give him my hand. The baron, while he could not suppress a smile, protested himself
highly delighted with my determination of speaking to the spectre, and
encouraged me not to fear it, as it was the most harmless creature of
its kind ever known. He then took his leave. I spent the remainder of the day reflecting on
the desperate enterprise that I had planned for the night, and
fortifying my mind by recalling all the hazardous escapes of other
heroines. At last the momentous hour was at hand. The lamp and snuff-box lay on
the table. I sat anxious, and kept a watchful eye upon the picture. The bell tolled one, again the picture vanished, and again the spectre
stood there. Its left thumb rested upon its hip, and its right hand was
held to the heavens. I sent forth a well-executed shriek, and hid my
face in my hands, while it spoke these words:

'_I come to thee for the last time. Wilt thou wed Montmorenci, or
wilt thou not?--Speak._'

'Oh!' cried I, 'if you would only promise not to do me a mischief, I
have something particular to ask of you.' 'A spirit cannot harm a mortal,' drawled out the spectre. 'Well then,' said I, faltering and trembling.--'Perhaps--pardon
me--perhaps you would first have the goodness to walk in.' The spectre advanced a few paces, and paused. 'This is so kind, so condescending,' said I, 'that really--do take a
chair.' The spectre shook its head mournfully. 'Pray do,' said I, 'you will oblige me.' The spectre seated itself in a chair; but atoned for the mortal act by
an immortal majesty of manner. 'As you are of another world,' said I, ''tis but fair to do the honours
of this; and in truth, I am not at all astonished that you apparitions
should speak so harshly as you usually do, we mortals always shew such
evident aversion and horror at your appearance.' 'There is a prejudice gone forth against us,' said the spectre, with a
hollow voice, 'in consequence of our coming at night, like thieves.' 'Yes,' said I, 'at one precisely. And it has often struck me how well
the clocks of old castles were kept, for they regularly struck just as
the ghost appeared. Indeed, ghosts keep such late hours, that 'tis no
wonder they look pale and thin. I do not recollect ever to have heard
or read of a fat or a fresh-coloured phantom.' 'Nor of a ghost wanting a limb or an eye,' said the spectre. 'Nor of an ugly ghost,' said I bowing. The spectre took the compliment, and bowed in return. 'And therefore,' said the spectre, 'as spirits are always accurate
resemblances of the bodies that they once inhabited, none but thin and
pale persons can ever become ghosts.' 'And by the same rule,' said I, 'none but blue-eyed and golden-haired
persons can go to heaven; for our painters always represent angels so. I have never heard of a hazel-eyed angel, or a black-haired cherub.' 'I know,' said the spectre, 'if angels are, as painters depict them,
always sitting naked on cold clouds, I would rather live the life of a
ghost, to the end of the chapter.' 'And pray,' cried I, 'where, and how do ghosts live?' 'Within this very globe,' said the spectre. 'For this globe is not, as
most mortals imagine, a solid body, but a round crust about ten miles
thick; and the concave inside is furnished just like the convex
outside, with wood, water, vale and mountain. In the centre stands a
nice little golden sun, about the size of a pippin, and lights our
internal world; where, whatever enjoyments we loved as men, we retain
as ghosts. We banquet on visionary turtle, or play at aërial marbles,
or drive a phantasmagoric four in hand. The young renew their amours,
and the more aged sit yawning for the day of judgment.--But I scent the
rosy air of dawn. Speak, lady; what question art thou anxious that I
should expound?' 'Whether,' said I, 'if I marry Lord Montmorenci, I shall be happy with
him or not?' 'Blissful as Eden,' replied the spectre. 'Your lives will be congenial,
and your deaths simultaneous.' 'And now,' said I, walking closer to it, 'will you do me the favour to
take a pinch of snuff?' 'Avant!' it cried, motioning me from it with its hand. But quick as thought, I flung the whole contents of the box full into
its eyes. 'Blood and thunder!' exclaimed the astonished apparition. I snatched the lamp, sprang through the frame of the picture, shut the
concealed door, bolted it; while all the time I heard the phantom
within, dancing in agony at its eyes, and sending mine to as many
devils as could well be called together on so short a notice. Thus far my venturous enterprise had prospered. I now found myself in a
narrow passage, with another door at the farther end of it; and I
prepared to traverse winding stairs, subterranean passages, and suites
of tapestried apartments. I therefore advanced, and opened the door;
but in an instant started back; for I had beheld a lighted hall, of
modern architecture, with gilded balustrades, ceiling painted in
fresco, Etruscan lamps, and stucco-work! Yes, it was a villa, or a
casino, or a pallazo, or any thing you please but a castello. Amazement! Horror! What should I do? whither turn? delay would be
fatal. Again I peeped. The hall was empty; so, putting down my lamp, I
stole across it to an open door, and looked through the chink. I had
just time to see a Persian saloon, and in the centre a table laid for
supper, when I heard several steps entering the hall. It was too late
to retreat, so I sprang into the room; and recollecting that a curtain
had befriended me once before, I ran behind one which I saw there. Instantly afterwards the persons entered. They were spruce footmen,
bringing in supper. Not a scowl, not a mustachio amongst them. As soon as the covers were laid, a crowd of company came laughing into
the room; but, friend of my bosom, fancy, just fancy my revulsion of
soul, my dismay, my disgust, my bitter indignation--oh! how shall I
describe to you half what I felt, when I recognised these wretches, as
they entered one by one, to be the identical gang who had visited me
the day before, as heroes and heroines! I knew them instantly, though
they looked twice as young; and in the midst of them all, as blithe as
larks, came Betterton himself and Lord Altamont Mortimer Montmorenci! My heart died at the sight. After they had seated themselves, Betterton (who sat at the head, and
therefore was master) desired one of the servants to bring in 'the
crazed poet.' And now two footmen appeared, carrying between them a
large meal-bag, filled with Higginson; which they placed to the table,
on a vacant seat. The bag was fastened at the top, and a slit was on
the side of it. The wretches then began to banter him, and bade him put forth his head;
but he would neither move nor speak. At last they turned the
conversation to me. 'I wonder can he be ghosting her all this time?' said Betterton. 'Well,' cried the fellow who had personated Sir Charles Grandison, 'I
ought to have played the ghost, I am so much taller than he.' 'Not unless you could act it better than you did Grandison,' said the
late Lady Sympathina. 'No, no, I was the person who performed my part
well;--pouring a vial of hot water down her neck, by way of tears; and
frightening her out of her senses by talking of a face like a pumpkin!' 'Nay,' cried my Lord Montmorenci, 'the best piece of acting you ever
saw was when I first met her at the theatre, and persuaded her that
Abraham Grundy was Lord Altamont Mortimer Montmorenci.' 'Except,' said Betterton, 'when I played old Whylome Eftsoones, at the
masquerade, and made her believe that Cherry Wilkinson was Lady
Cherubina De Willoughby.' I turned quite sick; but I had no time for thought, the thunderclaps
came so thick upon me. 'She had some mad notion of the kind before,' said Grundy (I have done
with calling him Montmorenci), 'for she fancied that an old piece of
parchment, part of a lease of lives, was an irrefragable proof of her
being Lady De Willoughby.' 'Ay,' cried Betterton, 'and of poor Wilkinson's being her persecutor,
instead of her father; on the strength of which vagary he lies at this
moment in a madhouse.' 'But,' said Grundy, 'her setting up for a heroine, and her affectation
while imitating the manners and language that authors chuse to give
their heroines, would make a tiger laugh. I vow and protest, our
amorous interview, where she first told her love, was the most
burlesque exhibition in nature. I am thine, and thou art mine! whimpered the silly girl, sinking on my bosom. She now says she does
not love me. Don't believe a syllable of it. Why, the poor creature
could not even bridle her passion in my presence. Such hugging and
kissing as she went on with, that, as I hope to be saved, I sometimes
thought she would suffocate me outright.' ''Tis false as hell!' cried I, bursting into tears, and running from
behind the curtain. 'Upon my sacred honour, ladies and gentlemen, 'tis
every word of it a vile, malicious, execrable falsehood! Oh, what shall
I do? what shall I do?' and I wrung my hands with agony. The guests had risen from their seats in amaze; and I now made a spring
towards the door, but was intercepted by Betterton, who held me fast. 'In the name of wonder,' cried he, 'how came you here?' 'No matter,' cried I, struggling. 'I know all. What have I ever done to
you, you base, you cruel people?' 'Keep yourself cool, my little lady,' said he. 'I won't, I can't!' cried I. 'To use me so. You vile set; you horrid,
horrid set!' 'Go for another meal-bag,' said he, to the servant. 'Now, madam, you
shall keep company with the bagged poet.' 'Mercy, mercy!' cried I, 'What, will no one help me?' 'I will if I can!' exclaimed Higginson, with his head thrust out of the
bag, like a snail; and down he slided from his seat, and began rolling,
and tumbling, and struggling on the floor, till he got upon his feet;
and then he came jumping towards me, now falling now rising, while his
face and bald forehead were all over meal, his eyes blaring, and his
mouth wide open. The company, wherever he moved, kept in a circle round
him, and clapped their hands and shouted. As I stood, with Betterton still holding me fast, he was suddenly flung
from me by some one, and my hand seized. I turned, and beheld--Stuart. 'Oh! bless you, bless you!' cried I, catching his arm, 'for you have
come to save me from destruction!' He pressed my hand, and pointing to Betterton and Grundy, who stood
thunderstruck, cried, 'There are your men!' A large posse of constables immediately rushed forward, and arrested
them. 'Heydey! what is all this?' cried Betterton. ''Tis for the beating you gave us when we were doing our duty,' said a
man, and I recognised in the speaker one of the police-men who had
arrested me about the barouche. 'This is government all over,' cried Betterton. 'This is the minister. This is the law!' 'And let me tell you, Sir,' said Stuart, 'that nothing but my respect
for the law deters me at this moment from chastising you as you
deserve.' 'What do you mean, sirrah?' cried Betterton. 'That you are a ruffian,' said Stuart, 'and the same cowardice which
made you offer insult to a woman will make you bear it from a man. Now,
Sir, I leave you to your fate.' And we were quitting the room. 'What thing is that?' said Stuart, stopping short before the poet; who,
with one arm and his face out of the bag, lay on his back, gasping and
unable to stir. 'Cut it, cut it!' cried the poor man, in choaking accents. 'Higginson I protest!' exclaimed Stuart, as he snatched a knife from
the table, and laid open the bag. Up rose the poet, resurrectionary
from his hempen coffin, and was beginning to clench his fist; but
Stuart caught his arm, and hurried him and me out of the room. Stuart, with great eagerness, now began asking me the particulars of
all that had occurred at Betterton's; and his rage, as I related it,
was extreme. He then proceeded to tell me how he had discovered my being there. After his departure from Lady Gwyn's, he set off for London, to
prosecute his inquiries about my father; and spent some days in this
way, to no purpose. At length he returned to Lady Gwyn's, but was much
shocked at learning from her that I had robbed her, and absconded; and
had afterwards made an assault on her house, at the head of a set of
Irishmen. By the description she gave, he judged that Jerry Sullivan
was one of them; and not finding us at Monkton Castle, whither she
directed him, he posted back to London, in order to make inquiries at
Jerry's house. Jerry, who had just returned, related the whole history
of the castle; adding that I was to call upon him the moment I should
arrive in Town. Stuart, therefore, waited some time; but as I did not
appear, he began to suspect that Betterton had entrapped me; so he
hastened to the coachmaker, and having explained to him that I was no
swindler, and having paid him for the barouche, he told him (as he
learned from Jerry) that Betterton was one of those who had assaulted
the postilion and constables. The coachmaker, therefore, applied at the
police-office; and a party was dispatched to apprehend Betterton. Stuart accompanied them, and thus gained admission (which he could not
otherwise have done) into the house. Higginson now told a lamentable tale of the pranks that Betterton had
played on him; and amongst the rest, mentioned, that a servant had
seduced him into the bag, by pretending to be his friend, and to
smuggle him out of the house, in the character of meal. He could gather, from several things said while the company were
tormenting him, that Grundy had agreed to marry me; and then, for a
stipulated sum, to give Betterton opportunities of prosecuting his
infamous designs. Thus both of them would escape the penalties of the
law. He likewise informed me, that the female guests were (to use his own
words) ladies whom the male guests loved better than they ought to do;
and he then explained that the several rooms were furnished according
to the fashions of different countries; Grecian, Persian, Chinese,
Italian; and that mine was the Gothic chamber. By this time, having reached the village, and stopped at an inn, where
we meant to sleep, I desired a room, and bade Stuart a hasty good
night.