said Mr. Davenport, "has she lost her front teeth too?"-"Oh! no," said the good-natured
Margaret, who could not help smiling at the laugh this caused Mrs. Davenport; "our teeth
are not alike, only-" "Well, well," said Mrs. Davenport, "I must say, Margaritta, that
your mouth is pretty enough." Mr. Davenport took his eyes off his dessert-plate, and was
condescending enough to acknowledge the truth of the remark by an assenting nod with


his head. "Well," said Mrs. Davenport, "go where I will, I hear nothing but the present
scandal of the day; Harrington's amour with Lady Isabella Raymond-and, indeed, I do
think any man is excusable in going astray with such a woman. "-"She would be an
absolute divinity," said Davenport, "if she was not so cursed satirical; but it was not at all
likely that such a fine dashing fellow as Harrington would tie himself to a country girl;
besides, he always, I am told, loved Lady Isabella; and no doubt she is far superior to
Mrs. Harrington, though they say she is a nice little creature:-by heaven, I think I'll go
down and see the pining bride, and advise her to the retort courteous! Come, Margaritta,
tell us," continued he, as he helped her to a glass of port, "now, without any partiality,
suppose Mrs. Harrington was not your sister,-which is the handsomest, your sister or the
divine Isabella?" Margaret, who always thought, that in her life she had never seen so
resplendent a beauty as Lady Isabella, said, without hesitation, "Oh! sir, Lady Isabella,
certainly." But the heart of Margaret was full; it rose to her throat, and almost choked her
utterance: she reflected on her sister's misfortune, and how cruelly the infidelity of
Harrington must have operated on a mind like hers; and, bringing her thoughts home to
her own sorrows, the perfidy of man, the unfeeling behaviour of those she thought once
her best benefactors, caused her, in spite of all her efforts to restrain her feelings, to burst
into an agony of tears. "Why, what is the matter with the girl?" said Mrs. Davenport.-"Indeed, ma'am,"
replied Margaret, "I cannot think of my dear sister's misfortunes, without being much
affected; it is a painful subject to me, and if you and Mr. Davenport wish to converse any
more upon it, will you permit me to withdraw: I dearly love my sister, I always did,
indeed I do still; I wish I did not affectionately love Lady Isabella." "Lord bless me, child!" said Mrs. Davenport, "these things are nothing in
fashionable life; and pray, why should you wish you did not love Lady Isabella?-pray,
what violent harm has she done? For, as to Harrington's fortune, that she will not much
injure, as it is a notorious fact, and will come all out on the trial, that Major Raymond has
been aiding and assisting in this little faux-pas of his wife. But, mark me, Margaritta,
when I say* these things are nothing in fashionable life; and where a woman is married,
and consequently privileged to commit many freedoms which are quite unbecoming in a
girl, yet a young woman, who has not a shilling, must be very careful to preserve her
modesty and good name, for it is all she has to depend upon;-you understand me,
Margaritta, I am sure: I wish I could say, that I hope things are not so bad as they have
been represented to me; but I am sorry to say, I have seen too much myself:-go, and
arrange your hair, and put on a little of my rouge-you look like a witch: I have a few
friends coming to-night." Margaret trembled, lest her father might chance to be one of them, and hastily
withdrew to perform the orders of Mrs. Davenport; whom she left laughing heartily at
some new sallies of her husband's wit upon Mrs. Harrington, the deserted bride, whom he
swore he would go and comfort, promising himself certain success: but sitting about a
quarter of an hour longer with his wife, to whom he was uncommonly polite and
attentive, he repaired to pass the evening with his favourite Sultana, while his lady
entertained at home a party of dashing beaux, and a bevy of gay females; amongst whom
* Historique. Margaret remained like a cypher, unnoticed, except by the whisper of Mrs. Davenport to
one or two of her particular friends, and the shrugs and sneers of the gentlemen. At length the eventful evening arrived, and Margaret, after Mrs. Davenport had
driven to the theatre, stole softly down stairs, and with a beating heart and trembling feet,
escaped into the street. It was dark; she was young and well dressed; her bonnet and pelisse made in the
highest style of fashion: she had never been in the street alone, before, in the evening; she
was accosted by many smart-looking young men; she thought that surely she had
captivated them by her appearance, and she hoped the most delightful success, from the
self-conviction of her personal charms, which must have been so striking on that evening,
when, in walking from Grosvenor Square to St. James's Street, she had been called
"pretty girl," "sweet little dear," and earnestly requested by several dashing looking men,
as she thought them, the permission of escorting her home: these dashers were, however,
chiefly men-milliners, tavern-waiters, servants out of livery, and markers at the gamblingtables,
and who were either going to their several avocations, or taking a lounge after
their dinners, and affecting the fine gentlemen. She arrived at Sir Charles Sefton's door, and knocked at it with all the buoyant
spirit she just then felt. "Ah! what, is it you, my dear?" said the porter. "Pray, who are you
speaking to?" said she, offended at his familiarity. "I'll be d--d if I know," said he,
holding the door half open; "but Sir Charles is not at home." "You told me he would be,"
said Margaret. "So I believe he will," said the porter, stretching himself, and yawning,
"when the play is over; he has ordered supper at home." -"Then cannot I sit down in one
of the apartments, and await his return? Sir Charles knows me very well, and I am sure he
will be glad to see me."-"Oh! like enough," said the porter, "my master knows a great
many young ladies; but as you are quite un-known to me, having never been admitted
here, I can't let you in." So saying, he slammed the door in her face. Poor Margaret burst
into tears; but resolving to see Sir Charles that night, even if she should never again be
admitted within Mrs. Davenport's doors, she determined on staying till the performance
at the theatre was ended. As an Eastern writer has justly observed, "Who is it that regardeth sorrow in the
public streets? who is there but turneth away the face and fleeth from her?" The weeping
Margaret, now no more accosted in the language of promiscuous admiration, was jostled
about from one side to the other; the rude porter with his load, almost knocked her down;
the whistling 'prentice drove her nearly into the kennel; the newsman blew his horn in her
ear; while the chairmen drove her almost before them with their poles, and then, laughing,
cried out, "By your leave!" The fear that accompanies the pedestrians in London, who are
unused to ramble in the dark, generally, by betraying itself, subjects them to every insult
and danger; and there is no other way to escape nocturnal buffetings and terrors inflicted
by the canaille, than by walking with the appearance of undaunted resolution, or with the
affected bustle of urgent business. The moon now began to rise in full splendour, and, added to the lamps and the
bright passages of the gaming and coffee-houses, imparted a brilliant illumination to the
street. An hackney-coach stopped at a shop opposite to where Margaret was standing; she
crossed over, though from what motive she knew not, except to give some kind of
variation to her nightly walk. A gentleman got out, and handed out a lady, who was


closely wrapped in a dark coloured shawl, and who wore a large bonnet which entirely
concealed her face. The gentleman attempted to follow her into the house, but she said,
"No, no-we never meet again, except on ONE condition." He bowed with solemnity,
and reascended the carriage. The lady entered the house, after waving her hand to the
servant to take away the light, and the door suddenly closed with a kind of caution. The
gentleman was wrapped in a curricle-coat, the cape buttoned over his cheeks, while a
slouch hat hid the upper part of his face. Of the gentleman or lady Margaret had not the
slightest recollection; but the lady seemed to interest her, and she was almost certain she
had heard her voice before; she felt herself unable to move from the door after it was
shut; she watched its re-opening, she looked up at the windows, but all were close shut;
and a still silence seemed to prevail about the house. The rattle of carriages from various directions now announced the close of the
theatrical entertainment; and seeing Sir Charles Sefton's chariot draw up to his door, she
almost hazarded her life, by nimbly crossing, amidst throngs of carriages, and arrived
time enough to see him hand out a lady richly dressed, while another carriage stopped,
from which descended two more ladies and two gentlemen, all apparently of the first
fashion. She waited the departure of the carriages, and then again presented herself before
the Cerberus of the hall. "Why it is impossible you can see Sir Charles now," said the porter, "he has
brought home company to supper." "Oh! tell him," said Margaret, "that a lady wishes
only to speak one word with him." "Oh! that is not my office," replied he; but the solitary
dollar in Margaret's ridicule, transferred from thence into his hand, made him relent,
though he shrugged his shoulders at the smallness of the bribe; however, calling a
footman who just then crossed the hall, he told Margaret she had better go to the fire and
warm herself till he had brought down an answer. The footman soon came down, saying, that he was sure he could not say when he
should be able to speak to his master, he was so engaged; but she had better walk into that
room, shewing her a little dark side-parlour, in which was no fire, and where he left her
with one solitary bit of candle, which soon began to glimmer in the socket; and the
wretched girl sat shivering with cold, and without even the comfort of light: she heard the
watchman cry the hour of half-past one, and a starlight morning. To return to Mr.
Davenport's she now found would be impracticable, and she trembled at the result. Presently she heard the door softly open. Not being able to distinguish objects from the shutters being closed, the fond idea
rushed upon her mind that it was her dear Sir Charles; but she was soon undeceived by
the footman saying, "What, are you in the dark, miss? I have at last, with much difficulty,
spoken to Sir Charles; he says it is totally impossible for him to see you now, but, if you
like, you may call at half-past eleven in the morning. Here, David," added he, addressing
the porter, "Shew a light to this young lady, and open the door for her." Margaret still leant on the hope of seeing her perfidious lover in the morning, and
strolled to the Park, determined there to pass the night: the sentries hailed her, as she
crossed the stable-yard, with "Who comes there?" She knew not how to reply, and they
suffered her to pass on in silence, as they deemed it might not be impossible but that she
had an appointment with the sergeant of the guard, or, perhaps, a higher military hero in
rank, to pass the night with him, sub rosa. She crossed the Park, and the moon retiring, while night was "at odds with
morning," she repaired to a solitary bench in the most retired part of this scenic
promenade, and wrapping her pelisse around her, huddled herself up in one corner,
awaiting the rising of the sun. As in the case of Sterne's Le Fevre, it "rose bright on almost every eye" in that
vicinity, except on that of the afflicted Margaret: exhausted from fatigue, want of rest,
and faint for want of food, she continued to wile away the tedious hours, in walking and
re-seating herself, till the clock struck eleven. The grand, or the jocund strain of martial
music, as the guards attended morning parade, only served, instead of raising her spirits,
to sink them to a state of melancholy depression: the insolent remarks, the puppy
exclamation of d--d ugly! continually assaulted her ears. At length, the Horse-Guards
chimed a quarter past eleven: she rose with aching limbs, and retraced her steps to St.
James's street. The porter did not open the door, but an elderly female, who, when
requested by Margaret to inform Sir Charles Sefton that she wished to speak to him,
frowned suspiciously upon her, and said, "Why, Sir Charles left town this morning at
half-past eight o'clock." "Impossible!" said Margaret, "he desired me to be here at halfpast
eleven." "Why, you may as well tell me, young woman," said the housekeeper, "that
I lie! I tell you, I and the porter are the only persons left here to take charge of the house;
my master is going to-night, or to-morrow, to sail for the Madeiras, for the recovery of his
health before he marries. "- "Marries!" echoed Margaret. "Why, yes," said the
housekeeper; "is that any thing wonderful? he is to be married, when he returns, to his
cousin, Lady Louisa Walton: she took her leave of him with his two aunts, last night:
why, la, if you know any thing of Sir Charles, you must know that it has been a fixed
thing for some weeks; Lady Louisa has a most immense fortune." Margaret, scarcely able
to conceal her emotions, or articulate a sentence, said, "Will you, ma'am, have the
kindness to give me a glass of water?" The woman, seeing her ready to faint, did not then, as she was just going to do,
shut the door in her face; but her hard features relaxing into a little expression, something
like compassion, she told her, as she opened the half-closed entrance a little wider, to
follow her down into her own room; where she gave her a bit of toast that was left frying
on a plate before the fire, and a cup of half-cold tea, which she stirred for her, and then
put the silver tea-spoon out of her reach: this temporary refreshment somewhat revived
poor Margaret; but her head ached violently, and she took her leave of the unfeeling
housekeeper, unknowing where to bend her course. As she came nearly opposite to the shop where she had seen, the night before, the
lady and gentleman alight from an hackney-coach, she stopped a little while and looked
up at the windows: they were close shut; but in the second story she saw the shade of a
female figure, as if peeping though a chamber-blind of gause-like texture: she stood for
some moments, pondering where she should go to escape observation, or the probable
search of the Davenport's after her; when a young girl put a sealed note in her hand, and
begged she would be pleased to read it: it was written in a hand evidently disguised, and
contained the following words:
"If, as I am almost assured, you are Miss Margaret Marsham, accompany the
bearer, and enquire at the house she will bring you to, for Mrs. Frederic. I see you are
unhappy: alas! I have suffered, and feel for every sufferer. From me you will receive all


the comfort a wretched being like myself can be capable of bestowing. But this I have yet
to give you-the most cordial and sisterly affection. "Whatever makes you thus a wanderer, fear not to confide to her, who loves you
with more sincerity and tenderness than ever." Oh! thought Margaret, as she pressed the letter to her lips and heart, it is from my
generous Mary! she has, to avoid being known, adopted the christian name of her
faithless husband.-She then instantly followed the bearer, and almost flew to receive the
embrace of a sister! -------Action treads the path
In which opinion says he follows good,
Or flies from evil; and opinion gives
Report of good or evil, as the scene
Was drawn by fancy, lovely or deform'd:
Thus her report can never there be true
Where fancy cheats the intellectual eye
With glaring colours and distorted lines. AKENSIDE. MRS. DAVENPORT had not been long departed for the theatre, when Edward
Marsham called on her;-after passing the day with his worthy friend, Sir Edward
Harrington, he thought he must in gratitude, take the earliest opportunity of visiting the
kind benefactress of his daughter. He therefore presented himself at the superb mansion of Mr. Davenport; and as
the magnificent well-lighted hall and spacious staircases gleamed on his sight, evincing
opulence and grandeur, he rejoiced in seeing the lovely friend of his late wife so
splendidly established in life; yet a sigh escaped his bosom, when, in the elegant and
often envied situation to which his Mary had been raised, she had experienced but little
comfort in such glittering donations, which taste and affluence have in their power to
bestow: Davenport might be, he reflected, another Harrington, and his wife might look
back with unavailing regret to the rural scenes of Emily Maddison's more tranquil hours. Yes, Davenport had all Harrington's failings, but they had in Mr. Davenport degenerated
into depravity; he had none of Mr. Harrington's good qualities: and Emily Davenport,
only existing in the scenes of fashionable folly, and fluttering in a round of continual
dissipation, would have died at the idea of again experiencing that state of quiet and
genteel mediocrity enjoyed by Emily Maddison. Edward was not sorry to hear that his daughter was at home alone; for, with a
father's tender affection, he loved his poor Margaret with all her foibles; and he hoped
her residence in town had taken off, in some degree, the romantic enthusiasm of her
ideas: and, as he had frequently been told that both her person and manners were much
improved, he flattered himself he should really find her more reasonable, and that he
should have the satisfaction of enjoying with her an hour or two of social and rational
conversation. After waiting a considerable time in the drawing-room, he was at length informed
that Miss Marsham could no where be found; and that Mademoiselle Minette was out,
who could give the most positive assurance whether or no Miss Marsham had
accompanied Mrs. Davenport to the theatre, as the above-mentioned French lady presided
over their toilettes: the other servants said they were almost sure she did not go with their
mistress; while the porter in the hall said, no person was with her except Miss Benworth


and two gentlemen, which four persons just filled the coach. Edward, however,
concluding she had gone with Mrs. Davenport, felt no anxiety, and leaving his card,
saying he would call the next morning, went to his temporary habitation at the good
Baronet's, in St. James's Square. These fashionable servants, who had always looked upon Margaret as a dependent
on their master and mistress, never heeded whether or no she had descended from the
carriage at the return of the partie quarr�e; and Margaret was never thought of till the
hour of one, when, after partaking of a few sandwiches and other slight refreshments, the
company departed. "Well, I always forget that girl," said Mrs. Davenport; "do, Robert,
order some one to go to Miss Marsham's apartment, and tell her to come and take a
sandwich and a glass of wine-and-water before she goes to bed." Robert then mentioned his not being able to find her when her father called. "It is
singular," said Mrs. Davenport, addressing her husband in French; "but I dare say she
stole out to take leave of her lover; and is now retired to her chamber, to weep over his
departure. "-"What do you mean?" said Mr. Davenport. "Oh!" said she, continuing the
subject in her own native language at the departure of Robert; "will you believe that Sir
Charles Sefton took leave of me to-night, as he quitted my private box, for he is going to
Madeira to-morrow." "The d--l he is?" said Davenport. "Yes, and he had that shemonkey
of a woman with him, in his box, Lady Louisa Walton, his rich cousin. "-"What
a precious ugly pair they will make!" said Mr. Davenport. "Well," replied his lady,
endeavouring to smile, but looking very spiteful, "I fairly sent him out of my box with
confusion; I asked him what his beautiful favourite, Miss Marsham, would do without
him? He stammered, hesitated, and with the most awkward air in the world, wished me
and my party a good night. I shall be glad when he is gone," continued she, her eyes
giving the lie to her tongue; "and I'm heartily glad too," added she, with much more
sincerity, "that Margaritta's father's come, and that I can wash my hands of her." Mr. Davenport said, "I'm cursed sorry this affair has happened in my house; I
shall be sorry to pain the good man." "Oh! that I think we need not," said Mrs.
Davenport; "let us only get Mr. Marsham to take her away again, we will make her a
handsome present; and after he gets her home, let him find it out himself: we need not be
supposed to know any thing about it. "-"That's a devilish good thought, Emily," said Mr.
Davenport: he pondered, however, some time, as if in deep reflection. "Let Minette," said
he, after he had been silent a few minutes, "see if the girl is in bed; we have sent for her to
supper, but you see she is not to be found again." Miss Marsham was not, however, in her
bed, nor in any part of the house. "By heaven," said Mr. Davenport, "I'm afraid, Emily, that Sir Charles is fool
enough to think of taking the girl off with him to Madeira; there is no doubt but that the
consequence of her indiscretion is likely very soon to appear: the fellow does not seem
possessed of much feeling; yet, perhaps the idea of being a father, may make him take
some care of the mother, till such time as the dear creature presents him with his ape-like
countenance; then he may make her a trifling settlement, sufficient to maintain her there,
and I really think it is the best thing he can do.-Well, sure such a pair was never seen!" "I declare, Davenport," said his Lady, "you are quite spiteful about Sir Charles. I
think his appearance by no means deserving ridicule; I am sure he is quite the gentleman
and man of fashion. "-"Quite so, my dear, but, by the bye, confounded ugly. Don't be


uneasy, Emily, if I tell you something that I saw to-night. As I was coming out of
Boodle's rather earlier than I usually do, for I could find by the carriages the play was but
just over, I could neither find my rascals nor the chariot; I suppose they had gone to take a
peep at the riot that was expected to take place at the theatre: I walked on, however, as
you know I am not devoted to gaming, and finding myself in the losing vein, I had no
inclination to return; so telling the porter at the door to inform my servants when they
came, that I had walked home, the night being uncommonly fine, I made a stroll of it. As
I passed opposite to Sir Charles Sefton's house, I am almost sure I plainly perceived your
Margaritta go into it: I knew her by the grey bonnet and pelisse you gave her last week;-
-because my Cora once saw her walking in it with you, in Kensington Gardens, the little
tasty hussy would never let me rest till I purchased one resembling it for her. The moon
shone full upon the lady at Sefton's door, and at first I took it to be Cora herself; but
looking circumspectly, I soon saw the difference in Meg's high shoulders and broad back,
to those of * my divinity; so I dare say the happy lovers will be off to-morrow morning;
and d--n it, let them alone, I think it very fortunate for us-our house will not be
disgraced, nor your care and prudence the least called in question." Mrs. Davenport burst
into tears. Now we cannot pretend to take upon ourselves to say what was the actual cause of
those tears, but we are very much inclined to believe, that, really liking Sir Charles
Sefton, she could not support the idea of Margaret accompanying him across the seas, and
receiving from him daily proofs of his regard and attentions: the bare thought, no doubt,
stung her mind with all the bitter vexation of jealousy. It could not be for the fate of the
poor girl, whom she cared but little about; it could not be jealousy of a little actress who
had once performed the part of Cora, in Pizarro, and with whom her husband was so
enraptured, that he took her from the stage, and she performed in public no more; in
private she acted the part of a most extravagant and expensive mistress: but Mrs.
Davenport knew all this before, and had never evinced any displeasure: so we really
believe the primary cause was jealousy of Sir Charles and Margaret. "My dear Emily," said Mr. Davenport, "you know I cannot bear to see you in
tears; what can I do for you?" "Go instantly," she replied, "to Sir Charles Sefton; we have taken the girl under
our protection, we must see that nothing happens to her; she shall not go with him! Fly! lose not a moment, they may set off to-night!" "I think it cursed ridiculous, my dear Mrs. Davenport, and you would do much
better to let them alone."