The whole
council sat in astonishment; and Mr Keelevine prepared his pen, and took
a sheet of paper to draw out a notation of the minute, when Mr Peevie
rose, and after coughing three times, and looking first at me and syne at
the two delinquents, said--

"My Lord Provost, I was surprised, and beginning to be confounded, at the
explosion which the two gentlemen have committed. No man can designate
the extent of such an official malversation, demonstrated, as it has been
here, in the presence of us all, who are the lawful custodiers of the
kingly dignity in this his majesty's royal burgh. I will, therefore, not
take it upon me either to apologise or to obliviate their offence; for,
indeed, it is an offence that merits the most condign animadversion, and
the consequences might be legible for ever, were a gentleman, so
conspicable in the town as you are, to evacuate the magistracy on account
of it. But it is my balsamic advice, that rather than promulgate this
matter, the two malcontents should abdicate, and that a precept should be
placarded at this sederunt as if they were not here, but had resigned and
evaded their places, precursive to the meeting." To this I answered, that no one could suspect me of wishing to push the
matter further, provided the thing could be otherwise settled; and
therefore, if Mr Plan and Mr Hickery would shake hands, and agree never
to notice what had passed to each other, and the other members and
magistrates would consent likewise to bury the business in oblivion, I
would agree to the balsamic advice of Mr Peevie, and even waive my
obligation to bind over the hostile parties to keep the king's peace, so
that the whole affair might neither be known nor placed upon record. Mr Hickery, I could discern, was rather surprised; but I found that I had
thus got the thief in the wuddy, and he had no choice; so both he and Mr
Plan rose from their seats in a very sheepish manner, and looking at us
as if they had unpleasant ideas in their minds, they departed forth the
council-chamber; and a minute was made by the town-clerk that they,
having resigned their trust as councillors, two other gentlemen at the
next meeting should be chosen into their stead. Thus did I, in a manner most unexpected, get myself rid and clear of the
two most obdurate oppositionists, and by taking care to choose discreet
persons for their successors, I was enabled to wind the council round my
finger, which was a far more expedient method of governing the community
than what I had at one time meditated, even if I could have brought it to
a bearing. But, in order to understand the full weight and importance of
this, I must describe how the choice and election was made, because, in
order to make my own power and influence the more sicker, it was
necessary that I should not be seen in the business. Mr Peevie was not a little proud of the part he had played in the storm
of the council, and his words grew, if possible, longer-nebbit and more
kittle than before, in so much that the same evening, when I called on
him after dusk, by way of a device to get him to help the implementing of
my intents with regard to the choice of two gentlemen to succeed those
whom he called "the expurgated dislocators," it was with a great
difficulty that I could expiscate his meaning. "Mr Peevie," said I, when
we were cozily seated by ourselves in his little back parlour--the
mistress having set out the gardevin and tumblers, and the lass brought
in the hot water--"I do not think, Mr Peevie, that in all my experience,
and I am now both an old man and an old magistrate, that I ever saw any
thing better managed than the manner in which ye quelled the hobleshow
this morning, and therefore we maun hae a little more of your balsamic
advice, to make a' heal among us again; and now that I think o't, how has
it happent that ye hae never been a bailie? I'm sure it's due both to
your character and circumstance that ye should take upon you a portion of
the burden of the town honours. Therefore, Mr Peevie, would it no be a
very proper thing, in the choice of the new councillors, to take men of a
friendly mind towards you, and of an easy and manageable habit of will." The old man was mightily taken with this insinuation, and acknowledged
that it would give him pleasure to be a bailie next year. We then
cannily proceeded, just as if one thing begat another, to discourse anent
the different men that were likely to do as councillors, and fixed at
last on Alexander Hodden the blanket merchant, and Patrick Fegs the
grocer, both excellent characters of their kind. There was not, indeed,
in the whole burgh at the time, a person of such a flexible easy nature
as Mr Hodden; and his neighbour, Mr Fegs, was even better, for he was so
good-tempered, and kindly, and complying, that the very callants at the
grammar school had nicknamed him Barley-sugar Pate. "No better than them can be," said I to Mr Peevie; "they are likewise
both well to do in the world, and should be brought into consequence; and
the way o't canna be in better hands than your own. I would, therefore,
recommend it to you to see them on the subject, and, if ye find them
willing, lay your hairs in the water to bring the business to a bearing." Accordingly, we settled to speak of it as a matter in part decided, that
Mr Hodden and Mr Fegs were to be the two new councillors; and to make the
thing sure, as soon as I went home I told it to Mrs Pawkie as a state
secret, and laid my injunctions on her not to say a word about it, either
to Mrs Hodden or to Mrs Fegs, the wives of our two elect; for I knew her
disposition, and that, although to a certainty not a word of the fact
would escape from her, yet she would be utterly unable to rest until she
had made the substance of it known in some way or another; and, as I
expected, so it came to pass. She went that very night to Mrs Rickerton,
the mother of Mr Feg's wife, and, as I afterwards picked out of her, told
the old lady that may be, ere long, she would hear of some great honour
that would come to her family, with other mystical intimations that
pointed plainly to the dignities of the magistracy; the which, when she
had returned home, so worked upon the imagination of Mrs Rickerton, that,
before going to bed, she felt herself obliged to send for her daughter,
to the end that she might be delivered and eased of what she had heard. In this way Mr Fegs got a foretaste of what had been concerted for his
advantage; and Mr Peevie, in the mean time, through his helpmate, had, in
like manner, not been idle; the effect of all which was, that next day,
every where in the town, people spoke of Mr Hodden and Mr Fegs as being
ordained to be the new councillors, in the stead of the two who had, as
it was said, resigned in so unaccountable a manner, so that no candidates
offered, and the election was concluded in the most candid and agreeable
spirit possible; after which I had neither trouble nor adversary, but
went on, in my own prudent way, with the works in hand--the completion of
the new bridge, the reparation of the tolbooth steeple, and the bigging
of the new schools on the piece of ground adjoining to my own at the
Westergate; and in the doing of the latter job I had an opportunity of
manifesting my public spirit; for when the scheme, as I have related, was
some years before given up, on account of Mr Plan's castles in the air
for educating tawny children from the East and West Indies, I inclosed my
own ground, and built the house thereon now occupied by Collector
Gather's widow, and the town, per consequence, was not called on for one
penny of the cost, but saved so much of a wall as the length of mine
extended--a part not less than a full third part of the whole. No doubt,
all these great and useful public works were not done without money; but
the town was then in great credit, and many persons were willing and
ready to lend; for every thing was in a prosperous order, and we had a
prospect of a vast increase of income, not only from the toll on the new
bridge, but likewise from three very excellent shops which we repaired on
the ground floor of the tolbooth. We had likewise feued out to advantage
a considerable portion of the town moor; so that had things gone on in
the way they were in my time, there can be no doubt that the burgh would
have been in very flourishing circumstances, and instead of being
drowned, as it now is, in debt, it might have been in the most topping
way; and if the project that I had formed for bringing in a supply of
water by pipes, had been carried into effect, it would have been a most
advantageous undertaking for the community at large. But my task is now drawing to an end; and I have only to relate what
happened at the conclusion of the last act of my very serviceable and
eventful life, the which I will proceed to do with as much brevity as is
consistent with the nature of that free and faithful spirit in which the
whole of these notandums have been indited. Shortly after the Battle of Waterloo, I began to see that a change was
coming in among us. There was less work for the people to do, no outgate
in the army for roving and idle spirits, and those who had tacks of the
town lands complained of slack markets; indeed, in my own double vocation
of the cloth shop and wine cellar, I had a taste and experience of the
general declension that would of a necessity ensue, when the great outlay
of government and the discharge from public employ drew more and more to
an issue. So I bethought me, that being now well stricken in years, and,
though I say it that should not, likewise a man in good respect and
circumstances, it would be a prudent thing to retire and secede entirely
from all farther intromissions with public affairs. Accordingly, towards the midsummer of the year 1816, I commenced in a far
off way to give notice, that at Michaelmas I intended to abdicate my
authority and power, to which intimations little heed was at first given;
but gradually the seed took with the soil, and began to swell and shoot
up, in so much that, by the middle of August, it was an understood thing
that I was to retire from the council, and refrain entirely from the part
I had so long played with credit in the burgh. When people first began to believe that I was in earnest, I cannot but
acknowledge I was remonstrated with by many, and that not a few were
pleased to say my resignation would be a public loss; but these
expressions, and the disposition of them, wore away before Michaelmas
came; and I had some sense of the feeling which the fluctuating gratitude
of the multitude often causes to rise in the breasts of those who have
ettled their best to serve the ungrateful populace. However, I
considered with myself that it would not do for me, after what I had done
for the town and commonality, to go out of office like a knotless thread,
and that, as a something was of right due to me, I would be committing an
act of injustice to my family if I neglected the means of realizing the
same. But it was a task of delicacy, and who could I prompt to tell the
town-council to do what they ought to do? I could not myself speak of my
own services--I could ask nothing. Truly it was a subject that cost me
no small cogitation; for I could not confide it even to the wife of my
bosom. However, I gained my end, and the means and method thereof may
advantage other public characters, in a similar strait, to know and
understand. Seeing that nothing was moving onwards in men's minds to do the act of
courtesy to me, so justly my due, on the Saturday before Michaelmas I
invited Mr Mucklewheel, the hosier, (who had the year before been chosen
into the council, in the place of old Mr Peevie, who had a paralytic, and
never in consequence was made a bailie,) to take a glass of toddy with
me, a way and method of peutering with the councillors, one by one, that
I often found of a great efficacy in bringing their understandings into a
docile state; and when we had discussed one cheerer with the usual
clishmaclaver of the times, I began, as we were both birzing the sugar
for the second, to speak with a circumbendibus about my resignation of
the trusts I had so long held with profit to the community. "Mr Mucklewheel," quo' I "ye're but a young man, and no versed yet, as ye
will be, in the policy and diplomatics that are requisite in the
management of the town, and therefore I need not say any thing to you
about what I have got an inkling of, as to the intents of the new
magistrates and council towards me. It's very true that I have been long
a faithful servant to the public, but he's a weak man who looks to any
reward from the people; and after the experience I have had, I would
certainly prove myself to be one of the very weakest, if I thought it was
likely, that either anent the piece of plate and the vote of thanks, any
body would take a speciality of trouble." To this Mr Mucklewheel answered, that he was glad to hear such a
compliment was intended; "No man," said he, "more richly deserves a
handsome token of public respect, and I will surely give the proposal all
the countenance and support in my power possible to do." "As to that," I replied, pouring in the rum and helping myself to the
warm water, "I entertain no doubt, and I have every confidence that the
proposal, when it is made, will be in a manner unanimously approved. But,
Mr Mucklewheel, what's every body's business, is nobody's. I have heard
of no one that's to bring the matter forward; it's all fair and smooth to
speak of such things in holes and corners, but to face the public with
them is another sort of thing. For few men can abide to see honours
conferred on their neighbours, though between ourselves, Mr Mucklewheel,
every man in a public trust should, for his own sake, further and promote
the bestowing of public rewards on his predecessors; because looking
forward to the time when he must himself become a predecessor, he should
think how he would feel were he, like me, after a magistracy of near to
fifty years, to sink into the humility of a private station, as if he had
never been any thing in the world. In sooth, Mr Mucklewheel, I'll no
deny that it's a satisfaction to me to think that may be the piece of
plate and the vote of thanks will be forthcoming; at the same time,
unless they are both brought to a bearing in a proper manner, I would
rather nothing was done at all." "Ye may depend on't," said Mr Mucklewheel, "that it will be done very
properly, and in a manner to do credit both to you and the council. I'll
speak to Bailie Shuttlethrift, the new provost, to propose the thing
himself, and that I'll second it." "Hooly, hooly, friend," quo' I, with a laugh of jocularity, no
ill-pleased to see to what effect I had worked upon him; "that will never
do; ye're but a greenhorn in public affairs. The provost maun ken
nothing about it, or let on that he doesna ken, which is the same thing,
for folk would say that he was ettling at something of the kind for
himself, and was only eager for a precedent. It would, therefore, ne'er
do to speak to him. But Mr Birky, who is to be elected into the council
in my stead, would be a very proper person. For ye ken coming in as my
successor, it would very naturally fall to him to speak modestly of
himself compared with me, and therefore I think he is the fittest person
to make the proposal, and you, as the next youngest that has been taken
in, might second the same." Mr Mucklewheel agreed with me, that certainly the thing would come with
the best grace from my successor. "But I doubt," was my answer, "if he kens aught of the matter; ye might
however enquire.