Unfortunately he extended his attentions too long. Unable to leave, he lingered near her, till the charm of novelty faded from her bosom, and with it the interest inspired by its influence; for it is a melancholy truth, however the young and the impassioned may shrink from the conviction, that even in love, rapture cannot always exist. A lover may not be weary of reciting the praises of his mistress, but language will in time be exhausted, his epithets must be repeated, the repetition shocks her nice ears, and she thinks that a new admirer, would praise her more agreeably. Absence strengthens real attachments, and destroys imaginary ones;
“L’absence est à l’amour, ce qu’ est au feu le vent, Il eteint le petit, il allume le grand.”
Thus it fanned the pure flame in Clayton’s breast, and extinguished the meteor blaze of gratified self-love in that of the beauteous but inconstant Everilda. Her parents witnessed the change in her inclinations with sorrow, for they sincerely esteemed Clayton, and were grieved at the mortification which he would feel from the loss of her affections; but her happiness was the study of their existence, and if she placed it in an union with Lord Courtney, he was so amiable, that she could not surely ever regret the foundation on which she trusted it; and in so serious a change, a change for life, undoubtedly little should be sacrificed to mere complaisance; for the deception which would conceal an

alteration of sentiment, must certainly be more dishonorable, and might be infinitely more lamentable in its consequences, than a frank confession could possibly be. Thus reasoned the fond parents, in behalf of their darling daughter, and the son of their esteemed friend: perhaps a latent wish might pervade their bosoms, that if they were fated to trust their Everilda into a foreign country, it might not be entirely amongst strangers, but into the happy and respected family, the envied and courted society of Lord Drelincourt. The pleasing emotions, of which Lord Courtney began to be sensible in the company of Everilda, were however somewhat ruffled, by a letter that he received, from the faithful, disinterested Dawson, informing his lordship in the most respectful terms, of Miss Macdonald’s disappearance; and as we have before said, that Dawson was not fond at any time, of a dry narration of facts, still less did he wish to confine himself to them, when they were so entirely barren of information, that he was at a loss even for conjecture wherewithal to elucidate them: in this dilemma he had recourse to the inexhaustible coinage of his own brain, and struck off a variety of pieces, likely to pass current with the person to whom he mean to send them. He therefore continued his account, with stating that he believed it probable, London might prove the place of her concealment, not that he had the slightest grounds for his conjectures, further than having heard from Jane, that her mistress was much tired of the insipid uniformity, in which she was obliged to spend her time, and frequently lamented not being in town, on account of the impossibility of procuring books or music in the country. This letter, written in a style of apparent simplicity, stung Lord Courtney to the quick. “Three times, he reads, as oft he reads again The cruel lines; as oft he strives in vain
To give each sense the lie, and fondly tries To disbelieve the witness of his eyes.”
At every perusal he fancied that he discovered more incontestible proofs of Mary’s guilt. The consciousness of falsehood, which had induced the writer to hurry over his account, he called an honest brevity, and the malignant mystery, which was thrown over the whole, he imputed to Dawson’s delicacy, that prevented him even saying all he knew. In this humour, tenderness was lost in anger, and Lord Courtney execrated Mary’s perfidy, whilst he recollected not his own. He accused her of falsehood in withdrawing her affections from him, but he forgot to condemn himself, for likewise offering his to another. He one moment raved against the deceitful sex, and swore that she had never loved him; the next, vanity kindly came to his aid, and whispered that she would never love another. When he had exhausted his rage, he endeavoured to calm himself, and perhaps the source from which he the most readily imbibed consolation for Mary’s desertion, was in the idea, that he was at liberty to devote himself entirely to Everilda, unchecked even by his own reproaches. Elated by her success, stimulated by the wish to ensure it, Everilda never appeared more captivating than at this time. She diffused facination all around her; and if the eye could have been insensible to her beauty, and her graces, or the mind regardless of her

talents and accomplishments, the heart must yet have yielded itself a willing a captive to her sensibility, her tenderness, and the numerous virtues, which shone through all her faults. Her error was indeed of that description, which
“Plays round the head, But touches not the heart.”
And might be chiefly attributed to the excessive indulgence, which from infancy she had been accustomed to receive. Naturally haughty, it was not likely that she should become humble from seeing herself implicitly obeyed. Conscious of the charms with which nature had so liberally gifted her, it was improbable that they should be despised by her, for being the theme of universal admiration. She would acknowledge no superior, neither did she ever make others suffer, from feeling their inferiority. Envy was a stranger to her breast, and the consciousness of her own merit, and the value that she affixed to it, taught her to be candid in acknowledging that of another, and liberal in praising it. Quick to take offence, and warm in resentment, a word, a look of apology, would yet disarm her anger. Where she was the offender, she would if treated with mildness, weep at the feet of the injured party, and think no submission too great, to obtain forgiveness of her acknowledged fault; but harshness roused her to a repetition of it, and the least appearance of contempt, would have induced her to continue firm in the offence. Sincerity reigned in every word she uttered, her thoughts and actions, were alike open to the inspection of the world; and conscious integrity, was her never-failing support, for the constructions which it might put on either. Her pecuniary and personal exertions, were ever at the service of the distressed; her friendship was inviolable, her benevolence universal, and her conduct to her parents irreproachable. Such was Everilda di Rodalvi. Oh think of transports which ye whilom tasted, And let the glad remembrance charm your mind, Be not the fruits of joyment quickly wasted, And to your heart her happy image bind:
Think what she merits who whilear was kind, Nor by inconstancy her peace destroy; Inconstancy, that monster fell and blind,
That vainly fond of every passing toy
Treads down its late delight, and poisons rapt’rous joy. WEST. ONE evening the Marchese, his family, and guests, were seated in a delightful pavillion, watching the beautiful spectacle of the sun gilding the horizon with his departing rays. Here they enjoyed the cool breezes wafted over the water, which were additionally grateful, from being contrasted with the more than usually sultry heat of the day. It was the favorite hour of the pensive Claudina, who left the happy circles to wander, where she could without restraint, indulge her own reflections. She had not proceeded far, when turning into a retired path, she was surprised by seeing a female stranger, walking slowly, and with irresolute steps: Claudina was alarmed, for she had suffered so much from her brother’s cruelty, that she suspected some of his designs, in every circumstance that wore the least semblance of mystery. Thus prejudiced, she was hastily returning, but on looking back, she saw that the stranger had thrown herself on a seat, apparently in the deepest affliction: Claudina then went towards her, saying to herself, “I will not indulge my own weakness, by yielding to the emotions of selfish fear, when the welfare of a fellow- creature may be at stake. Ill would it befit me to be slow in relieving distress, when I am daily receiving benefits from compassion.” The stranger, absorbed in sorrow, heard not her approach; and it was not till she had spoken, in the mildest and most soothing accents, that she drew the slightest attention. The object to whom she addressed herself, was, though very young, in a situation which could not fail to interest, for it informed the most careless observer, that she must soon become a mother. She answered Claudina’s enquiries in broken Italian, and though her accent was imperfect, her language was polite, and her manner extremely interesting. She said she was a stranger in Italy, and without the slightest knowledge of any of its inhabitants; that she had been informed of Lord Courtney’s present residence with the Marchese di Rodalvi, and that he being one of her countrymen, she had taken the liberty of coming to crave some assistance from him: adding, that she had left Florence in the morning, and had wandered until then in the grounds, unable to summon resolution to enquire for him. Claudina was touched with the simplicity and pathos with which she spoke, and intreated her to continue there no longer, as she must already be weary and faint, but to go immediately to Lord Courtney; adding that at that moment he was not an hundred yards distant. “Is he so near?” exclaimed the stranger, turning pale, “oh! no, I cannot see him; alas! my presence may displease him, I

must come again; at present I dare not see him; I am unequal to the task.” She burst into tears; Claudina was infinitely affected, ascribing her emotion partly to anxiety, and partly to her situation. “Come,” said she kindly, “you are exhausted; let us walk a little further, perhaps the air will revive you?” She then led her towards the pavillion, and when they came within sight of it, said, “you see that pavillion, Lord Courtney is now there with the family, but if you had rather converse with him alone, I will send him to you,” receiving no answer, she looked at her companion, who with quivering lips faintly articulated, “Oh! my father,” and sunk insensible to the earth. Claudina greatly shocked, ran to the pavillion, and hastily requested the Marchese to send assistance to an unfortunate English-woman, whom she had left, she feared expiring. Whilst the servants were summoned, Lord Courtney with the animation natural to him, had seized some wine, and gone in search of the unfortunate object, whom he soon found; but what were his feelings, when he recognized in her, the injured, forsaken, Mary Macdonald? “Oh! God,” he exclaimed, “what have I done? When will my fault be sufficiently punished?” He pressed the lifeless form in agony to his throbbing breast, and in a few minutes the family brought cordials, and were followed by the servants, with a chair, in which they proposed to remove the invalid; the surprise at Lord Courtney’s grief, was universal; but it was augmented when the unknown lady, opening her eyes and fixing them on him, with the most speaking tenderness, said in accents indescribably affecting. “Ah! Henry, how base were they who traduced thee; how have they wronged thy constancy and love? Ah! I cannot forgive myself, for ever having believed what I might have known to be impossible.” She closed her eyes again, overcome with languor, and totally regardless of all around her. Lord Courtney’s situation was truly embarrassing. He once looked up, but he read unfavorable conjectures, and just condemnation, in every countenance, and he cast his eyes down, mortified and humbled to the utmost. But if his feelings were painful, what were Everilda’s, as she gazed upon the scene with silent dignity? Too compassionate to see without sorrow, the situation of her rival, for such she immediately suspected her to be; too proud to reproach him who had reduced her to it, she was indeed eloquent in silence, for her eyes spoke volumes, her countenance was the transcript of her mind, and every gesture, every attitude, was in unison with her feelings. The Marchesa now proposed raising the stranger from the ground, and placing her in the chair, to take her into the house, as the night damps fell quickly. But as soon as she understood his intention, she begged to be excused, and requested the favor of a servant to procure her a conveyance to Florence, where she had apartments in the Casa Agostini. Finding her anxious to return, and that entreaties for her stay, only made her uneasy, the Marchese kindly ordered the carriage to be brought out, and requested her to rely on his services, if she should need assistance at any future period. She thanked him with the sweetest grace, and endeavoured to apologize for the confusion which she had occasioned, by the little command that she had retained over her feelings. “There needs no apology;” said Everilda, speaking for the first time, “that your feelings are exquisitely susceptible, is a misfortune, which I lament for your own sake, as sensibility is too often the source of misery to its possessor.” There was an ausperity in her tone, that stung Henry to the heart; he looked at her, but her countenance expressed only the coldness of contempt, and he never felt its influence more forcibly. The carriage was now ready; it would have been inhuman to suffer Mary to depart alone, and Lord Courtney rejoiced that

in attending her, he should escape for the present, those looks of censure, which though he had merited, he could not bear to receive from friends so esteemed, and whose good opinion he had till now eminently possessed. We will not trouble our readers, with the animadversions of the Marchese, and his family, on the recent occurrence, as they may very easily be imagined. Nor will we treat them with any repetitions of endearing speeches, gentle reproaches, and fond forgiveness, that passed between the reunited pair, as whatever other recommendation they might possess, that of novelty, which is the greatest of all, would certainly be wanting. Mary briefly explained the circumstances, that had prompted her in despair to leave England. “Which,” said she, “contained no friends for me; alas! I had rendered myself unworthy of any; I therefore resolved to seek you here, to learn my fate from your own lips, and if it should be as I dreaded, then to end my life in retirement, without ever returning to my native country, where I should every day be made more sensible of my loss; but I find you unchanged, and could I cease to consider myself culpable, oh! how soon could I forget that I had ever been unhappy!” Lord Courtney heard her recital with much emotion, and most aristocratically longed to treat Dawson with an introduction into the Bastile, in all its ancient terrors; Mary wept whilst she assured her lover, as she still fondly thought him, that he should never be reminded of a promise, the performance of which, must involve him in disgrace with his associates. “Never,” said she with streaming eyes, “never shall it be said, that my virtue was sacrificed to ambition; never shall my love prove prejudicial to its object. No, I repeat that I will return no more to a country wherein I have no friends. I have felt the horrors, the uncertainty, and disgrace, of my situation; no more will I expose myself to them. You, my Henry, will love the unhappy fruits of our attachment. If I live, my child will console me for resigning its father; my fault shall be expiated by penitence, and humble industry; and if I die, you will perhaps lament a woman, ‘who loved not wisely, but too well.’” She burst into tears, as she concluded these words, for all her firmness was spent, in the virtuous resolution that she had taken, and she felt entitled to the gratification of weeping the imperious necessity which demanded her perseverance. The object of her unfortunate attachment, was deeply affected with her distress, and used every argument to console her; but vainly endeavoured to impart to her, the comfort that he himself wanted. For several days Lord Courtney stayed from the Villa di Rodalvi, unable to summon resolution to renew his visits, yet feeling that every day’s delay, increased the difficulty; and certainly every day’s absence increased the displeasure of the Marchese and Marchesa, and strengthened them in their determination, never to risk their daughter’s happiness, on the uncertain and disgraceful foundation, of a libertine’s honor or affection. Mr. Barlowe likewise was as uneasy and perplexed as any of the party, for he felt responsible for his pupil’s conduct, which was certainly at that time far from meriting his approbation. He had not been perfectly satisfied with Lord Courtney’s lengthened stay in Florence, for they had long since, seen every thing worthy of note in it, and after that, he justly thought every succeeding day, a day lost; but as Mary was circumstanced, he could not expect to draw his pupil from the place, and indeed even to wish it, would have appeared cruel. He saw the native virtue and delicacy of Miss Macdonald’s mind, he lamented her deviation from the path of honor, and he severely condemned the

impetuosity, which had caused him who had undertaken to be her guide, to tempt her astray. Mr. Barlowe was one of the old-fashioned believers, that whether or not chastity be the principal virtue of a woman, without which no other can exist, yet she who is guilty of a breach of it, is generally capable of many other vices; as she has shewn herself regardless of public scorn, that great bond which holds the world in awe, consequently would not be withheld from the commission of a crime, by the fear of incurring what she is previously loaded with, and still less by conscientious motives, of which she has already proved her contempt. But though he did not affect that lenity of judgment, which is too much the fashion of the day, which under the affectation of candour, authorizes vice, and which has made as many profligates, as the puritanical tenets of Oliver Cromwell made hypocrites, he yet condemned not all alike: he thought not that the commission of any one fault included every other; and he carefully distinguished between hardened vice, and returning penitence. In Mary he saw the latter, he therefore strengthened her virtuous resolves, cheered her drooping spirits, and dispelled her doubts, with the piety of his profession, and the affection of a parent. She told him every transaction of her life, and did not conceal the motives which had inspired her with courage to undertake so long a journey, through a foreign country, attended only by her faithful Jane. She had raised sufficient money for her expences in addition to what Lord Courtney had left her, by disposing of some of her most valuable effects, and the same person who purchased them was fortunately capable of giving her the most expeditious and cheap rout to Florence, being in the habit of equipping travellers for continental expeditions. Balow my babe, ly stil and sleepe,
It greeves me sair to see thee weepe, If thou’lt be silent, I’ll be glad,
Thy moaning makes my heart full sad; Balow my boy, thy mither’s joy,
Thy father breedes me great annoy; Ly stil my darling, sleepe awhile,
And when thou wakest sweetly smile, But smile not as thy father did
To cozen maids, nay God forbid;
But yette I fear, thou wilt gae neere Thy father’s face and heart to beire. Balow my babe, ly stil and sleepe,
It greeves me sair to see thee weepe. LADY ANN BOTHWELL. AFTER a week’s absence, Lord Courtney gained courage to present himself again at the villa. His reception was polite but cool: he could not complain of any actual alteration of manner, yet that there was considerable change was too evident to pass unobserved by him, and he felt it the most forcibly from Everilda; who, under the mask of indifference, effectually concealed the anguish she had endured since his departure, and affected even to be weary in his company, the better to disguise the pleasure that his return had created in her bosom. When he took his leave, however, he found no encouragement to prolong his visit; no friendly entreaty solicited his speedy repetition of it; and he could not but perceive that he was not any longer the welcome visitor that he had once been. Unfortunately, in his breast, as in Everilda’s, opposition always created resistance, and the most ardent desire to surmount every obstacle to the gratification of wishes, strengthened by difficulty. This uncontroulable spirit now urged him to go once more to the villa, to offer himself in form as a suitor for Everilda’s hand; and his offer was in as great form refused by the Marchese, with the additional mortification of informing him, that, as he had declared his intentions, which however flattering, must inevitably be declined, he ought to be sensible that there would be an indelicacy in the continuance of his visits: the Marchese added, that he hoped to be pardoned, if, with the freedom of an old friend, he advised Lord Courtney to pursue his travels for the present, assuring him of a most friendly welcome in case of his revisiting Florence, after Everilda’s engagements with Mr. Clayton should be fulfilled. It would be difficult to describe Henry’s vexation and anger at this possitive dismissal; he requested to be allowed to receive it from the lady herself. “That is unnecessary, my lord,” replied the Marchese, “it would only encrease your regret, and be a painful task for her to execute.” He then desired permission to see the ladies before his departure, but the Marchese assured him that they were not within; and he was obliged to

take his leave, resolving to revenge himself at some future period, for the mortification which he then felt. When some days had elapsed without seeing Lord Courtney, it was natural for Everilda to remark the time of his absence, and she accompanied her observation with one not deficient in severity, on his want of politeness, and even of gratitude. But when the Marchese informed her with the utmost candour, of the circumstances attending his last visit, her displeasure unjustly changed its object, and acquitted Lord Courtney to condemn her father. She said little, but her countenance expressed a variety of contending emotions, not unperceived by her tender parents; who began seriously to apprehend that her heart had fallen a sacrifice to the vivacity, talents, and fascinating address of the young Englishman. Everilda was indeed severely mortified. It appeared to her that her father had acted unjustly, in not giving her, at least, the liberty of choice; and she thought that he had also taken an ungenerous advantage of her absence, by remaining silent on the subject, which had been discussed at that time, until it was too late to recal his decision. To be deceived and treated as a child, was what she could not forgive; and she forgot, in her resentment, the indulgence with which her parents had observed her rising partiality; the kindness with which they had forgiven her fickle, and unjustifiable conduct towards Clayton; and the rational fears and tender anxieties that now influenced their rejection of offers, which they had once regarded with satisfaction, as the probable source of their daughter’s happiness: all this she forgot; and remembering only that she had been deceived, rashly concluded, that she no longer owed the debt of confidence to those, who had violated it in the first instance towards her. Unfortunately Lord Courtney found opportunities to see her, and converse with her, whilst her mind was in this perverted state; and in a fatal hour, he had the temerity to propose an elopement, to which she had the rashness to consent. Thus did this thoughtless young man requite the kindness and hospitality of his father’s earliest friend. Such was the return made by the imprudent and headstrong Everilda, to the tenderness and anxiety of the most indulgent parents. Though Everilda, blinded by passion, had consented to see Lord Courtney in private, yet her native delicacy taught her, that every woman lessens the dignity of the female character, by any clandestine meetings, which must be always degrading to the retiring modesty, which even in the eyes of the libertine, is the most attractive charm of the sex. She therefore submitted to them no longer, than whilst they were necessary to fix the plan of flight, and that once arranged, she forbade every attempt to repeat them. Everilda had a female friend, not far from Florence, whom she often visited; and it was settled, that, under pretence of going thither for a short time, she might take some apparel, and avoid all suspicion in being accompanied by Claudina, and Bianca, her waiting- woman: Lord Courtney was to write to the Marchese two days before the execution of this scheme, with acknowledgments for past civilities, and a declaration of being about to leave Florence; hoping to have the pleasure of revisiting it before he returned to England. This, with parting compliments to the ladies, was to form the contents of the billet, which they flattered themselves would ensure their plans from detection. Nor were the most famed conspirators, of ancient or modern times, ever more impressed with the grandeur of their undertaking, the necessity of inviolable secrecy, and the encouraging prospect of

success, than were this young and thoughtless pair, on an occasion, conceived in a moment of passionate folly, and by which every event of their future lives would inevitably be influenced. But if Everilda had conquered all her scruples, Lord Courtney had some yet remaining, which, at times, appeared almost insurmountable. He had to inform
Mary of his intended departure; and the disclosure, in her situation, was an indelicacy, and a cruelty, which he was not so lost to feeling, or so intoxicated with a new passion, as to consider an easy task. He shrunk from it, he deplored the necessity of it, and there were moments when he would have willingly resigned every hope of happiness with Everilda, to insure the continuance of it with one, whom he had injured and betrayed, only to desert. As the appointed day drew near, his agitation was violent and undisguised. The gentle Mary, shocked and alarmed, could no longer affect not to perceive it, and enquired its cause, with all the anxiety of affection, mingled with the timid delicacy which feared to be intrusive, or to wear the appearance of curiosity. The most afflicting certainty was preferable to the guilty suspence that he endured. He confessed all, and threw himself for pardon, on that affection which he had so basely requited. She heard him with more calmness than he had thought her capable of assuming, and forgave him with more angelic sweetness, than he had imagined could exist in a mere mortal. No word of reproach passed her lips but once; when Lord Courtney was excusing his desertion,
under the plea of having engaged his honour to Lady Everilda, who trusted herself entirely to it; she then hastily answered, “My lord, you are the master of your own actions, excuses for them only degrade you, and insult me: I cannot judge of the claim that a female may have on the honor of the man in whom she confides, but I sincerely wish that the lady, to whom you are attached, may find yours immutable, and never, for a moment, feel occasion to repent her confidence.” Saying these words, she left the room with apparent composure; and Lord Courtney felt relieved by her magnanimity; though; contrasting it with the narrow and selfish light in which he must have appeared to her, he was not greatly elevated in his own esteem, by the comparison. Mary was, however, no heroine; she felt that,
“The grief which cannot speak,
Whispers the woe–fraught heart, and bids it break." When she found herself alone, she gave way to all the anguish of one deceived, rejected and abandoned, yet still fondly clinging to the object by whom she was made wretched. In vain she sought for consolation, in reflecting that she had voluntarily intended to resign his affections. “Alas!” she exclaimed, “he had already bestowed them on another, and I, lost, unhappy wretch, shall give birth to an unfortunate degraded being, who will not even have its father’s love to console it, for the contempt of a cruel world. Ah!