"-and
asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand him? "Not at all," was her answer; "but depend upon it, he means to be severe on us, and our surest way
of disappointing him will be to ask nothing about it." Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mr. Darcy in anything, and persevered
therefore in requiring an explanation of his two motives. "I have not the smallest objection to explaining them," said he, as soon as she allowed him to speak. "You either choose this method of passing the evening because you are in each other's confidence,
and have secret affairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figures appear to the
greatest advantage in walking; if the first, I would be completely in your way, and if the second, I can
admire you much better as I sit by the fire." "Oh! shocking!" cried Miss Bingley. "I never heard anything so abominable. How shall we punish him
for such a speech?" "Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination," said Elizabeth. "We can all plague and punish one
another. Tease him-laugh at him. Intimate as you are, you must know how it is to be done." "But upon my honour, I do not. I do assure you that my intimacy has not yet taught me that. Tease
calmness of manner and presence of mind! No, no; I feel he may defy us there. And as to laughter,
we will not expose ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without a subject. Mr. Darcy may
hug himself." "Mr. Darcy is not to be laughed at!" cried Elizabeth. "That is an uncommon advantage, and
uncommon I hope it will continue, for it would be a great loss to me to have many such
acquaintances. I dearly love a laugh." "Miss Bingley," said he, "has given me more credit than can be. The wisest and the best of men-nay,
the wisest and best of their actions-may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object in life
is a joke." "Certainly," replied Elizabeth-"there are such people, but I hope I am not one of them. I hope I
never ridicule what is wise and good. Follies and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, dodivert me, I
own, and I laugh at them whenever I can. But these, I suppose, are precisely what you are without." "Perhaps that is not possible for anyone. But it has been the study of my life to avoid those
weaknesses which often expose a strong understanding to ridicule." "Such as vanity and pride." "Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride-where there is a real superiority of mind, pride will be
always under good regulation." Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile. "Your examination of Mr. Darcy is over, I presume," said Miss Bingley; "and pray what is the result?" "I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has no defect. He owns it himself without disguise." "No," said Darcy, "I have made no such pretension. I have faults enough, but they are not, I hope, of
understanding. My temper I dare not vouch for. It is, I believe, too little yielding-certainly too little
for the convenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of others so soon as I ought,
nor their offenses against myself. My feelings are not puffed about with every attempt to move
them. My temper would perhaps be called resentful. My good opinion once lost, is lost forever." "That is a failing indeed!" cried Elizabeth. "Implacable resentment is a shade in a character. But you
have chosen your fault well. I really cannot laugh at it. You are safe from me." "There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particular evil-a natural defect, which
not even the best education can overcome." "And your defect is to hate everybody." "And yours," he replied with a smile, "is willfully to misunderstand them." "Do let us have a little music," cried Miss Bingley, tired of a conversation in which she had no share. "Louisa, you will not mind my waking Mr. Hurst?" Her sister had not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte was opened; and Darcy, after a few
moments' recollection, was not sorry for it. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much
attention. In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote the next morning to their
mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent for them in the course of the day. But Mrs. Bennet,
who had calculated on her daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, which
would exactly finish Jane's week, could not bring herself to receive them with pleasure before. Her
answer, therefore, was not propitious, at least not to Elizabeth's wishes, for she was impatient to get
home. Mrs. Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriage before Tuesday;
and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingley and his sister pressed them to stay longer, she
could spare them very well. Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positively resolved-nor
did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on the contrary, as being considered as intruding
themselves needlessly long, she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley's carriage immediately, and at
length it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfield that morning should be
mentioned, and the request made. The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough was said of wishing them to
stay at least till the following day to work on Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss
Bingley was then sorry that she had proposed the delay, for her jealousy and dislike of one sister
much exceeded her affection for the other. The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go so soon, and repeatedly tried to
persuade Miss Bennet that it would not be safe for her-that she was not enough recovered; but
Jane was firm where she felt herself to be right. To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence-Elizabeth had been at Netherfield long enough. She
attracted him more than he liked-and Miss Bingley was uncivil to her, and more teasing than usual
to himself. He wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admiration should now escape
him, nothing that could elevate her with the hope of influencing his felicity; sensible that if such an
idea had been suggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weight in confirming
or crushing it. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoke ten words to her through the whole of
Saturday, and though they were at one time left by themselves for half-an-hour, he adhered most
conscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her. On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almost all, took place. Miss
Bingley's civility to Elizabeth increased at last very rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when
they parted, after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give her to see her either at
Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her most tenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave of the whole party in the liveliest of spirits. They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Mrs. Bennet wondered at their
coming, and thought them very wrong to give so much trouble, and was sure Jane would have caught
cold again. But their father, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was really glad to see
them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. The evening conversation, when they were all
assembled, had lost much of its animation, and almost all its sense by the absence of Jane and
Elizabeth. They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough-bass and human nature; and had some
extracts to admire, and some new observations of threadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and
Lydia had information for them of a different sort. Much had been done and much had been said in
the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of the officers had dined lately with their
uncle, a private had been flogged, and it had actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to
be married. "I hope, my dear," said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they were at breakfast the next morning, "that you
have ordered a good dinner to-day, because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party." "Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure, unless Charlotte Lucas
should happen to call in-and I hope my dinners are good enough for her. I do not believe she often
sees such at home." "The person of whom I speak is a gentleman, and a stranger." Mrs. Bennet's eyes sparkled. "A gentleman and a stranger! It is Mr. Bingley, I am sure! Well, I am sure
I shall be extremely glad to see Mr. Bingley. But-good Lord! how unlucky! There is not a bit of fish to
be got to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell-I must speak to Hill this moment." "It is not Mr. Bingley," said her husband; "it is a person whom I never saw in the whole course of my
life." This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of being eagerly questioned by his wife
and his five daughters at once. After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explained:
"About a month ago I received this letter; and about a fortnight ago I answered it, for I thought it a
case of some delicacy, and requiring early attention. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who, when I am
dead, may turn you all out of this house as soon as he pleases." "Oh! my dear," cried his wife, "I cannot bear to hear that mentioned. Pray do not talk of that odious
man. I do think it is the hardest thing in the world, that your estate should be entailed away from
your own children; and I am sure, if I had been you, I should have tried long ago to do something or
other about it." Jane and Elizabeth tried to explain to her the nature of an entail. They had often attempted to do it
before, but it was a subject on which Mrs. Bennet was beyond the reach of reason, and she
continued to rail bitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family of five
daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about. "It certainly is a most iniquitous affair," said Mr. Bennet, "and nothing can clear Mr. Collins from the
guilt of inheriting Longbourn. But if you will listen to his letter, you may perhaps be a little softened
by his manner of expressing himself." "No, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it is very impertinent of him to write to you at all, and very
hypocritical. I hate such false friends. Why could he not keep on quarreling with you, as his father did
before him?" "Why, indeed; he does seem to have had some filial scruples on that head, as you will hear." "Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent, 15th October. "Dear Sir,-
"The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honoured father always gave me much
uneasiness, and since I have had the misfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the
breach; but for some time I was kept back by my own doubts, fearing lest it might seem disrespectful
to his memory for me to be on good terms with anyone with whom it had always pleased him to be
at variance.-'There, Mrs. Bennet. '-My mind, however, is now made up on the subject, for having
received ordination at Easter, I have been so fortunate as to be distinguished by the patronage of the
Right Honourable Lady Catherine de Bourgh, widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh, whose bounty and
beneficence has preferred me to the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall be my earnest
endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards her ladyship, and be ever ready to
perform those rites and ceremonies which are instituted by the Church of England. As a clergyman,
moreover, I feel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace in all families within the
reach of my influence; and on these grounds I flatter myself that my present overtures are highly
commendable, and that the circumstance of my being next in the entail of Longbourn estate will be
kindly overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject the offered olive-branch. I cannot be
otherwise than concerned at being the means of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to
apologise for it, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make them every possible amends-but
of this hereafter. If you should have no objection to receive me into your house, I propose myself the
satisfaction of waiting on you and your family, Monday, November 18th, by four o'clock, and shall
probably trespass on your hospitality till the Saturday se'ennight following, which I can do without
any inconvenience, as Lady Catherine is far from objecting to my occasional absence on a Sunday,
provided that some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day.-I remain, dear sir, with
respectful compliments to your lady and daughters, your well-wisher and friend,
"WILLIAM COLLINS"
"At four o'clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman," said Mr. Bennet, as he
folded up the letter. "He seems to be a most conscientious and polite young man, upon my word,
and I doubt not will prove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be so
indulgent as to let him come to us again." "There is some sense in what he says about the girls, however, and if he is disposed to make them
any amends, I shall not be the person to discourage him." "Though it is difficult," said Jane, "to guess in what way he can mean to make us the atonement he
thinks our due, the wish is certainly to his credit." Elizabeth was chiefly struck by his extraordinary deference for Lady Catherine, and his kind intention
of christening, marrying, and burying his parishioners whenever it were required. "He must be an oddity, I think," said she. "I cannot make him out.-There is something very pompous
in his style.-And what can he mean by apologising for being next in the entail?-We cannot suppose
he would help it if he could.-Could he be a sensible man, sir?" "No, my dear, I think not. I have great hopes of finding him quite the reverse. There is a mixture of
servility and self-importance in his letter, which promises well. I am impatient to see him." "In point of composition," said Mary, "the letter does not seem defective. The idea of the olive-
branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet I think it is well expressed." To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in any degree interesting. It was next to
impossible that their cousin should come in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they had
received pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour. As for their mother, Mr. Collins's
letter had done away much of her ill-will, and she was preparing to see him with a degree of
composure which astonished her husband and daughters. Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with great politeness by the whole family. Mr.
Bennet indeed said little; but the ladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither in
need of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was a tall, heavy-looking young man of
five-and-twenty. His air was grave and stately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been
long seated before he complimented Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family of daughters; said he
had heard much of their beauty, but that in this instance fame had fallen short of the truth; and
added, that he did not doubt her seeing them all in due time disposed of in marriage. This gallantry
was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Mrs. Bennet, who quarreled with no
compliments, answered most readily. "You are very kind, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it may prove so, for else they will be
destitute enough. Things are settled so oddly." "You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate." "Ah! sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to my poor girls, you must confess. Not that I mean to find
fault with you, for such things I know are all chance in this world. There is no knowing how estates
will go when once they come to be entailed." "I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins, and could say much on the subject,
but that I am cautious of appearing forward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I
come prepared to admire them. At present I will not say more; but, perhaps, when we are better
acquainted-"
He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on each other. They were not the
only objects of Mr. Collins's admiration. The hall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were
examined and praised; and his commendation of everything would have touched Mrs. Bennet's
heart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as his own future property. The dinner
too in its turn was highly admired; and he begged to know to which of his fair cousins the excellency
of its cooking was owing. But he was set right there by Mrs. Bennet, who assured him with some
asperity that they were very well able to keep a good cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do
in the kitchen. He begged pardon for having displeased her. In a softened tone she declared herself
not at all offended; but he continued to apologise for about a quarter of an hour. During dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servants were withdrawn, he thought
it time to have some conversation with his guest, and therefore started a subject in which he
expected him to shine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness. Lady Catherine
de Bourgh's attention to his wishes, and consideration for his comfort, appeared very remarkable. Mr. Bennet could not have chosen better. Mr. Collins was eloquent in her praise. The subject
elevated him to more than usual solemnity of manner, and with a most important aspect he
protested that "he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour in a person of rank-such affability
and condescension, as he had himself experienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously
pleased to approve of both of the discourses which he had already had the honour of preaching
before her. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings, and had sent for him only the Saturday
before, to make up her pool of quadrille in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by many
people he knew, but he had never seen anything but affability in her. She had always spoken to him
as she would to any other gentleman; she made not the smallest objection to his joining in the
society of the neighbourhood nor to his leaving the parish occasionally for a week or two, to visit his
relations. She had even condescended to advise him to marry as soon as he could, provided he chose
with discretion; and had once paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectly
approved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafed to suggest some
herself-some shelves in the closet up stairs." "That is all very proper and civil, I am sure," said Mrs. Bennet, "and I dare say she is a very agreeable
woman. It is a pity that great ladies in general are not more like her. Does she live near you, sir?" "The garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lane from Rosings Park, her
ladyship's residence." "I think you said she was a widow, sir? Has she any family?" "She has only one daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of very extensive property." "Ah!" said Mrs. Bennet, shaking her head, "then she is better off than many girls. And what sort of
young lady is she? Is she handsome?" "She is a most charming young lady indeed. Lady Catherine herself says that, in point of true beauty,
Miss de Bourgh is far superior to the handsomest of her sex, because there is that in her features
which marks the young lady of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sickly constitution, which
has prevented her from making that progress in many accomplishments which she could not have
otherwise failed of, as I am informed by the lady who superintended her education, and who still
resides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescends to drive by my humble abode
in her little phaeton and ponies." "Has she been presented? I do not remember her name among the ladies at court." "Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town; and by that means, as I told
Lady Catherine one day, has deprived the British court of its brightest ornament. Her ladyship
seemed pleased with the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion to offer
those little delicate compliments which are always acceptable to ladies. I have more than once
observed to Lady Catherine, that her charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess, and that the
most elevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned by her. These are the kind
of little things which please her ladyship, and it is a sort of attention which I conceive myself
peculiarly bound to pay." "You judge very properly," said Mr. Bennet, "and it is happy for you that you possess the talent of
flattering with delicacy. May I ask whether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of the
moment, or are the result of previous study?" "They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time, and though I sometimes amuse myself with
suggesting and arranging such little elegant compliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I
always wish to give them as unstudied an air as possible." Mr. Bennet's expectations were fully answered. His cousin was as absurd as he had hoped, and he
listened to him with the keenest enjoyment, maintaining at the same time the most resolute
composure of countenance, and, except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partner in
his pleasure. By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Mr. Bennet was glad to take his guest into the
drawing-room again, and, when tea was over, glad to invite him to read aloud to the ladies. Mr.
Collins readily assented, and a book was produced; but, on beholding it (for everything announced it
to be from a circulating library), he started back, and begging pardon, protested that he never read
novels. Kitty stared at him, and Lydia exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after some
deliberation he chose Fordyce's Sermons. Lydia gaped as he opened the volume, and before he had,
with very monotonous solemnity, read three pages, she interrupted him with:
"Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Phillips talks of turning away Richard; and if he does, Colonel
Forster will hire him. My aunt told me so herself on Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to
hear more about it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town." Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but Mr. Collins, much offended, laid aside
his book, and said:
"I have often observed how little young ladies are interested by books of a serious stamp, though
written solely for their benefit. It amazes me, I confess; for, certainly, there can be nothing so
advantageous to them as instruction. But I will no longer importune my young cousin." Then turning to Mr. Bennet, he offered himself as his antagonist at backgammon. Mr. Bennet
accepted the challenge, observing that he acted very wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling
amusements. Mrs. Bennet and her daughters apologised most civilly for Lydia's interruption, and
promised that it should not occur again, if he would resume his book; but Mr. Collins, after assuring
them that he bore his young cousin no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as any affront,
seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and prepared for backgammon. Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature had been but little assisted by
education or society; the greatest part of his life having been spent under the guidance of an
illiterate and miserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, he had merely kept
the necessary terms, without forming at it any useful acquaintance. The subjection in which his
father had brought him up had given him originally great humility of manner; but it was now a good
deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living in retirement, and the consequential
feelings of early and unexpected prosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady
Catherine de Bourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect which he felt for her
high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness, mingling with a very good opinion of himself,
of his authority as a clergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture of pride and
obsequiousness, self-importance and humility. Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended to marry; and in seeking a
reconciliation with the Longbourn family he had a wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the
daughters, if he found them as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report. This was his plan of amends-of atonement-for inheriting their father's estate; and he thought it an
excellent one, full of eligibility and suitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his
own part. His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet's lovely face confirmed his views, and established
all his strictest notions of what was due to seniority; and for the first evening she was his settled
choice. The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in a quarter of an hour's tete-a-tete with
Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, a conversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and leading
naturally to the avowal of his hopes, that a mistress might be found for it at Longbourn, produced
from her, amid very complaisant smiles and general encouragement, a caution against the very Jane
he had fixed on. "As to her younger daughters, she could not take upon her to say-she could not
positively answer-but she did not know of any prepossession; her eldest daughter, she must just
mention-she felt it incumbent on her to hint, was likely to be very soon engaged." Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth-and it was soon done-done while Mrs.
Bennet was stirring the fire. Elizabeth, equally next to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of
course. Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon have two daughters married; and
the man whom she could not bear to speak of the day before was now high in her good graces. Lydia's intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten; every sister except Mary agreed to go
with her; and Mr. Collins was to attend them, at the request of Mr. Bennet, who was most anxious to
get rid of him, and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins had followed him after
breakfast; and there he would continue, nominally engaged with one of the largest folios in the
collection, but really talking to Mr. Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunsford. Such doings discomposed Mr. Bennet exceedingly. In his library he had been always sure of leisure
and tranquillity; and though prepared, as he told Elizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every
other room of the house, he was used to be free from them there; his civility, therefore, was most
prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join his daughters in their walk; and Mr. Collins, being in fact much
better fitted for a walker than a reader, was extremely pleased to close his large book, and go. In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of his cousins, their time passed till they
entered Meryton. The attention of the younger ones was then no longer to be gained by him. Their
eyes were immediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers, and nothing less than a
very smart bonnet indeed, or a really new muslin in a shop window, could recall them. But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whom they had never seen before,
of most gentlemanlike appearance, walking with another officer on the other side of the way. The
officer was the very Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia came to inquire, and he
bowed as they passed. All were struck with the stranger's air, all wondered who he could be; and
Kitty and Lydia, determined if possible to find out, led the way across the street, under pretense of
wanting something in an opposite shop, and fortunately had just gained the pavement when the two
gentlemen, turning back, had reached the same spot. Mr. Denny addressed them directly, and
entreated permission to introduce his friend, Mr. Wickham, who had returned with him the day
before from town, and he was happy to say had accepted a commission in their corps. This was
exactly as it should be; for the young man wanted only regimentals to make him completely
charming. His appearance was greatly in his favour; he had all the best part of beauty, a fine
countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address. The introduction was followed up on his side
by a happy readiness of conversation-a readiness at the same time perfectly correct and
unassuming; and the whole party were still standing and talking together very agreeably, when the
sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcy and Bingley were seen riding down the street. On
distinguishing the ladies of the group, the two gentlemen came directly towards them, and began the
usual civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, and Miss Bennet the principal object. He was
then, he said, on his way to Longbourn on purpose to inquire after her. Mr. Darcy corroborated it
with a bow, and was beginning to determine not to fix his eyes on Elizabeth, when they were
suddenly arrested by the sight of the stranger, and Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of
both as they looked at each other, was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting. Both changed
colour, one looked white, the other red. Mr. Wickham, after a few moments, touched his hat-a
salutation which Mr. Darcy just deigned to return. What could be the meaning of it? It was
impossible to imagine; it was impossible not to long to know. In another minute, Mr. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed what passed, took leave and
rode on with his friend. Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door of Mr. Phillip's house, and
then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia's pressing entreaties that they should come in, and even
in spite of Mrs. Phillips's throwing up the parlour window and loudly seconding the invitation. Mrs. Phillips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest, from their recent absence, were
particularly welcome, and she was eagerly expressing her surprise at their sudden return home,
which, as their own carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothing about, if she had
not happened to see Mr. Jones's shop-boy in the street, who had told her that they were not to send
any more draughts to Netherfield because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her civility was
claimed towards Mr. Collins by Jane's introduction of him. She received him with her very best
politeness, which he returned with as much more, apologising for his intrusion, without any previous
acquaintance with her, which he could not help flattering himself, however, might be justified by his
relationship to the young ladies who introduced him to her notice. Mrs. Phillips was quite awed by
such an excess of good breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was soon put to an end by
exclamations and inquiries about the other; of whom, however, she could only tell her nieces what
they already knew, that Mr. Denny had brought him from London, and that he was to have a
lieutenant's commission in the --shire. She had been watching him the last hour, she said, as he
walked up and down the street, and had Mr. Wickham appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly
have continued the occupation, but unluckily no one passed windows now except a few of the
officers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become "stupid, disagreeable fellows." Some of
them were to dine with the Phillipses the next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call
on Mr. Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbourn would come in the
evening. This was agreed to, and Mrs. Phillips protested that they would have a nice comfortable
noisy game of lottery tickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect of such delights
was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr. Collins repeated his apologies in
quitting the room, and was assured with unwearying civility that they were perfectly needless. As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen pass between the two gentlemen;
but though Jane would have defended either or both, had they appeared to be in the wrong, she
could no more explain such behaviour than her sister. Mr. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet by admiring Mrs. Phillips's manners and
politeness. He protested that, except Lady Catherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more
elegant woman; for she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but even pointedly
included him in her invitation for the next evening, although utterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might be attributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met
with so much attention in the whole course of his life. As no objection was made to the young people's engagement with their aunt, and all Mr. Collins's
scruples of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet for a single evening during his visit were most steadily
resisted, the coach conveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton; and the girls had
the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room, that Mr. Wickham had accepted their
uncle's invitation, and was then in the house. When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr. Collins was at leisure to look
around him and admire, and he was so much struck with the size and furniture of the apartment,
that he declared he might almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfast parlour at
Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey much gratification; but when Mrs. Phillips
understood from him what Rosings was, and who was its proprietor-when she had listened to the
description of only one of Lady Catherine's drawing-rooms, and found that the chimney-piece alone
had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt all the force of the compliment, and would hardly have
resented a comparison with the housekeeper's room. In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion, with occasional digressions
in praise of his own humble abode, and the improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed
until the gentlemen joined them; and he found in Mrs. Phillips a very attentive listener, whose
opinion of his consequence increased with what she heard, and who was resolving to retail it all
among her neighbours as soon as she could. To the girls, who could not listen to their cousin, and
who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examine their own indifferent imitations of
china on the mantelpiece, the interval of waiting appeared very long. It was over at last, however. The gentlemen did approach, and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room, Elizabeth felt that she
had neither been seeing him before, nor thinking of him since, with the smallest degree of
unreasonable admiration. The officers of the --shire were in general a very creditable,
gentlemanlike set, and the best of them were of the present party; but Mr. Wickham was as far
beyond them all in person, countenance, air, and walk, as they were superior to the broad-faced,
stuffy uncle Phillips, breathing port wine, who followed them into the room. Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye was turned, and Elizabeth
was the happy woman by whom he finally seated himself; and the agreeable manner in which he
immediately fell into conversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, made her feel that the
commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be rendered interesting by the skill of the speaker. With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr. Wickham and the officers, Mr. Collins seemed to sink
into insignificance; to the young ladies he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kind
listener in Mrs. Phillips, and was by her watchfulness, most abundantly supplied with coffee and
muffin. When the card-tables were placed, he had the opportunity of obliging her in turn, by sitting
down to whist. "I know little of the game at present," said he, "but I shall be glad to improve myself, for in my
situation in life-" Mrs. Phillips was very glad for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason. Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was he received at the other table
between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first there seemed danger of Lydia's engrossing him entirely, for she
was a most determined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets, she soon grew
too much interested in the game, too eager in making bets and exclaiming after prizes to have
attention for anyone in particular. Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was
therefore at leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to hear him, though what she chiefly
wished to hear she could not hope to be told-the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Darcy. She
dared not even mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedly relieved. Mr.
Wickham began the subject himself. He inquired how far Netherfield was from Meryton; and, after
receiving her answer, asked in a hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been staying there. "About a month," said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subject drop, added, "He is a man of
very large property in Derbyshire, I understand." "Yes," replied Mr. Wickham; "his estate there is a noble one. A clear ten thousand per annum. You
could not have met with a person more capable of giving you certain information on that head than
myself, for I have been connected with his family in a particular manner from my infancy." Elizabeth could not but look surprised. "You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, after seeing, as you probably might,
the very cold manner of our meeting yesterday. Are you much acquainted with Mr. Darcy?" "As much as I ever wish to be," cried Elizabeth very warmly. "I have spent four days in the same
house with him, and I think him very disagreeable." "I have no right to give my opinion," said Wickham, "as to his being agreeable or otherwise. I am not
qualified to form one. I have known him too long and too well to be a fair judge. It is impossible
for me to be impartial. But I believe your opinion of him would in general astonish-and perhaps you
would not express it quite so strongly anywhere else. Here you are in your own family." "Upon my word, I say no more here than I might say in any house in the neighbourhood, except
Netherfield. He is not at all liked in Hertfordshire. Everybody is disgusted with his pride. You will not
find him more favourably spoken of by anyone." "I cannot pretend to be sorry," said Wickham, after a short interruption, "that he or that any man
should not be estimated beyond their deserts; but with him I believe it does not often happen. The
world is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by his high and imposing manners,
and sees him only as he chooses to be seen." "I should take him, even on my slight acquaintance, to be an ill-tempered man." Wickham only shook
his head. "I wonder," said he, at the next opportunity of speaking, "whether he is likely to be in this country
much longer." "I do not at all know; but I heard nothing of his going away when I was at Netherfield. I hope your
plans in favour of the --shire will not be affected by his being in the neighbourhood."