And the worse your quandary, the more I would stick by
you;--that is Jerry Sullivan. And if it was a gallows itself you were
speculating in, I would assist you all the same. One can find friends
enough when one is in the right, but give me the fellow that would
fight for me right or wrong.' I shook his honest hand with warmth, and then asked him if he had
performed my commissions. 'Your ladyship shall hear,' said he. 'As soon as I got your letter, I
went with it in my hand, and shewed it at fifty different
shops;--clothiers, and glaziers, and upholsterers, and feather-makers,
and trumpet-makers; but neither old tapestry, nor old painted glass,
nor old flags stained with old blood, nor old lutes, nor old any thing
that you wanted, could I get; and what I could get, I must pay for; and
so what I must pay for, I would not get; and the reason why, I had no
money; and moreover, as sure as ever I shewed them your letter, so sure
they laughed at it.' 'Laughed at it!' cried I. 'All but one,' said Jerry. 'And he?' cried I. 'Was going to knock me down,' answered Jerry. 'So, as I did not wish to
come without bringing something or other to you, and as you commanded
me to get everything old; egad, I have brought three whole pieces of
damaged black cloth out of our own shop, that I thought might answer
for the hangings and curtains; and I bought a parcel of old funeral
feathers and an old pall, from an undertaker; and I bought an old harp
with five strings, that will do any thing but play; and I stole our own
parlour bell; and I borrowed a horn from the guard of a mail-coach,
which I hope will do for a trumpet; and now here they are all in the
barouche, and my bed and trunk; and a box of Mr. Higginson's.' 'But the barouche?' said I; 'how did you get that?' 'By not shewing your letter,' answered Jerry; 'and besides, the
coach-maker knew me; and I told him it was for my Lady De Willoughby,
as beautiful as an angel--but he did not mind that--and as rich as a
Jew;--but he minded that; and so he gave me the barouche, and a
shake-hands into the bargain.' 'Well, my friend,' said I, 'you did your best; so as soon as I can
raise a sufficient sum, I will furnish my castle in a style of gothic
grandeur, which your modern painters and glaziers have no notion of. Meantime, if you and Higginson will pull down those stones that choak
the gateway, we will enter the building, and see what can be done with
our present materials.' They commenced operations with such alacrity, that they soon cleared
away the rubbish, and in we went. Not a sign of a roof on the whole
edifice: the venerable verdure of damp stained the walls, nettles and
thistles clothed the ground, and three of the turrets, inaccessible to
human feet, were to be come at only by an owl or an angel. However, on
examining the fourth, or eastern turret, I found it in somewhat better
condition than the rest. A half-decayed ladder, leaning against an
aperture in the ceiling above, tempted me to mount, and I got into a
room of about eight feet square (the breadth of the turret), overrun
with moss and groundsel, and having a small window in one of its sides. From the floor, another ladder reached to another aperture in the
ceiling above; and on ascending it, I found myself at the top of the
tower, round which ran a broken parapet. This tower, therefore, I
determined to fit up and inhabit; and to leave the other three in a
state of classical dilapidation, as receptacles for strange noises,
horrid sights, and nocturnal Condottieri. I then descended, and made the minstrel and warden (for they have
consented to undertake these offices) draw the barouche within the
gateway, and convey the luggage up to the room that I meant for my
residence. The next matter that we set about was hanging the chamber with the
black cloth; and this we contrived to do by means of wooden pegs, which
the warden cut with his knife, and drove, with a stone, through the
drapery, into the crevices of the walls. We found two of the three
pieces of black cloth sufficient to cover the sides of the room; and
when the hangings were all arranged, I gazed on their sombrous and
antique effect with the most heartfelt transport. I then named it the
BLACK CHAMBER, and gave orders that it should always be called so. Our next object was to contrive a bed for me. Jerry, therefore,
procured some branches of trees, and after much labour, and with no
small ingenuity, constructed a bedstead, as crazy as any that ever
creaked under a heroine. We then hung it round with curtains of black
cloth; and Jerry's own bed being placed upon it, we spread the black
pall over that. Never was there a more funereal piece of furniture; and
I saw, with pride, that it rivalled the famous bed in the Mysteries of
Udolpho. The minstrel all this time appeared stupified with astonishment, but
worked like a horse, puffing and panting, and doing every thing that he
was desired, without uttering a word. Dinner now became our consideration, and I have just dispatched the
warden (like Peter, in the Romance of the Forest) to procure
provisions. Not a farthing has he to purchase any, since even the
half-crown which Susan gave me is already exhausted. But the light that enters at my window begins to grow grey, and an
appropriate gloom thickens through the chamber. The minstrel stands in
a corner, muttering poetry; while I write with his pen and ink on a
stool that the warden made for me. My knees are my desk. Adieu. Just at the close of evening, Jerry came running towards the castle
with a milk-pail on his head. 'See,' cried he, putting it down, 'how nicely I have choused a little
milk-maid! There was she, tripping along as tight as her garter. 'Fly
for your life,' cries I, striding up to her: 'there is the big bull at
my heels that has just killed two children, two sucking pigs, two----
Here! here! let me hold your pail for you!' and I whips it off her
head. So, what does she do, but she runs off without it one way; and
what does I do, but I runs off with it another way. And besides this, I
have got my hat filled with young potatoes, and my pockets stuffed with
ears of wheat; and if we can't eat a hearty dinner off these dainties,
why that our next may be fried fleas and toasted leather!' Though I was angry at the means used by Jerry to get the provisions,
yet, as dinner just then had more charms for me than moral sentiment,
instead of instructing him in the lofty doctrines of the social
compact, I bade him pound the grains of wheat between two flat stones. In the mean time, I sent the minstrel to the cottage for a light and
some fuel; and on his return, made him stop up the window with grass
and fern. He then kindled a fire of wood in the centre of the Black
Chamber; for, as the floor was of stone, it ran no risk of being
burned. This done, I mixed some milk with the bruised wheat, kneaded a
cake, and laid it on the red embers, while Jerry took charge of
roasting the potatoes. As soon as our romantic repast was ready, I drew my stool to the fire:
my household sat on large stones, and we made a tolerable meal, they on
the potatoes, and I on the cake, which hunger had really rendered
palatable. The warden lifted the pail to my lips, and I took a draught of the
rural nectar; while the minstrel remarked, that Nestor himself had not
a larger goblet. I now paid the poor cottagers a visit, and carried the fragments of our
dinner to them. On my return, we resumed our seats, and hung over the decayed embers,
that cast a gloomy glare upon the bed and the drapery; while now and
then, a flash from the ashes, as they sank, shot a reddened light on
the paleness of the minstrel, and brightened the broad features of the
warden. The wind had risen: there was a good deal of excellent howling
round the turret: we sat silent, and looking for likenesses in the
fire. 'Come, warden,' cried I, 'repair these embers with a fresh splinter,
and let me hear the memoirs of your life.' The warden consented, the fire was replenished, and he thus began:

'Once upon a time when pigs were swine----'

'I will trouble you for a more respectable beginning,' said I; 'some
striking, genteel little picture, to bespeak attention,--such as, "All
was dark;" or, "It was on a gloomy night in the month of November."' 'That would be the devil's own lie,' cried Jerry, 'because I was born
in January; and by the same token, I was one of the youngest children
that ever was born, for I saw light five months after my mother's
marriage. Well, being born, up I grew, and the first word I said was
mammy; and my hair was quite yellow at first, though 'tis so brown now;
and I promised to be handsome, but the symptom soon left me; and I
remember I was as proud as Lucifer when I got trowsers; and----'

'Why now, Jerry, what sort of trash is this?' said I. 'Fie; a warden
like you! I hoped to have heard something of interest and adventure
from you; that your family was respectable, though poor----'

'Respectable!' cried Jerry. 'Why, I am of the O'Sullivans, who were
kings of Ireland, and that is the very reason I have not Mister to my
name, seeing as how I am of the blood royal. Oh, if 'tis the wonderful
your ladyship wants, by the powers, I am at home thereabouts. Well, I
was iddicated in great tenderness and ingenuity, and when I came of
age, I went and seized on O'Sullivan Castle, and fortified it, and got
a crown and sceptre, and reigned in great peace many years. But as the
devil would have it----'

'Jerry,' said I, 'I must insist on hearing no more of these monstrous
untruths.' 'Untruths!' cried he. 'Why you might as well give me the lie at once. O
murder! to think I would tell a falsehood about the matter!' 'Sir,' said I, ''tis a falsehood on the very face of it.' ''Pon my conscience then,' cried he, ''tis as like your own story as
one pea is like another. And sure I did not contradict you (whatever I
might think, and I have my thoughts too, I can tell you,) when you
talked so glib of your great estates; though, to be sure, your ladyship
is as poor as a rat. Howsomever, since you will have it so, 'tis all a
falsehood, sure enough; but now you shall hear the real story; though,
for that matter, any body can tell truth, and no thanks to them. 'Well, then, my father was nothing more than a common labourer, and
just poor enough to be honest, but not poor enough to be a rogue. Poverty is no great disgrace, provided one comes honestly by it; for
one may get poor as well as rich by knavery. So, being poor, father
used to make me earn odd pennies, when I was a boy; and at last I got
so smart, that he resolved on sending me to sell chickens at the next
town. But as I could only speak Irish at that time, by reason we lived
up the mountains, he sat down and taught me a little English, in case
any gentlefolks should ask me about my chickens. Now, Jerry, says he,
in Irish, if any gentleman speaks to you, of course it will be to know
the price of your chickens; so you are to say, _three shillings, Sir_. Then to be sure he will be for lowering the price, so you are to say
stoutly, _No less, Sir_; and if he shakes his head, or looks angry,
'tis a sign he won't buy unless you bate a little, so you are to say,
_I believe I must take two, Sir_. 'Well, I got my lesson pat, and off I set, with my hair cut and my face
washed, and thinking it the greatest day of my life; and I had not
walked a hundred yards from the house, when I met a gentleman. 'Pray how far is it to the next village?' says he. 'Three shillings, Sir,' says I. 'You are a saucy fellow,' says he. 'No less, Sir,' says I. 'I will give you a box in the face,' says he. 'I believe I must take two, Sir,' says I. 'But, instead of two, egad, I got six, and as many kicks as would match
'em; and home I ran howling.--Well, that was very well, so when I told
father that I was beaten for nothing:

'I warrant you were not,' says he; 'and if I had done so by my poor
father, he would have broken every bone in my skin,' says he. 'But he
was a better father than I am,' says he. 'How dare you say that your father was better than my father,' says I;
and upon this, father takes me by the ear, and lugs me out of the
house. Just as we got outside, the same gentleman was passing by; and
he stopped, and began to complain of me to my father; and then the
whole matter came out, and both of them laughed very heartily. 'Well, what do you think? 'Pon my veracity, the gentleman took me home
with him to clean the knives and boots. And then he sent me to school,
where I learned English; and then I began to tend at table, and at last
became a regular servant in the family. 'Well, here I lived several years, and might have lived till now, but
that one night, when mistress had company, while bringing in the tray
of cake and wine, down I came, and broke all the glasses. 'By this and that,' says mistress; (only to be sure, mistress did'nt
swear) 'you are quite drunk,' says she. 'Never tasted a drop all day,' says I; and it was true for me, 'cause I
did not begin till evening. 'Who taught you to tell falsehoods?' says she. 'Troth, you did,' says I; 'for you taught me to tell visitors you were
not at home, when all the time you are peeping down the bannisters. Fine fashions, indeed! Nobody is ever at home now-a-days, but a snail,'
says I. And I would have said more too, but that master kicked me out
of the house. 'Well, that was very well; and now my misfortunes were all before me,
like a wheelbarrow. 'This happened in the year of the Rebellion; so, being out of service,
I lived at alehouses; and there it was that I met gentlemen with rusty
superfine on their backs, and with the longest words in the world. They
soon persuaded me that old Ireland was going to ruin; I forget how now,
but I know I had the whole story pat at that time; and the end of it
was, that I became an United Irishman. 'Howsomever, though I would have died for my country, it would be
carrying the joke too far to starve for her, and I had now spent all my
wages. So, at last, back I went to my old master, and fell on my knees,
and begged his pardon for my bad conduct when I lived with him, and
prayed of him to take me once more. Well, he did; and it was only two
nights after that we heard a great noise outside, and master comes
running into the kitchen. 'Jerry,' says he, 'here are the rebels breaking into the house; and as
I know you are a faithful fellow, take this sword and pistol, and stand
by me.' 'No, but I will stand before you,' says I. So we mustered our men, five
in all, and posted ourselves on the head of the stairs; when in burst
the rebels into the hall, and we began a parley. 'Why then, is that
Barney Delany?' says I to their captain. 'Why then, is that Jerry Sullivan?' says he to me. 'You are one of us,'
says he, 'so now turn round and shoot your master,' says he. 'I will cut off both my hands first,' says I. 'Take that then,' says he; and he fires a shot, and I another, and to
it we kept, till we beat them all off. 'Well, in a few months afterwards, this same Barney being made
prisoner, I was bound over as witness against him. So some of the
gentlemen with the long words came to me, and told me how wrong I had
acted in fighting for my master, instead of for my country, and that I
must make amends by giving evidence in Barney's favour. 'Well, they puzzled me so, that from then till now I never could make
out whether I was right or wrong in standing by master. But somehow, I
think I was right; for though patriotism (as the gentlemen call it) is
a fine thing, yet, after all, there is nothing like gratitude. Why, if
the devil himself did me a kind office, I believe I would make shift to
do him another, and not act like the clergy, who spend their whole
lives in snubbing at him, and calling him all manner of names, though
they know, that, but for him, there would not be a clergyman or a fat
living in the kingdom. 'Howsomever, I was persuaded to do the genteel thing by Barney Delany;
so, when the day for the trial came, I drank myself pretty
unintelligible; and I swore point blank, before judge and jury, that I
did not know Barney good or bad, and that all I knew of him was good;
and I bothered the lawyers, and they turned me from the table, and
threatened to indite me for perjury. But it was the people that did
praise me, and call it iligant swearing, mighty pretty evidence; and I
was the great man of the day; and they took me to the fair that was
hard by, where we tippled a little more, and then we sallied forth ripe
for fun. 'Well, as we were running through the fair, what should I see but a
man's bald head sticking out of a hole in one of the tents--to cool, I
suppose,--so I just lifted up my cudgel, and just laid it down again;
when, in a moment, out came a whole set of fellows from the tent, and
the man asks which of us had broken his head. 'It was myself,' says I, 'but curse me if I could help it, that skull
of your's looked so inviting. 'Accordingly both parties began a battle, and then others, who had
nothing better to do, came and joined; they did not know why, but no
matter for that. Any one may fight when there is an occasion; but the
beauty of it is, to fight when there is no occasion at all. 'Howsomever, in the midst of it up came the military to spoil sport as
usual; and they dispersed us, and made some of us prisoners, I among
the rest, and we were put into Bridewell. Well, that was very well. So
at night we contrived to break it open, beat the keepers, and make our
escape. Then what to do with myself was the question. It would go hard
with me if I were caught again; so I skulked about the country several
days, till happening to meet some lads going beyond seas to reap the
English harvest, they persuaded me to buy a reaping-hook, and go with
them. 'But to be sure, to be sure, such a hurricane as we had at sea, and
such tumbling and tossing; and then we were driven to the world's end,
or the Land's End, or some end; but I know I thought I was come to my
own end. In short, such wonderful adventures never were known.' 'What adventures, my friend?' cried I. 'I love to hear wonderful
adventures.' 'Why,' said he, 'we had an adventure every moment, for every moment we
were near going to the bottom.' 'And was that all?' cried I. 'Then,' said he, 'there was such pulling of ropes, and reefing and
rigging; and we went over so many seas and channels; the Irish Channel,
and the British Channel, and the Bristol Channel, and the Baltic Sea,
and the Atlantic Sea, and---- Oh dear, as good as forty more.' 'Forty more!' cried I. 'And pray what were their names?' 'Bad luck to me if I can remember,' said he. 'Probably you were in the Red Sea,' said I. 'To be sure I was.' 'And in the Black Sea?' 'No doubt of it.' 'And in the White Sea, and the Pacific Ocean?' 'In every mother's soul of them.' 'And pray what kind of seas are they?' asked I. 'Why,' said he, 'the Red Sea is as red as blood, and the Black Sea is
as black as ink, and the White Sea is the colour of new milk, or nearer
butter-milk; and the Pacifi-ifi--What's that word?' 'Pacific,' said I. 'And what is the meaning of Pacific?' said he. 'It means peaceful or calm,' answered I. 'Gad, I thought so,' said he, 'for the devil a wave that same ocean had
on it high or low. 'Pon my conscience, it was as smooth as the palm of
my hand.' 'Take care, Jerry,' said I, laughing; 'I am afraid----'

'Why then,' cried he, 'that I may never----'

'Hush!' said I. 'No swearing.' 'By dad,' cried he, 'you had better tell my story yourself; for you
seem resolved to have it all your own way. May be you won't believe me
neither, when I tell you that I landed?' 'As you are not at sea now,' said I, 'I will believe you.' 'Well then,' said he, 'I suppose you will believe that I made a little
money by reaping, and then trudged to London to try my fortune.' 'I make no doubt of the fact,' said I. 'But pray how did you contrive
to subsist in London at first?' 'By spitting through my teeth,' said Jerry. 'Take care,' cried I. 'This I suspect is another----'

'If you mean lie,' said he, 'I have caught you at last; for 'tis as
true as true can be, and I will tell you all about it. You must know
that 'tis now the fashion for gentlemen to be their own coachmen; and
not only to drive like coachmen, but to talk, walk, dress, drink,
swear, and even spit like coachmen. Well, two days after my arrival in
London, as I was standing in the street, and looking about, I happened
to spit through my teeth, to the envy and admiration of a gentleman
that was just driving his own carriage by me. For he stopped, and
called me to him, and swore I should get half-a-crown if I would teach
him to _pickle a wig_,--that was the word. So when he gave me plain
English for it, I closed with him, and went to his house, and taught
him to spit so well, that my fame spread through the town, and all the
fashionable bloods came to me for instruction; till at last I had a
good mind to set up a Spitting Academy. 'Well, I had now spit myself into such affluence, that I refused a
coachman's seat with forty pounds a year (for, as I said, even a curate
had more than that); and may be, instead of a seat on the box, I might
at last have risen to a seat in the Parliament (for many a man has got
there by dirtier tricks than mine), but that my profession, which was
of a nature to dry up my mouth, forced me to frequent porterhouses;
where, as the devil would have it, I met other gentlemen, such as I had
met before, and with just the same set of long words. 'In a short time, all of us agreed that our country was ruined, and
that something must be done. So we made ourselves into a club, for the
purpose of writing ballads about the war, and the taxes, and a thousand
lashes that a soldier got. And we used to set ten or twelve
ballad-singers round a table in our club-room, each with her pint of
beer; and one of our club would teach them the tune with a little kit,
while I was in a cock-loft overhead composing the words. And they
reckoned me the best poet of them all; and they told me that my
writings would descend to posterity; and sometimes the thoughts came so
quick on me, that I was obliged to chalk them down on the back of the
bellows. But whenever I wanted an idea, I read the Weekly Register; and
then between the Register and the liquor, I got worked up to such a
pitch of poetry, that my blood used to run cold in the morning, at the
thoughts of what I would have done at night. 'Well, one evening, the ballad-singers were round the table, sipping
and singing to the little kit, and I had just popt down my head through
the trap-door of the cock-loft, to ask the chairman the rhime for
_Reform_:

'Confound you,' says he, 'didn't I tell you twenty times 'tis _a
storm_;' when in bursts the door, and a parcel of peace-officers seize
him, and the whole set, for holding seditious meetings, and publishing
inflammatory songs. Think of that! when I protest to you our only
object was, by causing disunion, and convincing our enemies that we
could not carry on the war, to procure a speedy and honorable peace. 'Howsomever, I got out of the scrape by being concealed in the
cock-loft; and I remember well it was on that very night I first saw my
wife.' 'Ah,' said I, 'give me the particulars of that event, the first meeting
of lovers is always so interesting!' 'Why,' said he, 'going home sorrowful enough after the ruin of our
club, I resolved to drown care in a noggin; and accordingly turned into
a gin-shop, where I found three fruit-women from Covent Garden, bound
on the same errand.' 'What dram shall we drink?' says they. 'Brandy,' says one. 'Gin,' says another. 'Anniseed-water,' says another. And so they fell to and drank. 'I am happy that I ever came to this City of Lunnun; for my fortune is
made,' says Brandy. 'If my father had lived, I would be brought up to good iddication,'
says Gin. 'If my mother had lived, I would be brought up at a boarding-school,'
says Anniseed-water. 'Why, curse you,' says Gin, 'what was your mother but an old
apple-woman?' 'And curse you,' says Anniseed-water, 'what was your father but a
gallows-bird of a bum-bailiff?' 'And then they fell a fighting and scratching; and Anniseed-water (the
present Mrs. Jerry Sullivan) was getting well cuffed, when I came to
her assistance. So that was our first meeting.' 'You may boast of it,' said I. 'Now then for your courtship.' 'You shall hear,' said he. 'She was so much obliged to me, that she
asked me home to tea, and I went. I found her a buxom widow, and at
that time she was as fine a doorful, as tight a wench over a
washing-tub, as you would wish to see. And there was her daughter, and
a great deal of good company;--the tailor's wife, and the barber's
wife, and the pawnbroker's wife; and none so grand as they. And they
told as many lies over the first dish of tea as a parcel of porters
would over twenty barrels of strong beer. And a young valet, who I
could see was courting the widow, swore that it was as good to be out
of the world as out of the fashion, and then he whispered to her that
she looked killing genteel. But I only pinched her elbow, and I thought
she liked that better.' 'It was very vulgar, however,' observed I. 'The first process is to
kiss the hand.' 'Ogh!' cried Jerry, 'that is a slobbering trick, to be mumbling
knuckles just as a pup niggles at a bone. I am the man to take at once,
and fluster a woman, and reckon her ribs for her. No creeping up, and
up, and up; and then down, and down, and down, for me--Why, as I hope
to be saved, I gave that same widow a thundering kiss on three days
acquaintance.' 'Poor thing!' exclaimed I. 'Well, and what did she say?' 'Say? why she said, "Be quiet now, though I know you can't." So, of
course, I kissed her still more; while she changed colour in a minute
as often as a blackberry in a month. "Ha done, do;" says she, "or I
will call out, only there is nobody at home;"--when, at the moment, in
pops the valet, and catches us lip to lip. 'Now he was a conceited sort of a chap, who used to set himself off
with great airs, shew his white hands--that, I verily believe, he
washed every day of his life;--curse and swear just like a gentleman,
keep a tooth-brush, and make both his heels meet when he bowed. 'Well, I had nothing upon earth to oppose to all this but a bit of a
quarrel;--that was _my_ strong point;--and sure enough, I gave him
such a beating for catching us, that the widow thought me main stout,
and married me in a week. 'With her money I set up shop; and I did not much mind her being ten
years older than myself, since she was ten times richer. I only copied
my own father there; for he once happened to be divided between two
girls, one of them with a single cow for her portion, and the other
with two cows; so he consulted his landlord which of them he should
marry, and his landlord bade him by all means marry the girl with the
two cows; "for," says he, "there is not a cow difference between any
two women." 'So now that is my history.' 'If I am to collect from it,' said I, 'the character of your countrymen
in your own class of life, I must conclude that they are frank,
generous, and noble; but neglected in their morals and education, and
oppressed by their superiors.' 'Ay, there is the matter,' said Jerry. 'By way of keeping us quiet they
keep us down. Now that is just the way to prevent our keeping quiet,
for it is natural that men who are kept down should try to rise up.' 'And why do they keep you down?' asked I. 'Because,' answered he, 'we are of one religion, and they of another;
and they say our religion is so bad, that it would make us keep them
down, if they did not keep us down.' 'Then,' said I, 'you ought to be greatly obliged to them for keeping
you down; because that is doing what they condemn, lest you should do
it. Now it is the highest possible test of good-nature, to become
criminal ourselves, in order to keep our friends virtuous.' 'A wise legislator,' said the minstrel, 'ought not to forget the
eighteenth century, in his retrospection to the sixteenth, nor in his
anticipation of the twentieth.' 'I know nothing of anticskippation,' said Jerry, 'but I will tell you a
bit of a story. When I first went to London, and was poor, I used to
dine in a cellar, with other Irishmen, where the knives and forks were
chained to the table, for fear we should steal them; though in my mind,
the surest way to make a rogue, is to let him know that you think him
one. Well, when we began to grow rich, we got a spirit, and broke the
chains, and paid for them; and broke them again, and paid for them
again, and so on. At last the master began to see that the same spirit
which made us break the chains would prevent us from stealing the
knives and forks; so he took off the chains, and then his table was no
disgrace, and we brought more company to it, and he made his fortune.' The minstrel and warden now retired to their allotted place of
rest--the barouche. Each was to keep watch in turn at the castle gate,
and to toll the hour on the bell. The wind still moaned round the turret; and now the fire, ghastly in
decay, but just tinged the projecting folds of the hangings. Dismal
looked the bed as I drew near; and while I lifted the velvet pall to
creep beneath, I shivered, and almost expected to behold the apparition
of a human face, starting from under it. When I lay down, I kept my
eyes quite closed, for fear of seeing something; nor was it till the
third bell had tolled that I fell asleep. Adieu. I rose early this morning, and summoned Jerry to the Black Chamber, for
my head was teeming with the most important projects. 'My friend,' said I, 'though Lady Gwyn has already acknowledged me as
the rightful owner, not alone of this castle, but of the house that she
herself inhabits, yet I cannot apply to my tenantry for rent, or even
raise a sum of money sufficient to purchase my breakfast, till she
surrenders up those deeds and parchments which would give me a legal
claim. Now as I fear I shall find it a hard matter to make her do so, I
have resolved on proposing a compromise, and on waving all title to the
house and demesne that she now occupies, provided she will consent to
put me in formal possession of this castle, and all the land
appertaining to it. 'I have therefore determined to pay her ladyship a visit for this
purpose; but as I was driven from her house with disgrace once before,
I mean to return thither now with such a train of domestics as shall
put it out of her power to offer me insult, or detain my person. 'Now, Warden, if I could but hire a set of servants, who would consent
to live in my castle and defend it, I would, on my part, give each of
them a lot of ground, and consider them as feudal vassals; and they
could accompany me to Lady Gwyn's. I have therefore to request that you
will instantly set off, and endeavour to procure them for me, as no
time is to be lost.' 'Begging your ladyship's pardon,' said Jerry, 'you are sending me of a
fool's errand: for who but madmen would hire as servants in such a
castle as this? Would you have them build swallows' nests for
themselves under the windows, and live on suction like the snipes?' 'Mr. Sullivan,' said I, 'cast no sarcasms, but go and do as you are
desired.' 'Well, from this moment out, I say nothing,' cried Jerry. 'Nothing at
all, at all: but like the old woman's crow, I will be the devil for
thinking.' 'Another sarcasm?' said I. 'May be 'tis better for me to go at once, before I get into a scrape,'
cried he. 'So now, your ladyship, how many of these same feudal
vessels, as you call 'em; these vessels that are to have no drink----'

'Jerry!----'

'Well, well, give me my directions quick, and there is my hand on my
mouth till I am out of the castle.' 'You may hire about fifteen or twenty of them,' said I. 'But remember,
I will have no dapper footmen, with smirking faces. I must have a clan
such as we read of in the middle ages; fellows with Norman noses, and
all sorts of frowns--men of iron, fit to live in comets.' 'Better live in comets, than----' But he clapped his hand on his mouth
in time, and then ran down the steps. During his absence, I paid a visit to the poor cottagers, and after
having sat with them awhile, and promised them assistance before
evening, I returned towards the castle. On approaching it, I perceived, to my great surprise, Jerry also
advancing at the head of about twenty strange looking men, all armed
with bludgeons. 'Here are the boys!' cried Jerry. 'Here are the true sort. Few Norman
noses, I believe, but all honest hearts; and though they never lived in
comets, egad they lived in Ireland, and that is worth fifty comets. Look at 'em. Hold up your heads, you dogs. They came over only to save
the hay, and reap the harvest; but when they found their countryman and
a woman in distress, they volunteered their services; and now here they
are, ready for that same Lady Gwyn, or any lady in the land.' 'Welcome, my friends,' said I; 'and be well assured that I will reward
you munificently.' 'Three cheers!' cried Jerry. They gave three cheers. My heart dilated with exultation at beholding this assemblage of feudal
vassals at my command; and in a moment I had arranged my project. As it
was expedient to inspire Lady Gwyn with respect and awe, I resolved on
making the best possible display of my power, taste, and feudal
magnificence. Of course, I meant to visit her in my barouche; and since
I had no horses for it, my plan was to make some of my domestics draw
it in a triumphal manner, while the rest should follow in procession. To let them escort me in their own ragged and unclassical dresses was
impossible; but I think you will give me credit for my ingenuity in
supplying them with others. I determined to divide the black cloth into
large pieces, which they should wear as cloaks, and to stick a black
feather in each of their hats, a costume that would give them the
pleasing appearance of Udolphian Condottieri. We now set about making the cloaks, but as we had not sufficient cloth
remaining, we were obliged to strip the Black Chamber of part of its
hangings. I had appropriated a large portion of the cloth to make flowing drapery
for Higginson, whom I meant to take in the barouche with me; but as
minstrels never wear hats, and have always bald heads, I was at a loss
how to manage about his, since he still cherished and curled his locks,
with a spruceness most unmeet for minstrelsy. At last, after repeated
assurances how much better he would look, I persuaded him to let Jerry
shave the crown of his head. Accordingly, Jerry performed the tonsoral operation in the Black
Chamber, while I remained below, fixing the feathers and cloaks on my
domestics. These poor fellows, who, I suppose, had never read even an
alphabet, much less a romance, in their lives, stood gaping at each
other in silent wonder, though some of them attempted unmeaning, and, I
must say, troublesome jests on what was going forward. When drest, a more formidable and picturesque group than they presented
you never beheld, and while I was still admiring them, forth from the
turret issued the minstrel. But such a spectacle! Half his huge head
was shorn of its hair: his black garments, knotted just under his bare
neck, gave a new ghastliness to his face, while his eyes, as he
rivetted them upon me, were starting out of their sockets with anxiety
and agitation. He looked preternatural. To contain was impossible: I
began laughing, and the Irishman uttered a shout of derision. The poor man looked round him, turned as pale as ashes; his face began
to work and quiver, and at last he burst into a piteous fit of crying. Then suddenly lifting a prodigious stone, he whirled it at Jerry's
head, who ducked for his life, and saved it. 'And what did I do to you?' cried Jerry. 'You shaved my head because you knew it would spoil my looks,' cried
the minstrel. 'And you are endeavouring to outdo me with my mistress,
and she likes you better than me;--but it cannot be holpen. Oh, dear,
dear!'