Those writers who have imagined a reign of peace and happiness on earth,
have generally described a rural country, where each small township was directed by the elders and
wise men. This was the key of my design. Each village, however small, usually contains a leader, one
among themselves whom they venerate, whose advice they seek in difficulty, and whose good
opinion they chiefly value. I was immediately drawn to make this observation by occurrences that
presented themselves to my personal experience. In the village of Little Marlow an old woman ruled the community. She had lived for some years in an
alms-house, and on fine Sundays her threshold was constantly beset by a crowd, seeking her advice
and listening to her admonitions. She had been a soldier's wife, and had seen the world; infirmity,
induced by fevers caught in unwholesome quarters, had come on her before its time, and she seldom
moved from her little cot. The plague entered the village; and, while fright and grief deprived the
inhabitants of the little wisdom they possessed, old Martha stepped forward and said- "Before now
I have been in a town where there was the plague. "-"And you escaped? "-"No, but I recovered. "-
After this Martha was seated more firmly than ever on the regal seat, elevated by reverence and
love. She entered the cottages of the sick; she relieved their wants with her own hand; she betrayed
no fear, and inspired all who saw her with some portion of her own native courage. She attended the
markets-she insisted upon being supplied with food for those who were too poor to purchase it. She shewed them how the well-being of each included the prosperity of all. She would not permit
the gardens to be neglected, nor the very flowers in the cottage lattices to droop from want of care. Hope, she said, was better than a doctor's prescription, and every thing that could sustain and
enliven the spirits, of more worth than drugs and mixtures. It was the sight of Little Marlow, and my conversations with Martha, that led me to the plan I
formed. I had before visited the manor houses and gentlemen's seats, and often found the
inhabitants actuated by the purest benevolence, ready to lend their utmost aid for the welfare of
their tenants. But this was not enough. The intimate sympathy generated by similar hopes and fears,
similar experience and pursuits, was wanting here. The poor perceived that the rich possessed other
means of preservation than those which could be partaken of by themselves, seclusion, and, as far as
circumstances permitted, freedom from care. They could not place reliance on them, but turned with
tenfold dependence to the succour and advice of their equals. I resolved therefore to go from village
to village, seeking out the rustic archon of the place, and by systematizing their exertions, and
enlightening their views, encrease both their power and their use among their fellow-cottagers. Many changes also now occurred in these spontaneous regal elections: depositions and abdications
were frequent, while, in the place of the old and prudent, the ardent youth would step forward,
eager for action, regardless of danger. Often too, the voice to which all listened was suddenly
silenced, the helping hand cold, the sympathetic eye closed, and the villagers feared still more the
death that had selected a choice victim, shivering in dust the heart that had beat for them, reducing
to incommunicable annihilation the mind for ever occupied with projects for their welfare. Whoever labours for man must often find ingratitude, watered by vice and folly, spring from the
grain which he has sown. Death, which had in our younger days walked the earth like "a thief that
comes in the night," now, rising from his subterranean vault, girt with power, with dark banner
floating, came a conqueror. Many saw, seated above his vice-regal throne, a supreme Providence,
who directed his shafts, and guided his progress, and they bowed their heads in resignation, or at
least in obedience. Others perceived only a passing casualty; they endeavoured to exchange terror
for heedlessness, and plunged into licentiousness, to avoid the agonizing throes of worst
apprehension. Thus, while the wise, the good, and the prudent were occupied by the labours of
benevolence, the truce of winter produced other effects among the young, the thoughtless, and the
vicious. During the colder months there was a general rush to London in search of amusement-the
ties of public opinion were loosened; many were rich, heretofore poor-many had lost father and
mother, the guardians of their morals, their mentors and restraints. It would have been useless to
have opposed these impulses by barriers, which would only have driven those actuated by them to
more pernicious indulgencies. The theatres were open and thronged; dance and midnight festival
were frequented-in many of these decorum was violated, and the evils, which hitherto adhered to
an advanced state of civilization, were doubled. The student left his books, the artist his study: the
occupations of life were gone, but the amusements remained; enjoyment might be protracted to the
verge of the grave. All factitious colouring disappeared-death rose like night, and, protected by its
murky shadows the blush of modesty, the reserve of pride, the decorum of prudery were frequently
thrown aside as useless veils. This was not universal. Among better natures, anguish and dread, the
fear of eternal separation, and the awful wonder produced by unprecedented calamity, drew closer
the ties of kindred and friendship. Philosophers opposed their principles, as barriers to the
inundation of profligacy or despair, and the only ramparts to protect the invaded territory of human
life; the religious, hoping now for their reward, clung fast to their creeds, as the rafts and planks
which over the tempest-vexed sea of suffering, would bear them in safety to the harbour of the
Unknown Continent. The loving heart, obliged to contract its view, bestowed its overflow of affection
in triple portion on the few that remained. Yet, even among these, the present, as an unalienable
possession, became all of time to which they dared commit the precious freight of their hopes. The experience of immemorial time had taught us formerly to count our enjoyments by years, and
extend our prospect of life through a lengthened period of progression and decay; the long road
threaded a vast labyrinth, and the Valley of the Shadow of Death, in which it terminated, was hid by
intervening objects. But an earthquake had changed the scene-under our very feet the earth
yawned-deep and precipitous the gulph below opened to receive us, while the hours charioted us
towards the chasm. But it was winter now, and months must elapse before we are hurled from our
security. We became ephemera, to whom the interval between the rising and setting sun was as a
long drawn year of common time. We should never see our children ripen into maturity, nor behold
their downy cheeks roughen, their blithe hearts subdued by passion or care; but we had them now-
they lived, and we lived-what more could we desire? With such schooling did my poor Idris try to
hush thronging fears, and in some measure succeeded. It was not as in summer-time, when each
hour might bring the dreaded fate-until summer, we felt sure; and this certainty, short lived as it
must be, yet for awhile satisfied her maternal tenderness. I know not how to express or
communicate the sense of concentrated, intense, though evanescent transport, that imparadized us
in the present hour. Our joys were dearer because we saw their end; they were keener because we
felt, to its fullest extent, their value; they were purer because their essence was sympathy- as a
meteor is brighter than a star, did the felicity of this winter contain in itself the extracted delights of a
long, long life. How lovely is spring! As we looked from Windsor Terrace on the sixteen fertile counties spread
beneath, speckled by happy cottages and wealthier towns, all looked as in former years, heart-
cheering and fair. The land was ploughed, the slender blades of wheat broke through the dark soil,
the fruit trees were covered with buds, the husbandman was abroad in the fields, the milk-maid
tripped home with well-filled pails, the swallows and martins struck the sunny pools with their long,
pointed wings, the new dropped lambs reposed on the young grass, the tender growth of leaves-
  Lifts its sweet head into the air, and feeds
  A silent space with ever sprouting green. Man himself seemed to regenerate, and feel the frost of winter yield to an elastic and warm renewal
of life-reason told us that care and sorrow would grow with the opening year-but how to believe
the ominous voice breathed up with pestiferous vapours from fear's dim cavern, while nature,
laughing and scattering from her green lap flowers, and fruits, and sparkling waters, invited us to join
the gay masque of young life she led upon the scene? Where was the plague? "Here-every where!" one voice of horror and dismay exclaimed, when in
the pleasant days of a sunny May the Destroyer of man brooded again over the earth, forcing the
spirit to leave its organic chrysalis, and to enter upon an untried life. With one mighty sweep of its
potent weapon, all caution, all care, all prudence were levelled low: death sat at the tables of the
great, stretched itself on the cottager's pallet, seized the dastard who fled, quelled the brave man
who resisted: despondency entered every heart, sorrow dimmed every eye. Sights of woe now became familiar to me, and were I to tell all of anguish and pain that I witnessed,
of the despairing moans of age, and the more terrible smiles of infancy in the bosom of horror, my
reader, his limbs quivering and his hair on end, would wonder how I did not, seized with sudden
frenzy, dash myself from some precipice, and so close my eyes for ever on the sad end of the world. But the powers of love, poetry, and creative fancy will dwell even beside the sick of the plague, with
the squalid, and with the dying. A feeling of devotion, of duty, of a high and steady purpose, elevated
me; a strange joy filled my heart. In the midst of saddest grief I seemed to tread air, while the spirit
of good shed round me an ambrosial atmosphere, which blunted the sting of sympathy, and purified
the air of sighs. If my wearied soul flagged in its career, I thought of my loved home, of the casket
that contained my treasures, of the kiss of love and the filial caress, while my eyes were moistened
by purest dew, and my heart was at once softened and refreshed by thrilling tenderness. Maternal affection had not rendered Idris selfish; at the beginning of our calamity she had, with
thoughtless enthusiasm, devoted herself to the care of the sick and helpless. I checked her; and she
submitted to my rule. I told her how the fear of her danger palsied my exertions, how the knowledge
of her safety strung my nerves to endurance. I shewed her the dangers which her children incurred
during her absence; and she at length agreed not to go beyond the inclosure of the forest. Indeed,
within the walls of the Castle we had a colony of the unhappy, deserted by their relatives, and in
themselves helpless, sufficient to occupy her time and attention, while ceaseless anxiety for my
welfare and the health of her children, however she strove to curb or conceal it, absorbed all her
thoughts, and undermined the vital principle. After watching over and providing for their safety, her
second care was to hide from me her anguish and tears. Each night I returned to the Castle, and
found there repose and love awaiting me. Often I waited beside the bed of death till midnight, and
through the obscurity of rainy, cloudy nights rode many miles, sustained by one circumstance only,
the safety and sheltered repose of those I loved. If some scene of tremendous agony shook my frame
and fevered my brow, I would lay my head on the lap of Idris, and the tumultuous pulses subsided
into a temperate flow -her smile could raise me from hopelessness, her embrace bathe my
sorrowing heart in calm peace. Summer advanced, and, crowned with the sun's potent rays, plague
shot her unerring shafts over the earth. The nations beneath their influence bowed their heads, and
died. The corn that sprung up in plenty, lay in autumn rotting on the ground, while the melancholy
wretch who had gone out to gather bread for his children, lay stiff and plague-struck in the furrow. The green woods waved their boughs majestically, while the dying were spread beneath their shade,
answering the solemn melody with inharmonious cries. The painted birds flitted through the shades;
the careless deer reposed unhurt upon the fern-the oxen and the horses strayed from their
unguarded stables, and grazed among the wheat, for death fell on man alone. With summer and mortality grew our fears. My poor love and I looked at each other, and our
babes.-"We will save them, Idris," I said, "I will save them. Years hence we shall recount to them our
fears, then passed away with their occasion. Though they only should remain on the earth, still they
shall live, nor shall their cheeks become pale nor their sweet voices languish." Our eldest in some
degree understood the scenes passing around, and at times, he with serious looks questioned me
concerning the reason of so vast a desolation. But he was only ten years old; and the hilarity of youth
soon chased unreasonable care from his brow. Evelyn, a laughing cherub, a gamesome infant,
without idea of pain or sorrow, would, shaking back his light curls from his eyes, make the halls re-
echo with his merriment, and in a thousand artless ways attract our attention to his play. Clara, our
lovely gentle Clara, was our stay, our solace, our delight. She made it her task to attend the sick,
comfort the sorrowing, assist the aged, and partake the sports and awaken the gaiety of the young. She flitted through the rooms, like a good spirit, dispatched from the celestial kingdom, to illumine
our dark hour with alien splendour. Gratitude and praise marked where her footsteps had been. Yet,
when she stood in unassuming simplicity before us, playing with our children, or with girlish assiduity
performing little kind offices for Idris, one wondered in what fair lineament of her pure loveliness, in
what soft tone of her thrilling voice, so much of heroism, sagacity and active goodness resided. The summer passed tediously, for we trusted that winter would at least check the disease. That it
would vanish altogether was an hope too dear- too heartfelt, to be expressed. When such a
thought was heedlessly uttered, the hearers, with a gush of tears and passionate sobs, bore witness
how deep their fears were, how small their hopes. For my own part, my exertions for the public good
permitted me to observe more closely than most others, the virulence and extensive ravages of our
sightless enemy. A short month has destroyed a village, and where in May the first person sickened,
in June the paths were deformed by unburied corpses-the houses tenantless, no smoke arising from
the chimneys; and the housewife's clock marked only the hour when death had been triumphant. From such scenes I have sometimes saved a deserted infant-sometimes led a young and grieving
mother from the lifeless image of her first born, or drawn the sturdy labourer from childish weeping
over his extinct family. July is gone. August must pass, and by the middle of September we may hope. Each day was eagerly
counted; and the inhabitants of towns, desirous to leap this dangerous interval, plunged into
dissipation, and strove, by riot, and what they wished to imagine to be pleasure, to banish thought
and opiate despair. None but Adrian could have tamed the motley population of London, which, like
a troop of unbitted steeds rushing to their pastures, had thrown aside all minor fears, through the
operation of the fear paramount. Even Adrian was obliged in part to yield, that he might be able, if
not to guide, at least to set bounds to the license of the times. The theatres were kept open; every
place of public resort was frequented; though he endeavoured so to modify them, as might best
quiet the agitation of the spectators, and at the same time prevent a reaction of misery when the
excitement was over. Tragedies deep and dire were the chief favourites. Comedy brought with it too
great a contrast to the inner despair: when such were attempted, it was not unfrequent for a
comedian, in the midst of the laughter occasioned by his disporportioned buffoonery, to find a word
or thought in his part that jarred with his own sense of wretchedness, and burst from mimic
merriment into sobs and tears, while the spectators, seized with irresistible sympathy, wept, and the
pantomimic revelry was changed to a real exhibition of tragic passion. It was not in my nature to derive consolation from such scenes; from theatres, whose buffoon
laughter and discordant mirth awakened distempered sympathy, or where fictitious tears and
wailings mocked the heart-felt grief within; from festival or crowded meeting, where hilarity sprung
from the worst feelings of our nature, or such enthralment of the better ones, as impressed it with
garish and false varnish; from assemblies of mourners in the guise of revellers. Once however I
witnessed a scene of singular interest at one of the theatres, where nature overpowered art, as an
overflowing cataract will tear away the puny manufacture of a mock cascade, which had before been
fed by a small portion of its waters. I had come to London to see Adrian. He was not at the palace; and, though the attendants did not
know whither he had gone, they did not expect him till late at night. It was between six and seven
o'clock, a fine summer afternoon, and I spent my leisure hours in a ramble through the empty streets
of London; now turning to avoid an approaching funeral, now urged by curiosity to observe the state
of a particular spot; my wanderings were instinct with pain, for silence and desertion characterized
every place I visited, and the few beings I met were so pale and woe-begone, so marked with care
and depressed by fear, that weary of encountering only signs of misery, I began to retread my steps
towards home. I was now in Holborn, and passed by a public house filled with uproarious companions, whose songs,
laughter, and shouts were more sorrowful than the pale looks and silence of the mourner. Such an
one was near, hovering round this house. The sorry plight of her dress displayed her poverty, she was
ghastly pale, and continued approaching, first the window and then the door of the house, as if
fearful, yet longing to enter. A sudden burst of song and merriment seemed to sting her to the heart;
she murmured, "Can he have the heart?" and then mustering her courage, she stepped within the
threshold. The landlady met her in the passage; the poor creature asked, "Is my husband here? Can I
see George?" "See him," cried the woman, "yes, if you go to him; last night he was taken with the plague, and we
sent him to the hospital." The unfortunate inquirer staggered against a wall, a faint cry escaped her
-"O! were you cruel enough," she exclaimed, "to send him there?" The landlady meanwhile hurried away; but a more compassionate bar-maid gave her a detailed
account, the sum of which was, that her husband had been taken ill, after a night of riot, and sent by
his boon companions with all expedition to St. Bartholomew's Hospital. I had watched this scene, for
there was a gentleness about the poor woman that interested me; she now tottered away from the
door, walking as well as she could down Holborn Hill; but her strength soon failed her; she leaned
against a wall, and her head sunk on her bosom, while her pallid cheek became still more white. I
went up to her and offered my services. She hardly looked up-"You can do me no good," she
replied; "I must go to the hospital; if I do not die before I get there." There were still a few hackney-coaches accustomed to stand about the streets, more truly from habit
than for use. I put her in one of these, and entered with her that I might secure her entrance into the
hospital. Our way was short, and she said little; except interrupted ejaculations of reproach that he
had left her, exclamations on the unkindness of some of his friends, and hope that she would find
him alive. There was a simple, natural earnestness about her that interested me in her fate,
especially when she assured me that her husband was the best of men,-had been so, till want of
business during these unhappy times had thrown him into bad company. "He could not bear to come
home," she said, "only to see our children die. A man cannot have the patience a mother has, with
her own flesh and blood." We were set down at St. Bartholomew's, and entered the wretched precincts of the house of
disease. The poor creature clung closer to me, as she saw with what heartless haste they bore the
dead from the wards, and took them into a room, whose half-opened door displayed a number of
corpses, horrible to behold by one unaccustomed to such scenes. We were directed to the ward
where her husband had been first taken, and still was, the nurse said, if alive. My companion looked
eagerly from one bed to the other, till at the end of the ward she espied, on a wretched bed, a
squalid, haggard creature, writhing under the torture of disease. She rushed towards him, she
embraced him, blessing God for his preservation. The enthusiasm that inspired her with this strange joy, blinded her to the horrors about her; but they
were intolerably agonizing to me. The ward was filled with an effluvia that caused my heart to heave
with painful qualms. The dead were carried out, and the sick brought in, with like indifference; some
were screaming with pain, others laughing from the influence of more terrible delirium; some were
attended by weeping, despairing relations, others called aloud with thrilling tenderness or reproach
on the friends who had deserted them, while the nurses went from bed to bed, incarnate images of
despair, neglect, and death. I gave gold to my luckless companion; I recommended her to the care of
the attendants; I then hastened away; while the tormentor, the imagination, busied itself in picturing
my own loved ones, stretched on such beds, attended thus. The country afforded no such mass of
horrors; solitary wretches died in the open fields; and I have found a survivor in a vacant village,
contending at once with famine and disease; but the assembly of pestilence, the banqueting hall of
death, was spread only in London. I rambled on, oppressed, distracted by painful emotions-suddenly I found myself before Drury Lane
Theatre. The play was Macbeth-the first actor of the age was there to exert his powers to drug with
irreflection the auditors; such a medicine I yearned for, so I entered. The theatre was tolerably well
filled. Shakspeare, whose popularity was established by the approval of four centuries, had not lost
his influence even at this dread period; but was still "Ut magus," the wizard to rule our hearts and
govern our imaginations. I came in during the interval between the third and fourth act. I looked
round on the audience; the females were mostly of the lower classes, but the men were of all ranks,
come hither to forget awhile the protracted scenes of wretchedness, which awaited them at their
miserable homes. The curtain drew up, and the stage presented the scene of the witches' cave. The
wildness and supernatural machinery of Macbeth, was a pledge that it could contain little directly
connected with our present circumstances. Great pains had been taken in the scenery to give the
semblance of reality to the impossible. The extreme darkness of the stage, whose only light was
received from the fire under the cauldron, joined to a kind of mist that floated about it, rendered the
unearthly shapes of the witches obscure and shadowy. It was not three decrepid old hags that bent
over their pot throwing in the grim ingredients of the magic charm, but forms frightful, unreal, and
fanciful. The entrance of Hecate, and the wild music that followed, took us out of this world. The
cavern shape the stage assumed, the beetling rocks, the glare of the fire, the misty shades that
crossed the scene at times, the music in harmony with all witch-like fancies, permitted the
imagination to revel, without fear of contradiction, or reproof from reason or the heart. The entrance
of Macbeth did not destroy the illusion, for he was actuated by the same feelings that inspired us,
and while the work of magic proceeded we sympathized in his wonder and his daring, and gave
ourselves up with our whole souls to the influence of scenic delusion. I felt the beneficial result of
such excitement, in a renewal of those pleasing flights of fancy to which I had long been a stranger. The effect of this scene of incantation communicated a portion of its power to that which followed. We forgot that Malcolm and Macduff were mere human beings, acted upon by such simple passions
as warmed our own breasts. By slow degrees however we were drawn to the real interest of the
scene. A shudder like the swift passing of an electric shock ran through the house, when Rosse
exclaimed, in answer to "Stands Scotland where it did?" Alas, poor country;
  Almost afraid to know itself! It cannot
  Be called our mother, but our grave: where nothing,
  But who knows nothing, is once seen to smile;
  Where sighs, and groans, and shrieks that rent the air,
  Are made, not marked; where violent sorrow seems
  A modern extasy: the dead man's knell
  Is there scarce asked, for who; and good men's lives
  Expire before the flowers in their caps,
  Dying, or ere they sicken. Each word struck the sense, as our life's passing bell; we feared to look at each other, but bent our
gaze on the stage, as if our eyes could fall innocuous on that alone. The person who played the part
of Rosse, suddenly became aware of the dangerous ground he trod. He was an inferior actor, but
truth now made him excellent; as he went on to announce to Macduff the slaughter of his family, he
was afraid to speak, trembling from apprehension of a burst of grief from the audience, not from his
fellow-mime. Each word was drawn out with difficulty; real anguish painted his features; his eyes
were now lifted in sudden horror, now fixed in dread upon the ground. This shew of terror encreased
ours, we gasped with him, each neck was stretched out, each face changed with the actor's
changes- at length while Macduff, who, attending to his part, was unobservant of the high wrought
sympathy of the house, cried with well acted passion:
  All my pretty ones? Did you say all?-O hell kite! All? What! all my pretty chickens, and their dam,
  At one fell swoop! A pang of tameless grief wrenched every heart, a burst of despair was echoed from every lip.-I had
entered into the universal feeling-I had been absorbed by the terrors of Rosse-I re-echoed the cry
of Macduff, and then rushed out as from an hell of torture, to find calm in the free air and silent
street. Free the air was not, or the street silent. Oh, how I longed then for the dear soothings of maternal
Nature, as my wounded heart was still further stung by the roar of heartless merriment from the
public-house, by the sight of the drunkard reeling home, having lost the memory of what he would
find there in oblivious debauch, and by the more appalling salutations of those melancholy beings to
whom the name of home was a mockery. I ran on at my utmost speed until I found myself I knew not
how, close to Westminster Abbey, and was attracted by the deep and swelling tone of the organ. I
entered with soothing awe the lighted chancel, and listened to the solemn religious chaunt, which
spoke peace and hope to the unhappy. The notes, freighted with man's dearest prayers, re-echoed
through the dim aisles, and the bleeding of the soul's wounds was staunched by heavenly balm. In
spite of the misery I deprecated, and could not understand; in spite of the cold hearths of wide
London, and the corpse-strewn fields of my native land; in spite of all the variety of agonizing
emotions I had that evening experienced, I thought that in reply to our melodious adjurations, the
Creator looked down in compassion and promise of relief; the awful peal of the heaven-winged
music seemed fitting voice wherewith to commune with the Supreme; calm was produced by its
sound, and by the sight of many other human creatures offering up prayers and submission with me. A sentiment approaching happiness followed the total resignation of one's being to the guardianship
of the world's ruler. Alas! with the failing of this solemn strain, the elevated spirit sank again to earth. Suddenly one of the choristers died-he was lifted from his desk, the vaults below were hastily
opened-he was consigned with a few muttered prayers to the darksome cavern, abode of
thousands who had gone before-now wide yawning to receive even all who fulfilled the funeral
rites. In vain I would then have turned from this scene, to darkened aisle or lofty dome, echoing with
melodious praise. In the open air alone I found relief; among nature's beauteous works, her God
reassumed his attribute of benevolence, and again I could trust that he who built up the mountains,
planted the forests, and poured out the rivers, would erect another state for lost humanity, where
we might awaken again to our affections, our happiness, and our faith. Fortunately for me those circumstances were of rare occurrence that obliged me to visit London, and
my duties were confined to the rural district which our lofty castle overlooked; and here labour stood
in the place of pastime, to occupy such of the country people as were sufficiently exempt from
sorrow or disease. My endeavours were directed towards urging them to their usual attention to
their crops, and to the acting as if pestilence did not exist. The mower's scythe was at times heard;
yet the joyless haymakers after they had listlessly turned the grass, forgot to cart it; the shepherd,
when he had sheared his sheep, would let the wool lie to be scattered by the winds, deeming it
useless to provide clothing for another winter. At times however the spirit of life was awakened by
these employments; the sun, the refreshing breeze, the sweet smell of the hay, the rustling leaves
and prattling rivulets brought repose to the agitated bosom, and bestowed a feeling akin to
happiness on the apprehensive. Nor, strange to say, was the time without its pleasures. Young
couples, who had loved long and hopelessly, suddenly found every impediment removed, and wealth
pour in from the death of relatives. The very danger drew them closer. The immediate peril urged
them to seize the immediate opportunity; wildly and passionately they sought to know what delights
existence afforded, before they yielded to death, and
  Snatching their pleasures with rough strife
  Thorough the iron gates of life,
they defied the conquering pestilence to destroy what had been, or to erase even from their death-
bed thoughts the sentiment of happiness which had been theirs. One instance of this kind came immediately under our notice, where a high-born girl had in early
youth given her heart to one of meaner extraction. He was a schoolfellow and friend of her brother's,
and usually spent a part of the holidays at the mansion of the duke her father. They had played
together as children, been the confidants of each other's little secrets, mutual aids and consolers in
difficulty and sorrow. Love had crept in, noiseless, terrorless at first, till each felt their life bound up
in the other, and at the same time knew that they must part. Their extreme youth, and the purity of
their attachment, made them yield with less resistance to the tyranny of circumstances. The father of
the fair Juliet separated them; but not until the young lover had promised to remain absent only till
he had rendered himself worthy of her, and she had vowed to preserve her virgin heart, his treasure,
till he returned to claim and possess it. Plague came, threatening to destroy at once the aim of the ambitious and the hopes of love. Long
the Duke of L--derided the idea that there could be danger while he pursued his plans of cautious
seclusion; and he so far succeeded, that it was not till this second summer, that the destroyer, at one
fell stroke, overthrew his precautions, his security, and his life. Poor Juliet saw one by one, father,
mother, brothers, and sisters, sicken and die. Most of the servants fled on the first appearance of
disease, those who remained were infected mortally; no neighbour or rustic ventured within the
verge of contagion. By a strange fatality Juliet alone escaped, and she to the last waited on her
relatives, and smoothed the pillow of death. The moment at length came, when the last blow was
given to the last of the house: the youthful survivor of her race sat alone among the dead. There was
no living being near to soothe her, or withdraw her from this hideous company. With the declining
heat of a September night, a whirlwind of storm, thunder, and hail, rattled round the house, and with
ghastly harmony sung the dirge of her family. She sat upon the ground absorbed in wordless despair,
when through the gusty wind and bickering rain she thought she heard her name called. Whose
could that familiar voice be? Not one of her relations, for they lay glaring on her with stony eyes. Again her name was syllabled, and she shuddered as she asked herself, am I becoming mad, or am I
dying, that I hear the voices of the departed? A second thought passed, swift as an arrow, into her
brain; she rushed to the window; and a flash of lightning shewed to her the expected vision, her lover
in the shrubbery beneath; joy lent her strength to descend the stairs, to open the door, and then she
fainted in his supporting arms. A thousand times she reproached herself, as with a crime, that she should revive to happiness with
him. The natural clinging of the human mind to life and joy was in its full energy in her young heart;
she gave herself impetuously up to the enchantment: they were married; and in their radiant
features I saw incarnate, for the last time, the spirit of love, of rapturous sympathy, which once had
been the life of the world. I envied them, but felt how impossible it was to imbibe the same feeling, now that years had
multiplied my ties in the world. Above all, the anxious mother, my own beloved and drooping Idris,
claimed my earnest care; I could not reproach the anxiety that never for a moment slept in her heart,
but I exerted myself to distract her attention from too keen an observation of the truth of things, of
the near and nearer approaches of disease, misery, and death, of the wild look of our attendants as
intelligence of another and yet another death reached us; for to the last something new occurred
that seemed to transcend in horror all that had gone before. Wretched beings crawled to die under
our succouring roof; the inhabitants of the Castle decreased daily, while the survivors huddled
together in fear, and, as in a famine-struck boat, the sport of the wild, interminable waves, each
looked in the other's face, to guess on whom the death-lot would next fall. All this I endeavoured to
veil, so that it might least impress my Idris; yet, as I have said, my courage survived even despair: I
might be vanquished, but I would not yield. One day, it was the ninth of September, seemed devoted to every disaster, to every harrowing
incident. Early in the day, I heard of the arrival of the aged grandmother of one of our servants at the
Castle. This old woman had reached her hundredth year; her skin was shrivelled, her form was bent
and lost in extreme decrepitude; but as still from year to year she continued in existence, out-living
many younger and stronger, she began to feel as if she were to live for ever. The plague came, and
the inhabitants of her village died. Clinging, with the dastard feeling of the aged, to the remnant of
her spent life, she had, on hearing that the pestilence had come into her neighbourhood, barred her
door, and closed her casement, refusing to communicate with any. She would wander out at night to
get food, and returned home, pleased that she had met no one, that she was in no danger from the
plague. As the earth became more desolate, her difficulty in acquiring sustenance increased; at first,
her son, who lived near, had humoured her by placing articles of food in her way: at last he died. But,
even though threatened by famine, her fear of the plague was paramount; and her greatest care was
to avoid her fellow creatures. She grew weaker each day, and each day she had further to go. The
night before, she had reached Datchet; and, prowling about, had found a baker's shop open and
deserted. Laden with spoil, she hastened to return, and lost her way. The night was windless, hot,
and cloudy; her load became too heavy for her; and one by one she threw away her loaves, still
endeavouring to get along, though her hobbling fell into lameness, and her weakness at last into
inability to move. She lay down among the tall corn, and fell asleep. Deep in midnight, she was awaked by a rustling
near her; she would have started up, but her stiff joints refused to obey her will. A low moan close to
her ear followed, and the rustling increased; she heard a smothered voice breathe out, Water,
Water! several times; and then again a sigh heaved from the heart of the sufferer. The old woman
shuddered, she contrived at length to sit upright; but her teeth chattered, and her knees knocked
together-close, very close, lay a half-naked figure, just discernible in the gloom, and the cry for
water and the stifled moan were again uttered. Her motions at length attracted the attention of her
unknown companion; her hand was seized with a convulsive violence that made the grasp feel like
iron, the fingers like the keen teeth of a trap.-"At last you are come!" were the words given forth-
but this exertion was the last effort of the dying-the joints relaxed, the figure fell prostrate, one low
moan, the last, marked the moment of death. Morning broke; and the old woman saw the corpse,
marked with the fatal disease, close to her; her wrist was livid with the hold loosened by death. She
felt struck by the plague; her aged frame was unable to bear her away with sufficient speed; and
now, believing herself infected, she no longer dreaded the association of others; but, as swiftly as she
might, came to her grand-daughter, at Windsor Castle, there to lament and die. The sight was
horrible; still she clung to life, and lamented her mischance with cries and hideous groans; while the
swift advance of the disease shewed, what proved to be the fact, that she could not survive many
hours. While I was directing that the necessary care should be taken of her, Clara came in; she was
trembling and pale; and, when I anxiously asked her the cause of her agitation, she threw herself into
my arms weeping and exclaiming-"Uncle, dearest uncle, do not hate me for ever! I must tell you, for
you must know, that Evelyn, poor little Evelyn"-her voice was choked by sobs. The fear of so mighty
a calamity as the loss of our adored infant made the current of my blood pause with chilly horror; but
the remembrance of the mother restored my presence of mind. I sought the little bed of my darling;
he was oppressed by fever; but I trusted, I fondly and fearfully trusted, that there were no symptoms
of the plague. He was not three years old, and his illness appeared only one of those attacks incident
to infancy. I watched him long-his heavy half-closed lids, his burning cheeks and restless twining of
his small fingers-the fever was violent, the torpor complete-enough, without the greater fear of
pestilence, to awaken alarm. Idris must not see him in this state. Clara, though only twelve years old,
was rendered, through extreme sensibility, so prudent and careful, that I felt secure in entrusting the
charge of him to her, and it was my task to prevent Idris from observing their absence. I administered
the fitting remedies, and left my sweet niece to watch beside him, and bring me notice of any change
she should observe. I then went to Idris, contriving in my way, plausible excuses for remaining all day in the Castle, and
endeavouring to disperse the traces of care from my brow. Fortunately she was not alone. I found
Merrival, the astronomer, with her. He was far too long sighted in his view of humanity to heed the
casualties of the day, and lived in the midst of contagion unconscious of its existence. This poor man,
learned as La Place, guileless and unforeseeing as a child, had often been on the point of starvation,
he, his pale wife and numerous offspring, while he neither felt hunger, nor observed distress. His
astronomical theories absorbed him; calculations were scrawled with coal on the bare walls of his
garret: a hard-earned guinea, or an article of dress, was exchanged for a book without remorse; he
neither heard his children cry, nor observed his companion's emaciated form, and the excess of
calamity was merely to him as the occurrence of a cloudy night, when he would have given his right
hand to observe a celestial phenomenon. His wife was one of those wondrous beings, to be found
only among women, with affections not to be diminished by misfortune. Her mind was divided
between boundless admiration for her husband, and tender anxiety for her children-she waited on
him, worked for them, and never complained, though care rendered her life one long-drawn,
melancholy dream. He had introduced himself to Adrian, by a request he made to observe some planetary motions from
his glass. His poverty was easily detected and relieved. He often thanked us for the books we lent
him, and for the use of our instruments, but never spoke of his altered abode or change of
circumstances. His wife assured us, that he had not observed any difference, except in the absence of
the children from his study, and to her infinite surprise he complained of this unaccustomed quiet. He came now to announce to us the completion of his Essay on the Pericyclical Motions of the
Earth's Axis, and the precession of the equinoctial points. If an old Roman of the period of the
Republic had returned to life, and talked of the impending election of some laurel-crowned consul, or
of the last battle with Mithridates, his ideas would not have been more alien to the times, than the
conversation of Merrival. Man, no longer with an appetite for sympathy, clothed his thoughts in
visible signs; nor were there any readers left: while each one, having thrown away his sword with
opposing shield alone, awaited the plague, Merrival talked of the state of mankind six thousand years
hence. He might with equal interest to us, have added a commentary, to describe the unknown and
unimaginable lineaments of the creatures, who would then occupy the vacated dwelling of mankind. We had not the heart to undeceive the poor old man; and at the moment I came in, he was reading
parts of his book to Idris, asking what answer could be given to this or that position. Idris could not refrain from a smile, as she listened; she had already gathered from him that his
family was alive and in health; though not apt to forget the precipice of time on which she stood, yet
I could perceive that she was amused for a moment, by the contrast between the contracted view
we had so long taken of human life, and the seven league strides with which Merrival paced a coming
eternity. I was glad to see her smile, because it assured me of her total ignorance of her infant's
danger: but I shuddered to think of the revulsion that would be occasioned by a discovery of the
truth. While Merrival was talking, Clara softly opened a door behind Idris, and beckoned me to come
with a gesture and look of grief. A mirror betrayed the sign to Idris-she started up. To suspect evil,
to perceive that, Alfred being with us, the danger must regard her youngest darling, to fly across the
long chambers into his apartment, was the work but of a moment. There she beheld her Evelyn lying
fever-stricken and motionless. I followed her, and strove to inspire more hope than I could myself
entertain; but she shook her head mournfully. Anguish deprived her of presence of mind; she gave
up to me and Clara the physician's and nurse's parts; she sat by the bed, holding one little burning
hand, and, with glazed eyes fixed on her babe, passed the long day in one unvaried agony. It was not
the plague that visited our little boy so roughly; but she could not listen to my assurances;
apprehension deprived her of judgment and reflection; every slight convulsion of her child's features
shook her frame -if he moved, she dreaded the instant crisis; if he remained still, she saw death in
his torpor, and the cloud on her brow darkened. The poor little thing's fever encreased towards night. The sensation is most dreary, to use no
stronger term, with which one looks forward to passing the long hours of night beside a sick bed,
especially if the patient be an infant, who cannot explain its pain, and whose flickering life resembles
the wasting flame of the watch-light,
  Whose narrow fire
  Is shaken by the wind, and on whose edge
  Devouring darkness hovers. With eagerness one turns toward the east, with angry impatience one marks the unchequered
darkness; the crowing of a cock, that sound of glee during day-time, comes wailing and untuneable-
the creaking of rafters, and slight stir of invisible insect is heard and felt as the signal and type of
desolation. Clara, overcome by weariness, had seated herself at the foot of her cousin's bed, and in
spite of her efforts slumber weighed down her lids; twice or thrice she shook it off; but at length she
was conquered and slept. Idris sat at the bedside, holding Evelyn's hand; we were afraid to speak to
each other; I watched the stars -I hung over my child-I felt his little pulse-I drew near the
mother-again I receded. At the turn of morning a gentle sigh from the patient attracted me, the
burning spot on his cheek faded-his pulse beat softly and regularly-torpor yielded to sleep. For a
long time I dared not hope; but when his unobstructed breathing and the moisture that suffused his
forehead, were tokens no longer to be mistaken of the departure of mortal malady, I ventured to
whisper the news of the change to Idris, and at length succeeded in persuading her that I spoke
truth. But neither this assurance, nor the speedy convalescence of our child could restore her, even to the
portion of peace she before enjoyed. Her fear had been too deep, too absorbing, too entire, to be
changed to security. She felt as if during her past calm she had dreamed, but was now awake; she
was
  As one
  In some lone watch-tower on the deep, awakened
  From soothing visions of the home he loves,
  Trembling to hear the wrathful billows roar;
as one who has been cradled by a storm, and awakes to find the vessel sinking. Before, she had been
visited by pangs of fear-now, she never enjoyed an interval of hope. No smile of the heart ever
irradiated her fair countenance; sometimes she forced one, and then gushing tears would flow, and
the sea of grief close above these wrecks of past happiness. Still while I was near her, she could not
be in utter despair- she fully confided herself to me-she did not seem to fear my death, or revert
to its possibility; to my guardianship she consigned the full freight of her anxieties, reposing on my
love, as a wind-nipped fawn by the side of a doe, as a wounded nestling under its mother's wing, as a
tiny, shattered boat, quivering still, beneath some protecting willow-tree. While I, not proudly as in
days of joy, yet tenderly, and with glad consciousness of the comfort I afforded, drew my trembling
girl close to my heart, and tried to ward every painful thought or rough circumstance from her
sensitive nature. One other incident occurred at the end of this summer. The Countess of Windsor, Ex-Queen of
England, returned from Germany. She had at the beginning of the season quitted the vacant city of
Vienna; and, unable to tame her haughty mind to anything like submission, she had delayed at
Hamburgh, and, when at last she came to London, many weeks elapsed before she gave Adrian
notice of her arrival. In spite of her coldness and long absence, he welcomed her with sensibility,
displaying such affection as sought to heal the wounds of pride and sorrow, and was repulsed only by
her total apparent want of sympathy. Idris heard of her mother's return with pleasure. Her own
maternal feelings were so ardent, that she imagined her parent must now, in this waste world, have
lost pride and harshness, and would receive with delight her filial attentions. The first check to her
duteous demonstrations was a formal intimation from the fallen majesty of England, that I was in no
manner to be intruded upon her. She consented, she said, to forgive her daughter, and acknowledge
her grandchildren; larger concessions must not be expected. To me this proceeding appeared (if so light a term may be permitted) extremely whimsical. Now that
the race of man had lost in fact all distinction of rank, this pride was doubly fatuitous; now that we
felt a kindred, fraternal nature with all who bore the stamp of humanity, this angry reminiscence of
times for ever gone, was worse than foolish. Idris was too much taken up by her own dreadful fears,
to be angry, hardly grieved; for she judged that insensibility must be the source of this continued
rancour. This was not altogether the fact: but predominant self-will assumed the arms and masque
of callous feeling; and the haughty lady disdained to exhibit any token of the struggle she endured;
while the slave of pride, she fancied that she sacrificed her happiness to immutable principle. False was all this-false all but the affections of our nature, and the links of sympathy with pleasure
or pain. There was but one good and one evil in the world-life and death. The pomp of rank, the
assumption of power, the possessions of wealth vanished like morning mist. One living beggar had
become of more worth than a national peerage of dead lords- alas the day!-than of dead heroes,
patriots, or men of genius. There was much of degradation in this: for even vice and virtue had lost
their attributes-life-life-the continuation of our animal mechanism- was the Alpha and Omega
of the desires, the prayers, the prostrate ambition of human race. HALF England was desolate, when October came, and the equinoctial winds swept over the earth,
chilling the ardours of the unhealthy season. The summer, which was uncommonly hot, had been
protracted into the beginning of this month, when on the eighteenth a sudden change was brought
about from summer temperature to winter frost. Pestilence then made a pause in her death-dealing
career. Gasping, not daring to name our hopes, yet full even to the brim with intense expectation, we
stood, as a ship-wrecked sailor stands on a barren rock islanded by the ocean, watching a distant
vessel, fancying that now it nears, and then again that it is bearing from sight. This promise of a
renewed lease of life turned rugged natures to melting tenderness, and by contrast filled the soft
with harsh and unnatural sentiments. When it seemed destined that all were to die, we were
reckless of the how and when-now that the virulence of the disease was mitigated, and it appeared
willing to spare some, each was eager to be among the elect, and clung to life with dastard tenacity. Instances of desertion became more frequent; and even murders, which made the hearer sick with
horror, where the fear of contagion had armed those nearest in blood against each other. But these
smaller and separate tragedies were about to yield to a mightier interest-and, while we were
promised calm from infectious influences, a tempest arose wilder than the winds, a tempest bred by
the passions of man, nourished by his most violent impulses, unexampled and dire. A number of people from North America, the relics of that populous continent, had set sail for the
East with mad desire of change, leaving their native plains for lands not less afflicted than their own. Several hundreds landed in Ireland, about the first of November, and took possession of such vacant
habitations as they could find; seizing upon the superabundant food, and the stray cattle. As they
exhausted the produce of one spot, they went on to another. At length they began to interfere with
the inhabitants, and strong in their concentrated numbers, ejected the natives from their dwellings,
and robbed them of their winter store. A few events of this kind roused the fiery nature of the Irish;
and they attacked the invaders. Some were destroyed; the major part escaped by quick and well
ordered movements; and danger made them careful. Their numbers ably arranged; the very deaths
among them concealed; moving on in good order, and apparently given up to enjoyment, they
excited the envy of the Irish. The Americans permitted a few to join their band, and presently the
recruits outnumbered the strangers-nor did they join with them, nor imitate the admirable order
which, preserved by the Trans-Atlantic chiefs, rendered them at once secure and formidable. The
Irish followed their track in disorganized multitudes; each day encreasing; each day becoming more
lawless. The Americans were eager to escape from the spirit they had roused, and, reaching the
eastern shores of the island, embarked for England. Their incursion would hardly have been felt had
they come alone; but the Irish, collected in unnatural numbers, began to feel the inroads of famine,
and they followed in the wake of the Americans for England also. The crossing of the sea could not
arrest their progress. The harbours of the desolate sea-ports of the west of Ireland were filled with
vessels of all sizes, from the man of war to the small fishers' boat, which lay sailorless, and rotting on
the lazy deep. The emigrants embarked by hundreds, and unfurling their sails with rude hands, made
strange havoc of buoy and cordage. Those who modestly betook themselves to the smaller craft, for
the most part achieved their watery journey in safety. Some, in the true spirit of reckless enterprise,
went on board a ship of an hundred and twenty guns; the vast hull drifted with the tide out of the
bay, and after many hours its crew of landsmen contrived to spread a great part of her enormous
canvass-the wind took it, and while a thousand mistakes of the helmsman made her present her
head now to one point, and now to another, the vast fields of canvass that formed her sails flapped
with a sound like that of a huge cataract; or such as a sea-like forest may give forth when buffeted by
an equinoctial north-wind. The port-holes were open, and with every sea, which as she lurched,
washed her decks, they received whole tons of water. The difficulties were increased by a fresh
breeze which began to blow, whistling among the shrowds, dashing the sails this way and that, and
rending them with horrid split, and such whir as may have visited the dreams of Milton, when he
imagined the winnowing of the arch-fiend's van-like wings, which encreased the uproar of wild
chaos. These sounds were mingled with the roaring of the sea, the splash of the chafed billows round
the vessel's sides, and the gurgling up of the water in the hold. The crew, many of whom had never
seen the sea before, felt indeed as if heaven and earth came ruining together, as the vessel dipped
her bows in the waves, or rose high upon them. Their yells were drowned in the clamour of
elements, and the thunder rivings of their unwieldy habitation-they discovered at last that the
water gained on them, and they betook themselves to their pumps; they might as well have laboured
to empty the ocean by bucketfuls. As the sun went down, the gale encreased; the ship seemed to
feel her danger, she was now completely water-logged, and presented other indications of settling
before she went down. The bay was crowded with vessels, whose crews, for the most part, were
observing the uncouth sportings of this huge unwieldy machine-they saw her gradually sink; the
waters now rising above her lower decks-they could hardly wink before she had utterly
disappeared, nor could the place where the sea had closed over her be at all discerned. Some few of
her crew were saved, but the greater part clinging to her cordage and masts went down with her, to
rise only when death loosened their hold. This event caused many of those who were about to sail, to put foot again on firm land, ready to
encounter any evil rather than to rush into the yawning jaws of the pitiless ocean. But these were
few, in comparison to the numbers who actually crossed. Many went up as high as Belfast to ensure
a shorter passage, and then journeying south through Scotland, they were joined by the poorer
natives of that country, and all poured with one consent into England. Such incursions struck the English with affright, in all those towns where there was still sufficient
population to feel the change. There was room enough indeed in our hapless country for twice the
number of invaders; but their lawless spirit instigated them to violence; they took a delight in
thrusting the possessors from their houses; in seizing on some mansion of luxury, where the noble
dwellers secluded themselves in fear of the plague; in forcing these of either sex to become their
servants and purveyors; till, the ruin complete in one place, they removed their locust visitation to
another. When unopposed they spread their ravages wide; in cases of danger they clustered, and by
dint of numbers overthrew their weak and despairing foes. They came from the east and the north,
and directed their course without apparent motive, but unanimously towards our unhappy
metropolis. Communication had been to a great degree cut off through the paralyzing effects of pestilence, so
that the van of our invaders had proceeded as far as Manchester and Derby, before we received
notice of their arrival.