The poet and the landlady did not return for half an hour. They told me
that their delay was occasioned by their search for me; but I refused
all explanation as to what happened after I had lost them. Adieu. Just as I had finished my last letter, his lordship entered my room,
but saluted me coldly. 'I am informed,' said he, 'that you strayed from your party last night,
and refused, afterwards, to give an account of yourself to the
landlady. May I hope, that to me, who feel a personal interest in all
your actions, you will be more communicative?' 'I regret,' said I, 'that circumstances put it out of my power to
gratify your wishes. I foresee that you, like an Orville, or a
Mortimer, will suspect and asperse your mistress. But the Sun shall
return, the mist disperse, and the landscape laugh again.' 'Confound your metaphors! 'cried he, discarding attitude and elegance
in an instant. 'Do you hope to hide your cunning under mists and
laughing landscapes? But I am not to be gulled; I am not to be done. No
going it upon me, I say. Tell me directly, madam, where you were, and
with whom; or by the devil of devils, you shall repent it finely.' I was thunderstruck. 'Sir,' said I, 'you have agitated the gentle air
with the concussion of inelegant oaths and idioms, uttered in the most
ungraceful manner. Sir, your vulgarity is unpardonable, and we now part
for ever.' 'For ever!' exclaimed he, reverting into attitude, and interlacing his
knuckles in a clasp of agony. 'Hear me, Cherubina. By the shades of my
ancestors, my vulgarity was assumed!' 'Assumed, Sir?' said I, 'and pray, for what possible purpose?' 'Alas!' cried he, 'I must not, dare not tell. It is a sad story, and
enveloped in a mysterious veil. Oh! fatal vow! Oh! cruel Marchesa!' Shocking were his contortions as he spoke. 'No!' cried I. 'No vow could ever have produced so dreadful an effect
on your language.' 'Well, 'said he, after a painful pause, 'sooner than incur the odium of
falsehood, I must disclose to you the horrid secret. 'The young Count Di Narcissini was my friend. Educated together, we
became competitors in our studies and accomplishments; and in none of
them could either of us be said to excel the other; till, on our
introduction at Court, it was remarked by the Queen, that I surpassed
the Count in shaking hands. 'Narcissini,' said her Majesty, 'has
judgment enough in knowing when to present a single finger, or perhaps
two; but, for the positive pressure, or the negligent hand with a
drooping wrist; or the cordial, honest, dislocating shake, give me
Montmorenci. I cannot deny that the former has great taste in this
accomplishment; but then the latter has more genius--more
execution--more, as it were, of the _magnifique_ and _aimable_.' 'His mother the Marchesa overheard this critique, turned as pale as
ashes, and left the levee. 'That night, hardly had I fallen into one of those gentle slumbers,
which ever attends the virtuous, when a sudden noise roused me; and on
opening my eyes, I beheld the detested Marchesa, with an Italian
assassin, standing over me.' 'Montmorenci!' cried she, 'thou art the bane of my repose. Thou hast
surpassed my son in the graces. Now listen. Either pledge thyself, by
an irrevocable vow, henceforth to sprinkle thy conversation with
uncouth phrases, and colloquial barbarisms, or prepare to die!' 'Terrible alternative! What could I do? The dagger gleamed before my
face. I shuddered, and took the fatal vow of vulgarity. 'The Marchesa then put into my hand the Blackguard's Dictionary, which
I studied night and day with much success; and I have now the
misfortune to state, that I can be, so far as language goes, the
greatest blackguard in England.' 'Unhappy youth!' cried I. 'This, indeed, accounts for what had often
made me uneasy. But say, can nothing absolve you from this hateful
vow?' 'There is one way,' he replied. 'The Marchesa permitted me to resume my
natural elegance, as soon as my marrying should put an end to
competition between her son and me. Oh! then, my Cherubina, you, you
alone can restore me to hope, to happiness, and to grammar!' 'Ah! my lord,' cried I, 'recollect my own fatal vow. Never, never can I
be your's!' 'Drive me not mad!' he cried. 'You are mine, you shall be mine. This,
this is the bitterest moment of my life. You do not, cannot love me. No, Cherubina, no, you cannot love me.' I fixed my eyes in a wild gaze, rose hastily from my chair, paced the
room with quick steps; and often sighing deeply, clasped my hands and
shuddered. He led me to the sofa, kissed the drapery of my cambric handkerchief,
and concealed his face in its folds. Then raising his head. 'Do you love me?' said he, with a voice dropping manna. A smile, bashful in its archness, played round my rich and trembling
lip; and with an air of bewitching insinuation, I placed my hand on his
shoulder, shook my head, and looked up in his face, with an expression
half reproachful, half tender. He snatched me in a transport to his heart; and that trembling
pressure, which virtue consecrated, and love understood, conveyed to
each of us an unspeakable sensation; as if a beam from Heaven had
passed through both our frames, and left some of its divine warmth
behind it. What followed, angels might have attested. A ringlet had escaped from the bandage of my bodkin. He clipped it off
with my scissors, and fixed it next his heart; while I prettily
struggled to prevent him, with arch anger, and a pouting playfulness. A
thousand saucy triumphs were basking in his eyes, when the door opened,
and who should make his appearance, but--Master Bobby! I could have boxed him. 'I avail myself,' said he, 'of the permission you gave me last night,
to call on you this morning.' Montmorenci looked from the one to the other with amazement. 'And as I am anxious,' continued Stuart, 'to speak with you in
private----'

'Sir,' said I, 'any thing which you have to communicate, this
gentleman, my particular friend, may hear.' 'Yes, Sir,' cried his lordship, in a haughty tone, 'for I have the
honour to boast myself the protector of this lady.' 'If you mean her protector from injury and insult,' said Stuart, 'I
hope, Sir, you are not on this occasion, as on others, an actor?' 'You know me then?' said his lordship. 'I saw you perform last night,' answered Stuart, 'but, to say the
truth, I do not recollect your name.' 'My name is Norval on the Grampian Hills,' cried his lordship. 'Sir,' said Stuart, 'though we sometimes laugh at you, even in your
grave characters, the part you have now chosen seems much too serious
for drollery. Allow me to ask, Sir, by what right you feel entitled to
call yourself the protector of this lady?' 'First inform me,' said Montmorenci, 'by what right you feel entitled
to put that question?' 'By the right of friendship,' answered Stuart. 'No, but enmity,' cried I, 'unprovoked, unprincipled, inexorable
enmity. This is the Stuart whom you have often heard me mention, as my
persecutor; and I hope you will now make him repent of his temerity.' 'Sir,' said his lordship, 'I desire you to leave the house.' 'Not till you favour me with your company,' replied Stuart; 'for I find
I must have some serious conversation with you.' 'Beshrew my heart!' cried Lord Altamont Mortimer Montmorenci, 'if you
want satisfaction, follow me this moment. I am none of your slovenly,
slobbering shots. Damme, I scorn to pistol a gentleman about the
ankles. I can teach the young idea how to shoot, damme.' He spoke, and strode out of the room. Stuart smiled and followed him. You must know, I speculate upon a duel. In short, my plot is entangling itself admirably; and such characters
as Betterton and Stuart will not fail to keep the wheels of it going. Betterton is probably planning to carry me off by force; Stuart and our
hero are coming to a misunderstanding about me; the latter will,
perhaps, return with his arm in an interesting sling, and another
parting-forever interview cannot be far distant. Such is the promising aspect of affairs. Adieu. While I was sitting in the most painful suspense, a knock came to the
door, and Stuart entered. 'You terrify, shock, amaze me!' cried I. 'What dreadful blow awaits me? Speak!' 'Pray,' said he, laughing, 'what was your fancy for telling me that you
were ruined?' 'And so I am,' answered I. 'At least, not in the way you wished me to suppose,' said he. 'I repeat, Sir,' cried I, 'that I am ruined: no matter in what manner;
but ruined I am.' 'Your friend, the player, tells me that you are not,' said he. 'My friend, the player, is very meddling,' answered I. 'This is the way
that whatever plot I lay down for my memoirs is always frustrated. Sir,
I say I am ruined.' 'Well,' cried he, 'I will not dispute the point. I wish only to guard
you against being ruined again. I mistrust this Grundy much. From his
conversation, after we left you, I can perceive that he has a
matrimonial design upon you. Pray beware of the fellow.' 'The fellow!' cried I. 'Alas! you know him not. His large and piercing
eye is but the index of a soul fraught with every human virtue.' 'Ah! my friend,' said he, 'you stand on the very verge of a precipice,
and I must endeavour, even at the risk of your displeasure, to snatch
you from it.' He then began a long lecture on my conduct, and asserted that my
romantic turn is a sort of infatuation, amounting to little less than
madness, and likely to terminate in ruin. He painted, in language
pretty enough, the distraction of Wilkinson, after I had fled from his
house; and, at last, contrived to extract from me (what, I remark, I
can never obtain when I want them)--tears. Seeing me thus affected, he turned the conversation to desultory
topics. We talked of old times, of our juvenal sports and quarrels,
when we were playfellows; what happened after our separation; his life
at college and in the army; my studies and accomplishments. Thence we
made a natural transition to the fine arts. In short, it was the first
time in my life that I had a rational conversation (as it is called)
with a well-informed young man, and I confess I felt gratified. Besides, even his serious remonstrances were so happily interspersed
with humour and delicate irony, that I could not bring myself to be
displeased with him. He remained more than two hours, and at parting took my hand. 'I have hitherto been scolding you,' said he, with a smile, 'and I must
now praise you, that I may be better entitled to scold you again. You
have the elements of every thing amiable and endearing in your mind,
and an admirable understanding to direct them. But you want some one to
direct that understanding. Your father and I have already had a serious
consultation on the subject; but till he comes, nothing can be done. Indeed, I am much alarmed at his absence. Meantime, will you permit me
to legislate in his stead, and to begin by chusing more eligible
lodgings for you. I confess I dread the machinations of that actor.' As he spoke, a rap came to the door. 'Do me the favour to take tea with me this evening,' said I, 'and we
will talk the matter over.' He promised, and took his leave. Montmorenci then made his appearance, and in visible perturbation, at
having found Stuart here again. If I can constitute a jealousy between
them it will add to the animation of several scenes. I therefore
praised Stuart to the skies, and mentioned my having asked him to tea. His lordship flew into a violent rage, and swore that the villain
wanted to unheroinize me, in order to gain me himself. He then renewed
his entreaties that I would consent to an immediate marriage; but now
the benefits of my fatal vow shone forth in their full lustre, and its
irrevocability gave rise to some of the finest agonies that his
lordship ever exhibited. At length we separated to dress for dinner. At my toilette I recollected with exactness every particular of his
late conversation; his sentiments so congenial with mine; his manners
so engaging; his countenance so noble and ingenuous. 'I shall see him no more,' said I. A sigh that followed, told me more of my heart than I wished to know. No, my Biddy, never, never can he be mine. I must banish his dear image
from my mind; and to speak in the simple and unsophisticated language
of the heroine in the Forest of Montalbo:

'_Indeed, surely, I think, we ought, under existing circumstances,
dearest, dearest madam, to avoid, where we can, every allusion, to
this, I fear, alas! our, indeed, hopeless attachment._'

Adieu. When Stuart came, he found his lordship, the landlady, the poet, and
myself sitting round the tea-table. At first the conversation was
general, and on the topics of the day. These Stuart discussed with much
animation and volubility, while his lordship sat silent and
contemptuous. I fancy that his illustrious tongue disdained to trifle. Meantime Higginson, in a new coat and waistcoat, sat anglicising the
Latinity of his face, and copying the manners and attitudes of
Montmorenci, whom the poor man, I verily believe, is endeavouring to
rival. At length the word poetry caught his ear; he gave the graces to
the winds, and listened. 'Therefore,' continued Stuart to me, 'satirical poetry must be much
more useful than encomiastic.' 'Sir,' said Higginson, drawing back his head and lowering his voice, as
if he dreaded nothing so much as being heard, 'I must beg leave, in all
humility, to coincide with your exprest proposition; but to suggest a
doubt whether it be decorous to violate the repose of noble blood.' 'If the great deserve exposure as much as the mean,' said Stuart,
'their rank is rather a reason why they should be censured sooner;
because their bad example is more conspicuous, and, therefore, more
detrimental.' 'But,' said I, 'though satirizing the vicious may be
beneficial to the community, is it always advantageous to the
satirist?' 'Johnson observes,' answered Stuart, 'that _it is no less a proof of
eminence to have many enemies than many friends_; and, indeed, without
the one we seldom have the other. On the whole, however, I would
advise a writer not to drop the olive-branch in grasping at the rod;
though those whom he finds privately endeavouring to vilify his own
character, self-defence entitles him to expose without mercy.' 'That satire is salutary to society, I am convinced,' said I. 'It
becomes mischievous only when it is aimed at the worthy heart.' 'And yet,' said Stuart, 'those that are loudest in declaiming against
the satirist, are often fondest of disseminating the satire. Now he who
slanders with his tongue, is just as culpable as he who defames with
his pen; for, if the one weapon be not as extensive, in its effects, as
the other, the motives of those who use it are equally vile. Hume, in
one of his essays, says, that _a whisper may fly as quick, and be as
pernicious, as a pamphlet_.' 'And I think,' said I, 'that those who never allow people faults, are
just as injurious to the community as those who never allow them
virtues.' 'True,' said Stuart; 'and a late publication (which equals in
sentiment, diction, and pictures of character, any work of the kind in
our language) thus concludes a description of them: _These, assuming
the name of Good-nature, say, that for their part, they wish to avoid
making enemies, and when they cannot speak well of people, they make it
a rule not to speak of them at all. Now this is an admirable system,
for thus, permitting vice, they sanction it, and by not opposing,
assist its progress._'

'So you see,' said Higginson, 'that next to laws and religion, which
correct the serious derelictions, writing, which chastises the smaller
foibles, is the most useful instrument in a state.' 'Observe,' whispered I to Stuart, 'how the ruling passion breaks
forth.' 'And, therefore,' continued Higginson, 'next to the legislator and
divine, the poet is the most exalted member of the community.' 'Pardon me there,' said I. 'The most exalted members are not
legislators, or divines, or poets, who prescribe, but heroes and
heroines, who perform.' 'If you mean the heroes and heroines of romance,' said Stuart, 'their
performances are useful in teaching us what we should shun, not what we
should imitate. The heroine, in particular, quits a comfortable home,
turns out to be the best pedestrian in the world; and, after weeping
tears enough to float her work-basket, weds some captious, passionate,
and kneeling hero.' 'Better,' cried I, 'than to remain a domesticated rosy little Miss, who
romps with the squire, plays an old tune on an old piano, and reads
prayers for the good family--servants and all. At last, marrying some
honest gentleman, who lives on his saddle, she degenerates into a
dangler of keys and whipper of children; trots up and down stairs,
educates the poultry, and superintends the architecture of pies.' 'Now for my part,' said Stuart, 'I would have a young lady neither a
mere homely drudge, nor a sky-rocket heroine, let off into the clouds. I would educate her heart and head, as well as her fingers and feet. She should be at once the ornament of the social group, and the delight
of the domestic circle; abroad attractive, at home endearing; the
enchantress to whom levity would apply for mirth, and wisdom for
admonition; and her mirth should be graceful, and her admonition
fascinating. If she happened to be solitary, she should have the power
of contemplation, and if her needle broke, she should be capable of
finding resource in a book. In a word, she should present a proof, that
wit is not inconsistent with good-nature, nor liveliness with
good-sense, and that to make the virtues attractive, they ought to be
adorned with the graces.' 'And pray, to whom would you marry this charmer?' asked his lordship,
winking at me. 'Why,' replied he, 'when she wishes to settle in life, I would have her
consult her parents, and make a prudent match.' 'A prudent match!' cried I. 'Just conceive--a prudent match! Oh,
Stuart, I declare I am quite ashamed of you.' ''Pon honour,' said his lordship, 'you are too severe. I will bet five
to four he means well.' 'No doubt,' said I. 'And to be candid, I think him a mighty good sort
of a man.' 'A proper behaved young person,' said his lordship. 'An honest _bon diable_!' added I. 'A worthy soul!' said he. 'A respectable character!' cried I. 'A decent creature!' said he. 'A humane and pious christian,' cried I. This last hit was irresistible, and both of us burst out laughing,
while Stuart sat silent, and even affected to smile. 'Now is your time,' whispered I, to his lordship. 'A few more sarcasms,
and he crouches to you for ever.' 'I fancy, young gentleman,' said his lordship, turning full upon
Stuart, and laughing so long, that I thought he would never finish the
sentence; 'I fancy, my tight fellow, you may now knock under.' 'I am not always inclined to do so,' replied Stuart; 'neither am I
easily provoked to knock down.' 'Knock down whom?' demanded his lordship, with the most complete frown
I had ever beheld. 'A puppy,' said Stuart coolly. 'You lie!' vociferated our hero. 'Leave the room, Sir,' cried Stuart, starting from his seat. Montmorenci rose, retreated to the door;--stopped--went on--stopped
again--moved--stopped--

'Vanish!' cried Stuart, advancing. His lordship vanished. I ran, snatched a pen, and wrote on a scrap of paper

'VINDICATE YOUR HONOUR, OR NEVER APPEAR IN MY PRESENCE!' I then rang the bell for the maid, and slipping some silver into her
hand, begged that she would deliver the paper to his lordship. Higginson then started from his chair. 'After a deliberate consideration of the subject,' said he, 'I am more
and more convinced, that a poet is the first character in society.' During a whole hour, I remained in a state of the most distracting
suspense, for he never returned! Meantime, Stuart was privately
pressing me to leave my lodgings, and remain at his father's, till
Wilkinson should be found. Indignant at the cowardly conduct of his
lordship, I was almost consenting; when on a sudden, the door flew
open, and with a slow step and dignified deportment, Lord Altamont
Mortimer Montmorenci entered. All eyes were rivetted on him. He walked
towards Stuart, and fell upon one knee before him:

'I come, Sir,' said he, 'to retract that abuse which I gave you just
now. I submit to whatever punishment you please; nor shall I think my
honour re-established till my fault is repaired. Then grant me the
pardon that I beg, on whatever conditions you think proper.' 'For shame!' exclaimed I, with an indignation that I could not
suppress. 'You a hero?' His lordship instantly snatched a book from his pocket, and opening a
passage, presented it to me. The book was _La Nouvelle Heloise_. 'You see there,' said he, 'how Lord B., after having given St. Preux
the lie, begs forgiveness on his knees, and in the precise words which
I have just used. Will Cherubina condemn the conduct that Heloise
applauded?' 'Ever excellent, ever exalted mortal!' cried I. 'O thou art indeed all
that is just, dignified, magnanimous.' I gave him my hand, and he bowed over it. Supper was announced. Mirth
ruled the night. The landlady sat gazing on his lordship; his lordship
on me. Stuart uttered a thousand witticisms; and even the poet
determined to be heard; for, in the midst of our merriment, I saw him,
with his mouth open, and his neck stretched forward, watching for the
first moment of silence. It came. 'This is the fun,
    Equalled by none;
    So never, never, never have done!' cried the happy creature, and protruded such an exorbitant laugh as
made ample amends for the gravity of his whole life. At length Stuart took leave; and the rest of us separated to our
several apartments. That coxcomb, I see, has no notion of sentiment, and no taste for
admiring those who have. There he sits, calm, unconcerned, and never
once fixes his eyes on me with a speaking gaze. Oh, no; nothing but wit
or wisdom for him. Not only is the fellow far from a pathetic turn
himself, but he has also an odd faculty of detaching even me from my
miseries, and of reducing me to horrid hilarity. It would vex a saint
to see how he makes me laugh, though I am predetermined not to give him
a single smile. But Montmorenci, the sentimental Montmorenci, timely
interposes the fine melancholy of his features;--he looks, he sighs, he
speaks; and in a moment I am recalled to the soft emotions, and a due
sense of my deplorable destiny. Adieu. Clouds are impending, and I know not whether they will clash together,
and elicit lightning, or mingle into one, and descend in refreshing
showers. This morning, Montmorenci, the hostess, and myself, breakfasted early,
and then went shopping. I purchased a charming scarf, a bonnet, two
dresses, a diamond cross, and a pair of pearl ear-rings. His lordship
borrowed a guinea from me, and then bought a small casket, which he
presented to me in the handsomest manner. We next visited Westminster Abbey; the first that I have ever seen,
though I had read of thousands. To my great disappointment, I found in
it no cowled monks with scapulars, and no veiled nuns with rosaries. Nothing but statues of statesmen and warriors, in stone wigs and marble
regimentals. Soon after we had returned home, Higginson entered my room, stealing,
and with a look of terror. 'My mother presents her respectful compliments,' said he in a whisper,
'and begs you will honour her with your presence, that she may do
herself the pleasure of saving you from destruction.' 'Tell me,' said I, with a look that pierced into his soul, 'which
character do _you_ mean to support on this occasion? that of my
friend, or of an accomplice in the plot against me?' Higginson looked aghast. 'As to your being a principal,' continued I, 'that is not likely; but I
must ascertain if your object is to be--excuse me--an understrapping
ruffian. Never fear, speak your mind candidly.' 'And I was writing verses on you all the morning, and it was for you
that I clipped my eyebrows, and it was for you that I--dear me, dear
me!' cried the poor man, and began whimpering like a child. 'Nay,' said I, 'if it is not your taste, that is another affair; but
though I cannot countenance you as a villain, I will at least respect
you as an honest man. I will, I assure you; so now lead me to your
mother.' We proceeded up stairs, and entered a garret; where his mother, a
corpulent old lady, was lying in a fit of the gout. Higginson having introduced us: 'Miss,' said she, 'I sent for you to
tell you that I have just overheard your hostess, and an old gentleman
(Betterton, I think she called him), planning something against you. They were in the next room, and thought I could not hear; but this I
know, that he offered her fifty pounds, if she would assist him in
obtaining you. And so, Miss, from all my son says of you, and sure
enough he raves of you like mad, I thought you would wish to be saved
from ruin.' 'Certainly, Madam,' answered I. 'At the same time, I must beg
permission to remark, that you have destroyed half the interest of this
intrigue against me, by forewarning me of it.' 'May be so, Miss,' said she. 'I have done my duty as a Christian,
however.' 'Nay,' said I, 'do not suppose I resent your conduct, old lady. I am
sure you meant all for the best, and I sincerely wish you health and
happiness. Farewell.' On returning to my room, I found Betterton there before me. He came to
request that I would accept of a ticket for the masquerade, at the
Pantheon: and he gave another to the landlady; who, he said, must
accompany me thither: so 'tis clear that he means to decoy me from it. Unhappy girl! But how can I refuse going? A heroine, you know, never
misses a masquerade: it is always the scene of her best adventure; and
to say the truth, I cannot resist the temptation of so delightful an
amusement. Now to consult about my character. At dinner, yesterday, I bespoke his lordship as an escort to the
masquerade; and we then held a council of dress. It was resolved, that
I should appear in the character of Sterne's Maria, and his lordship as
Corporal Trim. This morning, just as I had finished reading the closet-scene, in the
Children of the Abbey, Betterton and the landlady came into my room;
and in a short time, I perceived the purport of their visit; as they
began requesting that I would not take either Stuart or Montmorenci
with me to the masquerade. 'The fact is, Miss,' said the landlady, 'that I have heard your real
story. Mr. Grundy is not your cousin at all, and your name is
Wilkinson, not Donald. Howsomever, as I believe you meant no harm, in
this deception, I am willing, at the solicitations of this excellent
gentleman, to let you remain in my house, provided you promise not to
receive any more visits from that Stuart, who is the greatest villain
unhanged; or from Mr. Grundy, who has certainly bad designs on you;
though he made proposals of marriage to myself, no longer ago than
yesterday.' A tapping at my door prevented me from expressing my total disbelief in
her latter assertion.