I tried to sooth him: nothing would do, nor could I persuade him to
accompany me; so now, all being ready, I posted two sentinels on the
top of the turret, and then got into my barouche. Six vassals were
deputed to draw it, the rest followed with their oaken saplings under
their cloaks, and Jerry headed the whole. Never was a more august
procession; and I will venture to say, that this country, at least,
never saw any thing like it. As we proceeded along the road, the people ran out of their houses to
gaze on us. Some said that we were strolling players, and others swore
that we were going to a funeral; while a rabble of boys and girls
capered at our heels, and gathered as we went. It was not till about five o'clock that we reached Lady Gwyn's avenue. We paused there a moment, while I made my attendants shake the dust
from their cloaks, and wipe the barouche; and now, with a beating
heart, I found myself at her door. Jerry then pealed an authoritative rap. The door opened. The servant
stared. 'Inform the Lady Gwyn,' said I, 'that her niece, the Lady Cherubina de
Willoughby, desires the honour of a conference with her.' The fellow grinned, and vanished; and, in a few minutes, out came her
ladyship, accompanied by several guests, some of whose faces I
remembered having seen there before. I therefore felt doubly delighted
that I had come in such feudal and chivalric pomp. They greeted me with great kindness and respect. Carelessly bowing to Lady Gwyn, as I sat half reclined in the barouche,
I thus addressed her:

'I now come to your ladyship with a proposal, which it is as generous
in me to offer, as it will be politic in you to accept. And first,
learn, that I am at this moment in actual possession of Monkton Castle,
the noble seat of my ancestors. To that castle, and to this house, your
ladyship has already acknowledged my just right; and to both, of
course, I can establish my claim by a judiciary process. 'As, however, I prefer a more amicable mode of adjustment, and am
willing to spare the effusion of money, I now declare my readiness to
make over this house and demesne to your ladyship, and to your heirs
for ever, on condition that you, on your part, will surrender to me,
without delay or reservation, the title deeds of Monkton Castle, and
all the Monkton estate. This is a generous proposal. What say you? Yes
or no?' 'Lady Cherubina,' returned her ladyship, 'I cannot think of entering
into terms with you, till you restore the portrait that you purloined
from this house. But, in the mean time, as a proof of my desire to
settle matters amicably, I request the honour of your company at dinner
to-day.' 'Your ladyship must excuse me,' said I, with a noble air. 'During our
present dispute respecting this house, I should deem it derogatory to
my honour and my dignity, were I to enter it in the capacity of guest.' 'Why then, death and 'ounds!' cried Jerry, 'is it to refuse so good an
offer, after starving all the morning!' 'Starving!' cried Lady Gwyn. 'We have not put a morsel inside our mouths this blessed day,' said
Jerry; 'and even yesterday we dined on potatoes and milk, and a sort of
a contrivance of a cake that your ladyship would'nt throw to your cat.' I thought I should drop at this exposure of our poverty, and I
commanded him to be silent. 'Time enough for silence when one has spoken,' cried he. 'But sure,
would'nt it vex a saint to hear you talking about honour and dignity,
when all the time you are in a starving state!' 'Sensibly remarked,' said Lady Gwyn. 'And pray, my good fellow, who are
you?' 'My warden,' answered I quickly, lest he should speak. 'And these are
my feudal vassals; and I have left my minstrel, and the rest of my
faithful people, on the battlements of the eastern tower, just over the
Black Chamber, to guard my castle.' 'And for all this fine talk,' cried Jerry, 'we have not so much as a
rap farthing amongst the whole set of us. So pray, your ladyship, do
make her stay dinner--Do. Or may be,' (said he, getting closer and
whispering Lady Gwyn), 'may be you would just lend her half-a-crown or
so; and, 'pon my soul, I will pay you myself in ten days.' 'Silence, traitor!' cried I, rising in the barouche, and dignifying my
manner. 'I do not want a dinner: I would not accept of a dinner; but
above all, of a dinner in this house, till I am mistress of it!' 'And is it true,' cried Jerry to Lady Gwyn, 'that she is the real
mistress of this house?' 'Oh! certainly, certainly,' said her ladyship. 'Oh! certainly, certainly,' said the guests. 'Well, bad luck to me, if ever I believed it, till this moment,' cried
Jerry. 'And why then won't your ladyship give it up to her?' 'Because,' answered she, 'the quiet surrender of an estate was never
yet read of in romances.' ''Tis the only rational excuse you can assign,' said I. 'Dinner is on the table,' said the butler coming to the door. 'And so,' cried Jerry to me, 'you won't dine in this house till you are
mistress of it?' 'Never, as I hope to see heaven!' answered I. 'And so,' cried he to Lady Gwyn, 'you won't make her mistress of it?' 'Never, as I hope to see heaven!' answered she. 'Why then,' cried Jerry, 'since one refuses to dine in it till she is
mistress of it, and since the other owns that she ought to be mistress
of it, and yet won't make her mistress of it; by the powers, I will
make her mistress of it in two minutes!' So saying, he shouted some words in an uncouth jargon (Irish, I
suppose) to my vassals, several of whom instantly darted into the
house, others brandished their sticks in the faces of the guests; Jerry
himself ran, lifted me from the barouche, and bore me into the hall;
while the rest brought up the rear, and beat back the gentlemen who
were attempting to rush between us and the door. Jerry set me down in the hall, where I stood motionless, while some of
my domestics scudded, with merry uproar, through kitchen, parlour,
drawing-room, garret; and drove footman, maid, valet, cook, scullion,
and lap-dog, all out of the house. 'Now then,' cried Jerry, shutting the hall-door, 'your ladyship is in
quiet possession for ever and ever.' 'Jerry,' said I, 'there is no knowing how this will end. But come into
that parlour, for some of my people are making a sad riot there.' In we went; it was the dining-room, and to my great astonishment, I
found about a dozen of my domestics already round the table, eating and
drinking as if nothing had happened. In vain Jerry and I desired them
to desist; they did not even seem to hear us. They laughed and capered,
and tore whole joints with their hands, and swallowed the richest wines
from the decanters. The rest soon flocked in, and then such a scene of
confusion arose as struck me with utter dismay. And now, having glutted
themselves, they ran to the windows, and exhibited the mangled meat and
diminished wine to the dismayed eyes of poor Lady Gwyn. There she stood
in the midst of her friends, looking like a bedlamite; and as soon as I
appeared, she beckoned me, with the most frantic gesticulations, to
open the window. I called the warden to my side, and flung up the sash. 'Let us in, let us in!' cried she. 'My house will be destroyed by these
diabolical miscreants! Oh! let us in, let us in!' 'Lady Gwyn,' said I, 'these outrages are on my house, not on your's. But be well assured that whatever injury your personal property may
sustain, it is contrary to my wishes, and will by me be amply
compensated.' 'Gracious powers!' exclaimed she. 'My precious cabinet, and all my
furniture will be demolished! Won't you save my house? won't you? dear
ma'am, won't you?' '_Your_ house?' cried Jerry. 'Why I had your own word for it just now
that it was my own lady's house. So, if you told a lie, take the
consequence. But we have got possession, and let me see who will dare
drive us out.' 'Here they are that will soon drive you out!' cried a servant. 'Here they are, here they are!' echoed every one. All eyes were now directed down the avenue, and, to my horror, I
perceived a large party of soldiers, in full march towards the house. 'We shall have a bloody battle of it,' whispered Jerry. 'But never
fear, my lady, we will fight to the last gasp. Hollo, lads, here is a
battle for you!' At that magic word, all the Irishmen clubbed their sticks, and ran
forward. 'We must surrender,' said I. 'Never could I bear the dreadful contest.' 'By the mother that bore me,' cried Jerry, 'I will defend the house in
spite of you!' 'Then I will walk out of it,' said I. 'Well, surrender away!' cried Jerry, 'and may all the---- Oh! murder,
murder, to give up your own house without a bit of a battle!' By this time the soldiers had arrived, and the magistrate who was at
their head, advanced, and desired me to have the door opened instantly. 'Provided you pledge yourself that none of my brave fellows shall be
punished,' answered I. 'You shall all be punished with the utmost rigour of the law,' said the
magistrate. 'Since that is the case then,' cried I, 'and since I cannot keep
possession of my house, I am resolved that no one else shall. Know,
Sir, I have, at this instant, six of my domestics, each with a lighted
brand, stationed in different apartments; and the moment you order your
men to advance, that moment I give the signal, and the house bursts
into a blaze.' 'If you dare,' cried the magistrate. 'Dare!' cried Lady Gwyn. 'The creature would dare any thing. Dare! why
she burned a house once before. She did, I protest to you; so pray,
make some conditions with her, or she will burn this now. I tell you
the girl is quite----' and she whispered something in the magistrate's
ear. 'Well,' said the magistrate to me, 'will you promise never to come here
again, provided I now let you and your gang pass without detention or
punishment?' 'I will,' answered I. 'But I must make some conditions too. In the
first place, will your ladyship give me back my cloaths and the money
that I left behind me, when I was here last?' 'I will,' answered her ladyship. 'In the next place,' said I, 'will your ladyship promise not to prevent
me from inhabiting Monkton Castle, till such time as the law shall
determine which of us has a right to the contested estates?' 'Undoubtedly,' replied her ladyship. 'And now,' said I, 'I must have the distinct and solemn declaration of
every individual present, that neither myself nor my people shall
suffer any molestation in consequence of what we have done.' All present pledged their honours. 'Now then,' said I, 'we will open the door.' Accordingly, the warden opened it, and I issued forth with a majestic
demeanour, while my awful band marched after their triumphant mistress. Lady Gwyn and her guests hastened into the house, without even wishing
me good evening, and the soldiers drew up before the door. In a few minutes, a servant came out with my dresses and the money. Having received them, I got into my barouche, and, drawn by my vassals,
proceeded homeward. We were silent for some time, but at length I
called Jerry to the side of the carriage. 'Well, my friend,' cried I, quite cheerful, 'I think we have come off
famously.' 'Yes,' said Jerry. 'I flatter myself,' added I, 'we have made a good day's work of it.' 'Yes,' said Jerry. 'Nothing but yes!' said I. 'Why now, do you not think we have obtained
the most decisive advantages? Was it not a glorious affair?' 'Since I must speak out,' cried Jerry, 'I think it was the bluest
business that ever was botched by poltroons.' 'It was all your own doing, however,' said I. 'So now you may walk on,
Sir.' Jerry tossed his hat at one side, and strutted forward. 'Come back, Jerry,' cried I. 'Here is my hand. You are a faithful
fellow, and would have died for me.' 'Ah, bless you!' cried he. 'You quarrel like a cat, but you make up
like an angel!' It was night before we reached the castle; and as I had not tasted a
morsel all day, I dispatched Jerry to the village for provisions, and
other matters. I then divided six guineas among my domestics, and
desired them to return next morning, as I should want them to repair
the fortifications, dig a mote, and excavate subterranean passages. They gave three cheers, and departed. In about an hour Jerry returned with a cart containing an abundant
stock of provisions;--bread, meat, potatoes, tea, sugar, &c. besides, a
kettle, plates, cups and saucers, &c.

After having unloaded and dismissed the cart, we made a fire in the
Black Chamber, and supped. I then took a solitary walk, and carried
some victuals to the poor cottagers. They received the donation with
gratitude, and I left them to the comforts of a hearty meal. It is now probable that I may reside some time at my castle; and as to
my villa, I wish Lady Gwyn joy of it; for in my opinion it is a fright. Conceive the difference between the two. The villa mere lath and
plaster; with its pretty little stucco-work, and its pretty little
paintings, and its pretty little bronzes. Nice, new, sweet, and
charming, are the only epithets that one can apply to it; while
antique, sublime, terrible, picturesque, and Gothic, are the adjectives
appropriate to my castello. What signify laced footmen, Chinese vases,
Grecian tripods, and Turkish sofas, in comparison with feudal vassals,
ruined towers, black hangings, dampness, and ivy? And to a person of
real taste, a single stone of this edifice is worth a whole cart-load
of such stones as the onyx, and sardonyx, and the other barbarous
baubles belonging to Lady Gwyn. But nothing diverts me more than the
idea that poor Lady Gwyn is twice as old as the house she lives in. I
have got a famous simile on the subject. What think you of a decayed
nut in an unripe shell? The woman is sixty if she is a day. Adieu. The moist shadows of night had fled, dawn shook the dew from his purple
ringlets, and the sun, that well-known gilder of eastern turrets, arose
with his usual punctuality. I too rose, and having now recovered my
wardrobe, enjoyed the luxury of changing my dress; for I had worn the
same cloaths several days, and consequently was become a perfect
slattern. How other heroines manage, I cannot imagine; for I have read
of some of them who were thrown among mountains, or into cells, and
desolate chambers, and caverns; full of slime, mud, vermin, dust, and
cobwebs, where they remained whole months without clean linen, soap,
brush, towel, or comb; and, at last, when rescued from captivity, forth
they walked, glittering like the morning star, as fragrant as a lily,
and as fresh as an oyster. We breakfasted on the top of the tower; and after our repast, the
minstrel told me that he had employed the day before in composing a
Metrical Romance, called 'Monkton Castle;' which, with my permission,
he would now repeat. I was delighted; and to give it every advantage, I placed him at the
harp, flung his black garments over him, and making him sit on the
battlements, endeavoured to fix him in the fine attitude of old Allan
Bane; but his limbs were so muscular and impracticable, that I could
make nothing of them. With an emphatic enunciation, he thus began. MONKTON CASTLE

    A METRICAL ROMANCE

    Awake, my harp, sweet plaintiff, wake once more,
      Now while bedight in shadowy amice dim,
    Eve bathes the mountains in her radiant gore,
      And edges ocean with a fiery rim. And while I touch, with nails ypared anew,
      Thy parallel and quadrupedal strings,
    May fairies brush away the vesper dew,
      That else mote moist the chorded chitterlings. And ah! full oft the learned tribe, I trow,
      With baleful dews of cavil damp thy strain. But morning shall return, the sun shall glow,
      The baleful dews shall fly, the harp shall sound again. It was a castle of turrets grey,
          All nettles and chickweed inside;
        Where the wind did howl the livelong day,
          And the livelong night beside. It had no windows or roof, I am sure,
          Or parlour for Bell-accoyle;
        Where a Belamay and a Belamoure,
          In daynt Bellgards mote moyl. 'That same parlour,' said Jerry, 'has bells enough to bother the
rookery of Thomastown, and that is the largest in Ireland.' Nathlesse, to stablish her rights, I ween,
      Came to that castle fair Cherubine. Nor the wind day and night could her astound,
      Nor the nettles and chickweed that grew on the ground. She was of the house of De Willoughby,
    And her story was long and melancholie;
    But her beauty never could rivalled be. Glittered her tresses like beams of sun,
      And snake-like over her neck did run. Her cheek, where dimples made beauteous breach,
      Lovelily smiled, and the down on each
    Was soft as fur of unfingered peach. While thro' her marble a blush did gleam,
    Like ruddy berries, all crushed in cream. The minstrel to the castle hied,
    His mother's hope, his mother's pride. Gramercy, how that mother cried! He was a gentle man of thought,
    And grave, but not ungracious aught. His face with thinking lines was wrought. And though his head was bald a space,
    Than he who shore it will get grace. 'Now that is a slap at me!' cried Jerry. Yet, though he sold full half his books,
    To lay out money on his looks;
    The lady had such deep disdain;
    That the poor minstrel, in his pain,
      From the hour that is natal,
      To the hour that is fatal,
    Mote sing these words, and sing in vain. SONG

    _The birds are all singing,
    The bells are all ringing,
    And tidings are bringing,
      Of peace and of joy. Then let us, my treasure,
    In love without measure,
    And tenderest pleasure,
      Our moments employ._

'Eh! what? what's all that?' cried Jerry. 'Why sure--body o'me, sure
you ant--Oh, confound me, but 'tis making love to the mistress you
are!' The minstrel blushed, and more pointedly repeated;

    But her favourite warden, could he but sing,
    He not unlistened, would touch the string,
    Tho' he was a man with unchisseled face;
    From eye to eye too little a space;
    A jester withouten one attic joke,
    And the greatest liar that ever spoke. 'Bad luck to you, what do you mean by that?' cried Jerry, running
towards him. 'I will box you for a shilling!' 'You are not worth one,' exclaimed the minstrel, starting up. 'I will leave your carcase not worth one,' cried Jerry. 'That would be more than your's is worth now,' returned the minstrel. 'For shame, my friends!' cried I. 'Mr. Higginson, I declare your
conduct is that of a child.' 'Because you treat me like one,' said he. 'And you treat him like a
man.' 'But you should treat him like a gentleman,' said I. 'Well, well, well,' cried the minstrel; 'there is my hand for you, Mr. Sullivan.' 'And there is mine for you,' said Jerry. 'Hand in hand is better than
fist to fist at any time.' 'I will defer hearing the remainder of your poem,' said I, 'till you
have altered it. But my good friend, do not forget to tell that I
inhabit the _eastern_ turret, and to give a full description of it. You might begin thus:

    He who would view that east turret aright,
    Must go at rosy-finger'd morning bright.' 'Rosy-fingered morning!' cried Jerry. 'Why, how can the morning have
rosy fingers?' 'It has not,' answered I. 'The poets only say so by way of ornament.' 'And yet,' cried Jerry, 'if I had said, when I was telling you my
history, that I saw a set of red fingers and thumbs rising in the east
every morning, I warrant you would have called me a liar, just as you
did about that business of the Pacific Ocean.' 'Why,' said the minstrel, 'we poets are permitted a peculiar latitude
of language, which enables us to tell Homeric falsehoods, without fear
of the society for discountenancing vice. Thus, when we speak of

    The lightning of her angel smile,

we do not expect one to believe that fire comes out of her mouth,
whenever it laughs.' 'Not unless her teeth were flints,' said Jerry. 'But if you said that
fire came out of her eyes, one would believe you sooner; for this I
know, that many and many a time Molly has struck fire out of mine.' 'A heroine's eye,' said I, 'gives a greater scope to the poet than any
thing in the world. It is all fire and water. If it is not beaming, or
sparkling, it is sure to be drowned or swimming----'

'In the Pacific Ocean, I hope,' cried Jerry. 'No, but in tears,' said the minstrel. 'And of these there is an
infinite variety. There is the big tear, and the bitter tear, and the
salt tear, and the scalding tear.' 'And, ah!' cried I, 'how delightful, when two lovers lay cheek to
cheek, and mingle these tears; or when the tender youth kisses them
from his mistress's cheek!' 'Troth, then, that must be no small compliment,' said Jerry, 'since
they are so brackish and scalding as you say. Water itself is maukish
at any time, but salt water is the devil. Well, if I took such a dose
of a snivelling chit's tears, I would season it with a dram, or my name
is not Jerry.' 'And, by the by, I wish Jerry were not your name,' said I. ''Tis so
vulgar for a warden. Indeed, I have often thought of altering it to
_Jeronymo_; which, I fancy, is the Italian of _Jerry_. For, in my
opinion, nothing can equal Italian names ending in O.' 'Except Irish names beginning with O,' cried Jerry. 'Nay,' said I, 'what can be finer than Montalto, Stefano, Morano,
Rinaldo, Ubaldo, Utaldo?' 'I will tell you,' said Jerry. 'O'Brien, O'Leary, O'Flaherty,
O'Flanigan, O'Guggerty, O'Shaugnassy----'

'Oh, ecstasy!' exclaimed a voice just beneath the turret. I looked
down, and beheld--Montmorenci himself, clad in armour, and gazing up at
me with an attitude that mocked mortal pencil. I waved my hand, and smiled. 'What? whom do I behold?' cried he. 'Ah,'tis but a dream! Yet I spoke
to her, I am sure I spoke to her; and she beckoned me. Merciful powers! Why this terror? Is it not Cherubina, and would Cherubina hurt her
Montmorenci?' 'Jerry, Jerry,' said I; 'run down to the Black Chamber, and clean it
out quick. Sweep the ashes into a corner, hide the pipkin and kettle,
pin up the cloaks against the walls; put the leg of mutton under the
bed. Run, run.--My lord, the Lady Cherubina hastes to receive your
lordship at her ever-open portal.' I then descended, and met him beneath the gateway. His greeting was
frantic, but decorous; mine endearing, but reserved. Several very
elegant things were said on both sides. Of course, he snatched my hand,
and fed upon it. At last, when I supposed that Jerry had regulated the room above, I
conducted his lordship up the steps; while I anticipated his delight at
beholding so legendary, fatal, and inconvenient a chamber. His astonishment was, indeed, excessive. He stared round and round,
admired the black hangings, the bed, the bell, and the horn. 'I see,' said he, advancing to the ashes, 'that you are even classical
enough to burn a fire of wood. But ha! (and he started,) what do mine
eyes behold beneath these embers? A BONE, by all that is horrible! Perhaps part of the skeleton of some hysterical innocent, or some
pathetic count, who was murdered centuries ago in the haunted
apartment of this mysterious castle. Interesting relic! Speak, Lady
Cherubina. Is it as I suspect?' 'Why,' said I, 'I believe--that is to say--for aught I can tell----'

''Pon my conscience,' cried Jerry, 'her ladyship knows just as well as
I do that 'tis nothing but the blade-bone of mutton which she got
broiled for her supper last night.' 'Impossible, Sir!' exclaimed his lordship. 'A heroine never eats of a
four-footed animal. 'Tis always the leg of a lark, or the wing of a
chicken.' And so saying, he began divesting himself of his spear,
shield, and helmet. 'Pray, Mr. Blunderer,' whispered I to Jerry, 'did I not desire you to
clean out the room?' 'You did not say a word about the blade-bone,' said Jerry. 'But did I not bid you clean out the room?' repeated I. 'Don't I tell you----' cried Jerry. 'Can't you speak low?' said I. 'Don't I tell you that not one syllable about the blade-bone ever came
outside your lips?' 'Grant me patience!' said I. 'Answer me yes or no. Did I, or did I not,
order you to clean out the room?' 'Now bad luck to me,' said he, 'if you ant all this time confounding
the blade-bone of mutton with the leg of mutton that you bade me put
under the bed. And accordingly----'

'Gracious goodness!' said I, 'can't you speak within your breath?' 'And accordingly,' whispered he, 'I put it under the velvet pall,
because I thought it might be seen under the bed.' 'Well, that shewed _some_ discretion,' said I. 'Though after all my pains,' said Jerry, 'there is the man in the tin
cloaths has just stripped down that same pall, and discovered the
mutton, and the parsnips, and the bag of salt, and the pewter spoons,
and----'

'Oh, Jerry, Jerry!' said I, dropping my arms lifeless at my sides;
'after that, I give you up!' I then called to his lordship, and drew off his attention, by beginning
an account of all that had happened since our parting. He listened with
great eagerness; and, after my recital, begged of the warden to retire
with him, that they might consult on the best line of policy to be
adopted in the present state of my affairs. They descended the steps; I remained alone. Montmorenci had left his
helmet, shield, and spear behind. I pressed each of them to my heart,
heaved several sighs, and paced the chamber.