But when supper was announced, and the company
adjourned to partake of it, judge of the universal consternation that was
visible in every countenance, when, instead of the light tarts, and nice
jellies and sillybobs that were expected, we beheld a long table, with a
row down the middle of rounds of beef, large cold veal-pies on pewter
plates like tea-trays, cold boiled turkeys, and beef and bacon hams, and,
for ornament in the middle, a perfect stack of celery. The instant I entered the supper-room, I saw there had been a plot: poor
Bailie Kilsyth, who had all the night been in triumph and glory, was for
a season speechless; and when at last he came to himself, he was like to
have been the death of the landlord on the spot; while I could remark,
with the tail of my eye, that secret looks of a queer satisfaction were
exchanged among the beaux before mentioned. This observe, when I made
it, led me to go up to the bailie as he was storming at the bribed and
corrupt innkeeper, and to say to him, that if he would leave the matter
to me, I would settle it to the content of all present; which he,
slackening the grip he had taken of the landlord by the throat, instantly
conceded. Whereupon, I went back to the head of the table, and said
aloud, "that the cold collection had been provided by some secret
friends, and although it was not just what the directors could have
wished, yet it would be as well to bring to mind the old proverb, which
instructs us no to be particular about the mouth of a gi'en horse." But
I added, "before partaking thereof, wel'll hae in our bill frae the
landlord, and settle it,"--and it was called accordingly. I could
discern, that this was a turn that the conspirators did not look for. It,
however, put the company a thought into spirits, and they made the best
o't. But, while they were busy at the table, I took a canny opportunity
of saying, under the rose to one of the gentlemen, "that I saw through
the joke, and could relish it just as well as the plotters; but as the
thing was so plainly felt as an insult by the generality of the company,
the less that was said about it the better; and that if the whole bill,
including the cost of Bailie Kilsyth's wine and spirits, was defrayed, I
would make no enquiries, and the authors might never be known." This
admonishment was not lost, for by-and-by, I saw the gentleman confabbing
together; and the next morning, through the post, I received a twenty-
pound note in a nameless letter, requesting the amount of it to be placed
against the expense of the ball. I was overly well satisfied with this
to say a great deal of what I thought, but I took a quiet step to the
bank, where, expressing some doubt of the goodness of the note, I was
informed it was perfectly good, and had been that very day issued from
the bank to one of the gentlemen, whom, even at this day, it would not be
prudent to expose to danger by naming. Upon a consultation with the other gentlemen, who had the management of
the ball, it was agreed, that we should say nothing of the gift of twenty
pounds, but distribute it in the winter to needful families, which was
done; for we feared that the authors of the derision would be found out,
and that ill-blood might be bred in the town. But although in the main I was considered by the events and transactions
already rehearsed, a prudent and sagacious man, yet I was not free from
the consequences of envy. To be sure, they were not manifested in any
very intolerant spirit, and in so far they caused me rather molestation
of mind than actual suffering; but still they kithed in evil, and thereby
marred the full satisfactory fruition of my labours and devices. Among
other of the outbreakings alluded to that not a little vexed me, was one
that I will relate, and just in order here to show the animus of men's
minds towards me. We had in the town a clever lad, with a geni of a mechanical turn, who
made punch-bowls of leather, and legs for cripples of the same commodity,
that were lighter and easier to wear than either legs of cork or timber. His name was Geordie Sooplejoint, a modest, douce, and well-behaved young
man--caring for little else but the perfecting of his art. I had heard
of his talent, and was curious to converse with him; so I spoke to Bailie
Pirlet, who had taken him by the hand, to bring him and his leather punch-
bowl, and some of his curious legs and arms, to let me see them; the
which the bailie did, and it happened that while they were with me, in
came Mr Thomas M'Queerie, a dry neighbour at a joke. After some generality of discourse concerning the inventions, whereon
Bailie Pirlet, who was naturally a gabby prick-me-dainty body, enlarged
at great length, with all his well dockit words, as if they were on
chandler's pins, pointing out here the utility of the legs to persons
maimed in the wars of their country, and showing forth there in what
manner the punch-bowls were specimens of a new art that might in time
supplant both China and Staffordshire ware, and deducing therefrom the
benefits that would come out of it to the country at large, and
especially to the landed interest, in so much as the increased demand
which it would cause for leather, would raise the value of hides, and per
consequence the price of black cattle--to all which Mr M'Queerie listened
with a shrewd and a thirsty ear; and when the bailie had made an end of
his paternoster, he proposed that I should make a filling of Geordie's
bowl, to try if it did not leak. "Indeed, Mr Pawkie," quo' he, "it will be a great credit to our town to
hae had the merit o' producing sic a clever lad, who, as the bailie has
in a manner demonstrated, is ordained to bring about an augmentation o'
trade by his punch-bowls, little short of what has been done wi' the
steam-engines. Geordie will be to us what James Watt is to the ettling
town of Greenook, so we can do no less than drink prosperity to his
endeavours." I did not much like this bantering of Mr M'Queerie, for I saw it made
Geordie's face grow red, and it was not what he had deserved; so to
repress it, and to encourage the poor lad, I said, "Come, come,
neighbour, none of your wipes--what Geordie has done, is but arles of
what he may do." "That's no to be debated," replied Mr M'Queerie, "for he has shown
already that he can make very good legs and arms; and I'm sure I shouldna
be surprised were he in time to make heads as good as a bailie's." I never saw any mortal man look as that pernickity personage, the bailie,
did at this joke, but I suppressed my own feelings; while the bailie,
like a bantam cock in a passion, stotted out of his chair with the spunk
of a birslet pea, demanding of Mr M'Queerie an explanation of what he
meant by the insinuation. It was with great difficulty that I got him
pacified; but unfortunately the joke was oure good to be forgotten, and
when it was afterwards spread abroad, as it happened to take its birth in
my house, it was laid to my charge, and many a time was I obligated to
tell all about it, and how it couldna be meant for me, but had been
incurred by Bailie Pirlet's conceit of spinning out long perjink
speeches. Nor did I get every thing my own way, for I was often thwarted in matters
of small account, and suffered from them greater disturbance and
molestation than things of such little moment ought to have been allowed
to produce within me; and I do not think that any thing happened in the
whole course of my public life, which gave me more vexation than what I
felt in the last week of my second provostry. For many a year, one Robin Boss had been town drummer; he was a relic of
some American-war fencibles, and was, to say the God's truth of him, a
divor body, with no manner of conduct, saving a very earnest endeavour to
fill himself fou as often as he could get the means; the consequence of
which was, that his face was as plooky as a curran' bun, and his nose as
red as a partan's tae. One afternoon there was a need to send out a proclamation to abolish a
practice that was growing into a custom, in some of the bye parts of the
town, of keeping swine at large--ordering them to be confined in proper
styes, and other suitable places. As on all occasions when the matter to
be proclaimed was from the magistrates, Thomas, on this, was attended by
the town-officers in their Sunday garbs, and with their halberts in their
hands; but the abominable and irreverent creature was so drunk, that he
wamblet to and fro over the drum, as if there had not been a bane in his
body. He was seemingly as soople and as senseless as a bolster.--Still,
as this was no new thing with him, it might have passed; for James Hound,
the senior officer, was in the practice, when Robin was in that state, of
reading the proclamations himself.--On this occasion, however, James
happened to be absent on some hue and cry quest, and another of the
officers (I forget which) was appointed to perform for him. Robin,
accustomed to James, no sooner heard the other man begin to read, than he
began to curse and swear at him as an incapable nincompoop--an
impertinent term that he was much addicted to. The grammar school was at
the time skailing, and the boys seeing the stramash, gathered round the
officer, and yelling and shouting, encouraged Robin more and more into
rebellion, till at last they worked up his corruption to such a pitch,
that he took the drum from about his neck, and made it fly like a
bombshell at the officer's head. The officers behaved very well, for they dragged Robin by the lug and the
horn to the tolbooth, and then came with their complaint to me. Seeing
how the authorities had been set at nought, and the necessity there was
of making an example, I forthwith ordered Robin to be cashiered from the
service of the town; and as so important a concern as a proclamation
ought not to be delayed, I likewise, upon the spot, ordered the officers
to take a lad that had been also a drummer in a marching regiment, and go
with him to make the proclamation. Nothing could be done in a more earnest and zealous public spirit than
this was done by me. But habit had begot in the town a partiality for
the drunken ne'er-do-well, Robin; and this just act of mine was
immediately condemned as a daring stretch of arbitrary power; and the
consequence was, that when the council met next day, some sharp words
flew from among us, as to my usurping an undue authority; and the thank I
got for my pains was the mortification to see the worthless body restored
to full power and dignity, with no other reward than an admonition to
behave better for the future. Now, I leave it to the unbiassed judgment
of posterity to determine if any public man could be more ungraciously
treated by his colleagues than I was on this occasion. But, verily, the
council had their reward. The divor, Robin Boss, being, as I have recorded, reinstated in office,
soon began to play his old tricks. In the course of the week after the
Michaelmas term at which my second provostry ended, he was so
insupportably drunk that he fell head foremost into his drum, which cost
the town five-and-twenty shillings for a new one--an accident that was
not without some satisfaction to me; and I trow I was not sparing in my
derisive commendations on the worth of such a public officer. Nevertheless, he was still kept on, some befriending him for compassion,
and others as it were to spite me. But Robin's good behaviour did not end with breaking the drum, and
costing a new one.--In the course of the winter it was his custom to
beat, "Go to bed, Tom," about ten o'clock at night, and the reveille at
five in the morning.--In one of his drunken fits he made a mistake, and
instead of going his rounds as usual at ten o'clock, he had fallen asleep
in a change house, and waking about the midnight hour in the terror of
some whisky dream, he seized his drum, and running into the streets,
began to strike the fire-beat in the most awful manner. It was a fine clear frosty moonlight, and the hollow sound of the drum
resounded through the silent streets like thunder.--In a moment every
body was a-foot, and the cry of "Whar is't? whar's the fire?" was heard
echoing from all sides.--Robin, quite unconscious that he alone was the
cause of the alarm, still went along beating the dreadful summons. I
heard the noise and rose; but while I was drawing on my stockings, in the
chair at the bed-head, and telling Mrs Pawkie to compose herself, for our
houses were all insured, I suddenly recollected that Robin had the night
before neglected to go his rounds at ten o'clock as usual, and the
thought came into my head that the alarm might be one of his inebriated
mistakes; so, instead of dressing myself any further, I went to the
window, and looked out through the glass, without opening it, for, being
in my night clothes, I was afraid of taking cold. The street was as throng as on a market day, and every face in the
moonlight was pale with fear.--Men and lads were running with their
coats, and carrying their breeches in their hands; wives and maidens were
all asking questions at one another, and even lasses were fleeing to and
fro, like water nymphs with urns, having stoups and pails in their
hands.--There was swearing and tearing of men, hoarse with the rage of
impatience, at the tolbooth, getting out the fire-engine from its stance
under the stair; and loud and terrible afar off, and over all, came the
peal of alarm from drunken Robin's drum. I could scarcely keep my composity when I beheld and heard all this, for
I was soon thoroughly persuaded of the fact. At last I saw Deacon
Girdwood, the chief advocate and champion of Robin, passing down the
causey like a demented man, with a red nightcap, and his big-coat on--for
some had cried that the fire was in his yard.--"Deacon," cried I, opening
the window, forgetting in the jocularity of the moment the risk I ran
from being so naked, "whar away sae fast, deacon?" The deacon stopped and said, "Is't out? is't out?" "Gang your ways home," quo' I very coolly, "for I hae a notion that a'
this hobleshow's but the fume of a gill in your friend Robin's head."