There was much to interest Mary Cuthbert in Mrs. Deborah Moreton; under all
her peculiarities, she discovered warm affection for her niece, and deep sorrow for the
eccentricities of her conduct. A near and beloved relative going so far astray from every
thing that was right, was surely a painful subject of contemplation. And Mary's respect
and attention insensibly heightened towards Mrs. Moreton, as these reflections passed in
her mind. With surprise, not unmixed with satisfaction, Mary Cuthbert distinguished
Montgomery amongst the congregation assembled in the church; and when the service
was ended, and she was moving slowly along with Mrs. Deborah Moreton through the
crowd, in order to leave the church, he joined them, and his compliments were most
graciously received by the old lady, who insisted on both her companions resting
themselves at her house before they returned to the Villa. This invitation they did not
refuse; and, on entering the house, Mary recognised Miss Davenport sitting on the sopha,
not without a suffusion of crimson at the recollection of where she had last seen her. In the most unaffected and prepossessing manner, Miss Davenport advanced
towards Mrs. Deborah Moreton, who welcomed her with much satisfaction; and
introduced her particularly to Mary Cuthbert, as to the ward and first cousin of Miss
Moreton, and then to Montgomery. Miss Davenport immediately inquired after Miss Moreton, and said, "had I known
she had so near a relative at the Villa, I should have made a point of calling; but I shall
certainly not fail in paying my respects very soon." Mary curtesied, and Mrs. Deborah
Moreton said, "Do so, my dear Miss Davenport, you will find this young lady one of the
right sort, one of the old school; and I shall take it as a particular favour done to me, if
you will visit a little more frequently at the Villa, for your example may do wonders." Miss Davenport seemed confused, and turned the conversation, by saying "It was
in my way to church that I heard of Miss Cuthbert; I accidentally called on a poor woman,
whose husband has been very ill, and she spoke to me in warm terms of the goodness and
sympathy of a young lady lately come to the Attic Villa." Mary turned towards the
window. "I knew you would suit exactly; I said so from the first; I said that you would do
exactly for one another," said Mrs. Deborah, a pleased expression gradually softening the
asperity of her harsh features.-"One turns away from hearing her own praises; the other
always calls accidentally on the poor objects of her bounty-I said so, I said from the
first, that you would do exactly for one another!" Montgomery followed Mary to the window, and while his eyes flashed
intelligence, he said in a low voice-
"Do good by stealth, and blush to find its fame!" So grateful is praise from characters whom we have reason to respect, that
perhaps Mary Cuthbert had never felt more happy than at this moment. The reserve
incident to her disposition seemed to fall off; and she joined in a general conversation
with readiness and spirit; which the good sense of Miss Davenport, the vivacity of
Montgomery and the quaint remarks of Mrs. Deborah Moreton rendered very agreeable
and animated. The two young ladies seemed equally reluctant to separate; but Miss Davenport
had an indispensable engagement, and Mary found it time to retrace her way to the Attic
Villa. Montgomery was but too happy in the prospect of being her escort; but, when he
took leave of Mrs. Moreton, and mentioned his intentions of leaving the Villa the
succeeding morning, that lady loudly expressed her regret; Mary Cuthbert was silent, and
her eyes sought the carpet. "I do not wonder at your going; I cannot say that I do," said Mrs. Deborah; "for a
man of sense and understanding must feel himself in a very awkward situation, in that
temple of folly!-I had hoped that my niece-I was in hopes that she might have had
discernment to have-but you are going, Mr. Montgomery?" Mrs. Deborah Moreton,
paused again, and curtesied slowly to Montgomery, as she bade him farewell. For some minutes the walk was pursued in silence. Mary Cuthbert was the first
who broke it, by saying, "Miss Davenport appears a charming young woman." "She does," said Montgomery, "and much do I rejoice in your introduction to her;
for, deeply interested as I must ever feel for you, my dear Miss Cuthbert," (and the dear
Miss Cuthbert was expressed with unwonted emphasis), "I must consider the countenance
of Mrs. Deborah Moreton, and the friendship of Miss Davenport as great ameliorations to
your situation." "You are very good," said Mary, "I think I feel them so; I am grateful for the
kindness and sympathy of every human being, and to you, Mr. Montgomery, I owe a great
deal, for the consideration and attention which you have manifested towards me!" "Grateful! grateful to me! Oh Mary," said Montgomery, and he paused and looked
in her speaking face; but, checking the instantaneous impulse of his feelings, by
remembering their respective situations, he said, "I should have been unworthy the name
of a man, Miss Cuthbert, if I had not been interested by your introduction here, being
privy to all the circumstances of it; and had my dearest sister been thus situated, I could
not have wished her to deport herself in a more becoming and exemplary manner than
you have done!" Mary tried to vary the conversation; but she did not find her ideas very prompt. Montgomery was not peculiarly brilliant in his remarks, and made none but indifferent
ones, till they had nearly reached the house; when, hastily turning, and taking Mary's
hand with emotion, he said, "this may be the only moment allowed me of saying, that I
must always feel interested for your happiness; and that, though my lot in this world may
throw me at a wide distance from you; yet shall I ever fervently pray for your felicity, and
bear about me the remembrance of your wondrous sweetness; even though I should never
meet you more-God bless you, farewell, Miss Cuthbert!" The last words were spoken with peculiar emotion; they forced the tears to the
eyes of Mary; but, luckily, Montgomery saw them not; for, relinquishing her hand, he fled

from her, and turned by another path into the shrubbery, instead of accompanying her into
the house. Mary's full heart overflowed at her eyes; and she was glad to escape from the
observation of the family, and to gain her own room, where she tried to restrain her
emotions; emotions for which she could not account, as her acquaintance with
Montgomery had been too short, she thought, to justify them. "To be sure, his manners
were particularly pleasing; his respectful attention to her had been peculiarly grateful; and
I feel it now," thought Mary, "because the loss of my dear parents has left me a forlorn
and isolated orphan on the world!" Mary soon gained her accustomed composure, and went into the Lyceum to seek
Miss Moreton, not having paid her compliments to her for the day;-but Miss Moreton
was not there. Mr. Germ was employed in sorting shells, and designating them under their
respective classes, as he put them into little paper boxes; while Copy, with his pallet and
easel before him, had sketched the outline of Superstition, and a Gorgon front he had
given her; notwithstanding that, it bore a slight resemblance to the harsh features of Mrs.
Deborah Moreton. In the viranda was seated the Monsieur in his morning robes, his hair
"en papillot," with his Cremona on his shoulder scraping, "Go to the Devil and shake
yourself;" and several other dances which bore equally elegant appellations. Mary was leaving the room again, when the Monsieur cried out, "Oh now,
Ma'amselle, now don't leave us, me pray you, Ma'amselle Cuthbert, do not leave us-we
be only little tranqueel amusement, just to pass away little time in absence of les belles
Damoiselles." "Where is Miss Moreton, Monsieur?" asked Mary, "I was come to seek
her." "Oh she be gone with Monsieur Walwyn or the Chevalier-Oh! you would have
been delighted, if you had been here just now; we look all about, but we could not find
you; 'twas ver fine, ver fine, indeed. She perform in one tragedy the character of one
Madame Caleesta, and the Monsieur Walwyn was Lothario, the grand hero of the piece;
one ver fine man, ver great man, indeed!-we look all about for you, Ma'amselle, and for
Monsieur Montgomery, but they said you vas gone to church-he he! he! he! varm
weather for church, Ma'amselle, ver warm weather, indeed! Oh! Ma'amselle Cuthbert!" and he tapped her cheek with the end of the fiddle stick, "what beautiful, ver fine colour
in your cheeks, they look like the Provence rose!" At this moment, the Signora's large person passed through the door of the
Lyceum; and, in a louder key, with more vivacity, and in better English, than she
generally used, she said, "Monsieur, where have you been? I have been waiting for you
this half hour; and here I find you fooling with your fiddle-stick! do come and braid my
hair!" "Oh, Ma chere Signora, why did you not ring your bell, den I fly to execute your
commands!" The Signora said no more, and without noticing Mary Cuthbert, returned to her
apartments; whilst the agile and light-heeled Monsieur skipped after her, practising the
newest cotillion step all the way. The remainder of this day was passed like any day but Sunday. Miss Moreton cast a hasty glance of inquiring scrutiny on the ingenuous
countenance of Mary, when she heard that Montgomery had been to church; but reading
nothing there, she returned to her own easy and conscious superiority. The Signora thought it right to be obliging on the eve of her departure, in order to
ensure herself an invitation to repeat the visit; and some of the amatory effusions of the
Italian poets were sung by her, and accompanied by the Monsieur, with expressive
attitudes and gestures. The Chevalier appeared to be heart-struck, Miss Moreton was
charmed, and every moment turned to Montgomery for his approbation; who rejoiced at
hearing Mary Cuthbert say, she had not the slightest acquaintance with the Italian
language. Her ears at least were not offended, though he perceived that the extravagant
gestures of the large and half clothed warbler; and the fantastic attitudes of the Monsieur
were not calculated to give her satisfaction. Before Miss Moreton left the room for the night, Montgomery advanced towards
her; and, gracefully thanking her for her politeness and hospitality, he mentioned his
intention of quitting the Villa in the morning. Miss Moreton was surprised and hurt to hear him announce his departure. She
tried to dissuade him; but, not being able to prevail, she extended her fair hand, and gave
him a most pressing invitation to renew his visit. Mary Cuthbert received another fervent
farewell, as he quitted the room, and soon retired to her own apartment; where her best
wishes were offered up for the safety and welfare of the amiable Montgomery. Miss Moreton retired also, but not to rest! She had been foiled in her dearest
wishes, "the cold, the insensate Montgomery was going to leave the Attic Villa!" "And is he then cold? is he insensate?" asked she. "Ah no, no; it is the very
magnitude, the warmth of his passion, which drives him from me; he fears to stay, he
fears to trust his own heart in my presence!" This was a more pleasant idea than the first; and, prone to construe every thing as
her wishes would have it to be, Miss Moreton had soon resolved that this was actually the
case. She was really charmed with Montgomery. The eloquence of his manners; the
manly beauty of his person; had raised a passion in her bosom, which she had never felt
before. But vanity was still the ruling feature of her mind. It was not according to her
disposition to let Montgomery know the progress he had made in her affections at
present; nor, till she should have acquired yet greater influence over him, and enveloped
his whole soul, as it were, by the irradiation of her talents and her virtues. Then, when he
should have worshipped her at a distance, as do the Persian idolaters the Sun, she would
beam resplendently upon him, and raise him to life and happiness! A perfect Machiavel in art, nobody guessed at her secret sentiments; and, when
she met her company in the morning, the softened voice, in which she addressed Walwyn,
the sentimental effusions which she poured forth to the Chevalier, led each to imagine
that he was the favoured object of Miss Moreton's preference. Montgomery had quitted the house at break of day. The Signora and the Monsieur
took their departure about noon. "Happy, beyond the common condition of her
sex, is she who has found a friend indeed; open
hearted, yet discreet; generally fervent, yet steady;
thoroughly virtuous, but not severe; wise and
cheerful at the same time!" FORDYCE. THE absence of Montgomery was deeply felt by Mary Cuthbert; but she received some
consolation by a visit from Miss Davenport, who came, unannounced, into the little parlour
where she was sitting at work; and taking out her netting, remained with her two hours. Mary
was delighted with her new acquaintance. She found her a most sensible and well-informed
young woman; her manners entirely divested of self-importance and conceit; her heart teeming
with benevolence and charity towards the whole world. No romantic effusions; no bombastic
exaggerations, fell from the lips of Miss Davenport; her words came from the heart; they did not
evaporate in expressions; and her conversation was marked by sincerity, yet a sincerity chastened
from offending by the obligingness of her manner. Miss Moreton was studying with the Chevalier, and, as she was never interrupted from
pursuing her interesting researches by morning visitors, Mary had the pleasure of an unrestrained
conversation with Miss Davenport, who pressed her to spend the ensuing day in the same
friendly manner, at Heathfield Cottage. Mary said, "she would gladly avail herself of the invitation, if Miss Moreton would
permit it." "She will permit it, I am confident," said Miss Davenport; "you must not be too obedient
at first, my dear; but I am sure you will be allowed to visit me, for I have never been one of Miss
Moreton's rivals in any shape. She has always been very civil to me; but we think so differently
on most subjects, and our pursuits are so dissimilar, that you cannot wonder at our not being very
intimate." Heathfield Cottage was about two miles from the Attic Villa. Mr. Davenport, the father
of the young lady, who inhabited it, had been a respectable manufacturer in the city of Coventry;
and, having acquired a fortune to satisfy his moderate wishes, he purchased Heathfield Cottage,
with twenty acres of land, and retired from business with his infant daughter. Mr. Davenport was a man of strict principles, both of morality and religion. He had a
taste for reading; which, though it had lain dormant for many years, whilst engaged in the active
scenes of life, was now suffered to revive again. His choice of books was judicious. He carefully
discarded all which were calculated to dazzle by their brilliancy, and to blind the judgment; and
he selected those alone which referred every thing to the laws of right and the precepts of
morality, which were deducible from the Christian religion. Such being the bent of his mind, no wonder that his daughter's was formed in the same
model; and that she caught those truths, which came mended from the tongue of her father. *
Gentle and affectionate in her disposition, with an accomplished and a perspicuous mind,
and a prepossessing person, Miss Davenport was left sole mistress of herself and a fortune of
fifteen thousand pounds, at the early age of nineteen. Her conduct in this situation had been
strictly prudent and highly meritorious. No ostentation, no show, was observable in her mansion;
the chaste simplicity of her manners gave the tone to her whole household, and decorum and
propriety reigned throughout.-Prudent and economical in her own expences, the charities of
Miss Davenport were diffuse and extensive; and though, in accomplishing some of her plans of
benevolence, she was obliged to appear to the world in her true character of benefactress to her
fellow-creatures; yet where it lay in her power, she scrupulously adhered to the scripture
injunction of not letting her right hand know what her left had done. Conforming to the customs of the world as far as they were reconcileable with her duty,
there was nothing precise or eccentric in her manners or conversation. There was not indeed as
much gaiety, as in most young women; but this was caused by some foregoing circumstances;
for, previous to these, Clara Davenport had been the gayest of the gay! Mr. Davenport had been dead three years. When Miss Davenport's independence was
first made public, many had been the pretenders to her hand; but a Captain Walsingham, then
quartered in the city of Coventry with his regiment, was the only one who had any chance of
success. To the rest Miss Davenport speedily gave a polite but gentle refusal; and her mildness
and modesty secured her their friendship and esteem, even while she put an end to the hopes of
the lover. Lesly Walsingham was handsome in person; elegant and insinuating in his manners; he
possessed a genteel fortune; his family was superior to Miss Davenport's; and his character was
held in general estimation by the world: and that world universally applauded the choice of
Clara, when they saw Captain Walsingham received at Heathfield Cottage as an accepted lover. Miss Davenport was of a tender and affectionate disposition; and the preference which
she felt for Walsingham was very great. In his turn he was deeply in love, and thought that in the
whole created universe there was not such another amiable being as his Clara. At the end of twelve months, after the death of her father, Miss Davenport had promised
to become his wife.