“To gain the point to which our soul aspires,
We nourish toil and reek hard labour sweet,
For this, thro’ Greenland’s frosts, or India’s fires,
The hardy sailors, death and dangers meet,
And the proud chieftain, bolder than discreet,
In blood imbued pursues the martial fray,
And lovers eke, thro’ life’s hard tempest beat,
Led on by hope, that never dying ray,
Hope wantons in their breasts, and strews with flowers
their way.”
THE change of name adopted by Sir Edward sufficiently accounts for his concealment; as Mr. Price after mentioning to the ladies his having a Mr. Balfour for his guest, in whose society, he every day found encreasing gratification, never repeated his name, except to quote an occasional opinion or remark from him; for judging others by himself, he imagined that the concerns of strangers, could not be very interesting to those, who had in their own affairs subjects of sufficient importance to occupy their thoughts; but his benevolence made him now believe, that it would give Mr. Balfour pleasure, to hear that the ladies, had accidentally heard of an old acquaintance, by whose means the widow might perhaps be prevailed on to return to her friends. The countenance of this good man, was unusually animated, as he entered his little parsonage, and he found its cheerfulness reflected in the supposed Balfour’s, who rose to meet him with great alacrity. “One would imagine,” said Mr. Price smiling, “that you knew I had a little news to communicate, and your haste to hear it reproaches me, for not having before amused you with some village anecdotes.” “In truth my dear sir,” replied Clayton, “I am impatient to inform you of an adventure of my own, but tell me what is the subject of your intelligence, and you shall then hear mine.” Mr. Price immediately entered on the pleasure he felt from the hope of being serviceable to his female friends, and related the substance of the conversation he had had with them, but when he mentioned Claudina’s, or as he called her, Louisa’s agitation and tears, Clayton hastily interrupted him, “Do you imagine, sir, they were tears of joy? ah! make me happy by confirming that delightful supposition. But no, I deceive myself, they were tears of aversion and anger, you do not answer me, you believe then that they flowed from such odious sources?” Mr. Price unaccustomed to ecstacies, thought Mr. Balfour’s brain was a little confused, but seeing him become calm again he checked the idea, and quietly replied with a smile which he could not conquer, “I own I did not expect you would so suddenly have become interested in this young lady, to whose praises you have often listened with an indifference, which I thought they did not deserve; but however, I will not punish you for it, by delaying to answer questions asked with so much impatience. It appeared to me, that she wept with mingled pleasure and tenderness, evidently inspired by unexpectedly meeting a man, whom in my opinion, she regards with more than common esteem, and truly do I hope he will prove worthy the affections of one so amiable.”

“He will! it shall be the study of his life to become so,” exclaimed Clayton, “ah! sir, you know not the new existence to which you have restored me.” “You are then acquainted with the gentleman?” asked Mr. Price, with unaffected surprise. “The gentleman, my dear sir!” replied Clayton, “did not you tell me that she wept for me? and that you believed she regarded me with no common esteem? and can you wonder at my transports!” The good clergyman again thought Mr. Balfour’s intellects were disordered, but Sir Edward recovering from the ebullitions of his rapture, soon convinced him of his sanity, by giving him an undisguised account of the unfortunate accident, which had driven Lady Courtney into the retirement, where he had happily discovered her. Mr. Price sincerely wished that events so melancholy, might have a fortunate termination, and proposed to take Sir Edward with him the next day, when he should visit Lady Courtney, observing that as the meeting, when ever it took place, must inevitably be very painful, it would be adviseable, at least not to encrease the distressful sensations that would be excited, by allowing much time for their anticipation. Sir Edward consented to accompany him; but on being introduced to Lady Courtney, how was he shocked to see the difference produced in her appearance by a few month’s suffering. Her eyes were sunk, and their lustre quenched in ceaseless tears; her complexion was faded; her lips pale; her voice broken, and hollow; her figure bent and emaciated; and a deep incessant cough, affectingly proclaimed the alarming state of her health. Such was the altered Everilda; and unexpected as severe, was the trial to which Clayton was exposed, in witnessing the afflicting change. For some minutes, he stood lost in thought, and vainly endeavoured to summon fortitude to speak, but the dignified ease of her manner recalled his attention. “Sir Edward Clayton,” she said in a firm tone, though at the sight of him her cheek had become unusually pale, “you see me much altered, and you are afraid I should perceive that you think so; but my health has been too long precarious, to leave me in doubt as to the inroads which disease has made upon my constitution. Let us not however, speak any more on this subject, which no complaints can remedy; or of the past, which no regrets can recal.” She then exerted resolution enough to converse with Mr. Price on indifferent topics, and Sir Edward felt convinced by her composure, her dejection, and above all by her calm politeness towards him, that the remembrance of her husband, was the only idea which now occupied her heart. This conviction made him sensible of the void in his own; and he looked incessantly towards Claudina, whose eyes studiously avoided his, but when they accidentally met, their souls mingled in every glance. The first visit was short and constrained, but the next was less embarrassing, and in the course of it, Sir Edward gained resolution to enter on the subject of informing Lady Courtney’s friends of her retreat. She had had time to consider it; her delicacy told her that Sir Edward ought not to reside a single day in a village, where she had professed that her intention was to remain unknown; yet to urge the impropriety of it to him, and thereby occasion his removal, was what she could not resolve on, as she thought it would be acting cruelly to Claudina, whose attachment to him she well knew; she imagined she could read in his countenance, that it was returned with fervour, and that he waited only for an opportunity to declare it. Yet this did not authorize her to risk her own reputation, by suffering his visits, for though she knew they were no longer directed to herself, yet the world would not know his altered inclinations, “And I have already,” said she to herself, “outraged society too much in his company.” The result of her reflections was, a

resolution to gain some days of happiness for Claudina, by allowing Sir Edward to send an express to Lord Drelincourt, as in the interim, the most rigid propriety could not be offended, by his being received in company with Mr. Price, as his guest. It was not in the nature of Lady Courtney’s friendship, to praise Claudina without enthusiasm. She delighted to dwell in her absence, on the gratitude she owed her, and invariably concluded her eulogiums by saying, that to see her happy was the only gratification she could receive in life. Sir Edward soon fully comprehended, that he had Lady Courtney’s warmest wishes for his success; and if he might believe the softness in Claudina’s eyes, the tenderness in her tones, and her ill-concealed embarrassment whenever they were left together, his case was not a hopeless one. But true love is timid; he feared to trust appearances, by which he had before been deceived, or to risk, by a presumptuous declaration, depriving himself even of the delusions of hope. He therefore continued to sigh and gaze in silence, notwithstanding the pretty and lively Bianca told him one day, that she was glad he had come, “for,” said she, “Donna Claudina has never looked up, since the day she fainted away, and said your honor was murdered, and I am sure it has made me so dull, that if it had not been for Giuseppe, I should have been as bad as she is.”
Sir Edward was however soon called on to act decidedly. He was in company with the ladies one afternoon, when a letter was brought to him; it was from Bernard his valet, and informed him that Lord Drelincourt, with part of his family, and the Marchese and his lady, would reach Llewenmawr that evening. Sir Edward turned pale; he saw himself obliged to depart, just when his heart had forgotten its former wounds, in the charms of a new and more fortunate attachment. Lady Courtney perceived his agitation, and guessed that the letter contained information of the time when her friends would arrive. She had complained of unusual languor the whole day, and finding her spirits quite unequal to any new trial, in order to prevent the introduction of the subject at that moment, she hastily said to Mr. Price. “If you my dear Sir, will favour me with your support, I will walk round the garden, for I feel myself suddenly faint and oppressed, perhaps the air may revive me.” He reached her cloak, and they left the room, where Claudina and Sir Edward remained. The former attempted to appear very busy, she leaned over some drawings which she pretended to touch, but her trembling hand betrayed itself by the irregular strokes of the pencil, it seemed to guide. Sir Edward appeared no less occupied in admiring the sketches and ornaments, with which her elegant fancy had adorned the room, but he soon left them to gaze on the fairer artist. He took a chair nearer her’s; “Claudina,” he said, “you must have perceived my uneasiness on the perusal of the letter which I just now received,” he paused for a reply, but as he had already affirmed what she could not deny, she did not think one necessary. He continued, “Claudina, that letter told me what I could never gain resolution to tell myself, it told me that I must leave you. Lord Drelincourt will be here this evening, I am not so far lost in my own gratification as to offend him by my presence; I make to him the greatest sacrifice in my power, I tear myself from one whom I love, and esteem beyond the world, and without whom my life will be a blank. I shall leave England immediately; my exile would be supportable had I hope to sustain me in it; oh, send me not ‘a banished man to roam,’ without even the consolation of thinking that I am remembered by you; speak, my Claudina, but one word, will you pity a man whom you could make happy? will you pardon his past errors in his adoration of your virtues, will you accept his vows and suffer him to live for you?” He had

spoken with a rapidity which defied interruption and when he ceased, Claudina wished he had continued to speak, for she was unable to reply. She remembered the time when she had given way to the most exquisite sensations of delight at Florence, and that they were succeeded by the severest disappointment and mortification. She feared the felicity of the present moment might be equally transient, and she dreaded lest the tones of her own voice should dissipate the fascinating illusion. But silence is eloquence to the lover who can construe it in his favour, and Clayton clasped her to his heart in a transport of joy and gratitude, for the indulgence that she had shewn his cause. We shall pass over the remainder of the scene for two reasons, first, that by those who have ever been in love, it will be easily imagined, and secondly, that we may not make those who have unfortunately never felt the influence of the tender passion, repine at the insipid medium of an existence merely selfish. Suffice it then to say, that Sir Edward took his leave of Lady Courtney with the utmost respect, and of his Claudina with the liveliest tenderness, and newborn hope. On returning to the parsonage with Mr. Price, he paid him the most grateful acknowledgments for the kindness that he had received from him; he told him his reason for a departure apparently sudden, saying that he was anxious to spare Lord Drelincourt the apprehension of even accidentally meeting with him, and should therefore set off to Caermarthen where he should stay that night, and wait the arrival of his valet, he should then probably leave England, perhaps for years; but if he never returned to it, absence would not efface from his mind the remembrance of the obligations he owed this worthy friend, under whose roof he had recovered his peace of mind, and to whom he might be indirectly indebted for every future blessing of his life. Never did human breast contain a warmer or more susceptible heart than Clayton’s, and the tears sprung into his expressive hazel eyes, as he pressed Mr. Price’s hand, and regretted that a man so formed to embellish and improve society should live in a solitude unworthy of his endowments; not because the praise so justly his due, was confined to the rustic voices of his little flock, the applause of men could not add to his virtues, but the narrow circle in which he moved, confined their fruits, which were sufficiently plentiful to enrich a space wide indeed. Mr. Price was equally affected with Sir Edward; but he endeavoured to smile as he returned his fervent pressure, saying, “I can hardly thank you for your society, for I fear the pleasure I have derived from it, will make me dissatisfied with my own; yet have I not thy image, my Maria? and can solitude ever be irksome whilst cheered by the remembrance of thee?” He cast his eyes to heaven as he made this apostrophe, and his spirit seemed to soar above the earth which confined him from the angel he invoked.” “Pardon me Sir,” he resumed, “as I am so soon to lose you, I am already beginning to fall into the habits in which I indulge when alone; but you will readily excuse me, for you are an enthusiast, and will not refuse an old man, a little of the imagination which makes the happiness of a young one.” He again endeavoured to smile, but his heart was full, and he turned aside to conceal the tears by which it might find relief. Clayton was unmanned, he bade a hasty adieu, “God bless you.” “God bless you,” was warmly repeated. Sir Edward mounted his horse, and when he had proceeded a few paces, he looked back, and saw the good man slowly returning to his house, and pausing as he passed his Maria’s grave. Affliction is the wholesome soil of virtue;
Where patience, honor, sweet humanity,
Calm fortitude, take root, and strongly flourish: Whilst prosp’rous fortune that allures with pleasure, Dazzles with pomp, and undermines with flattery, Poisons the soil, and its best produce kills. MALLET. AS the time approached when Lady Courtney expected the arrival of her friends, her whole soul was agitated; and she walked about the room in restless impatience, perpetually enquiring the hour. One moment she repented having given her consent to see them; the next she was uneasy at their delay, and longed to embrace them. She then, for the first time, regretted the alteration in her looks; “It will make them unhappy,” said she, “and I am not deserving of their anxiety.”
At length the wished-for, though dreaded, moment arrived. Bianca ran breathless into the room, exclaiming, “Oh! my lady they are all come. There is my honored lady the Marchesa, and your noble father, coming down the hill; for the good pastor went to tell them, that it was dangerous to descend in the carriage; and Lord and Lady Drelincourt are going to his house to stay till you have seen my dear revered lady the Marchesa.” “Ah!” exclaimed the pale and trembling Lady Courtney, “the trial will be too much for me; how shall I bear to meet my mother’s eyes? Alas! were she less tender, I should not thus dread to see her.” Presently footsteps were heard; they approached the door; a hand was about to open it, but desisted as if irresolute, and Lady Courtney distinguished her mother’s voice, though suppressed into a whisper. “Ah! save me,” she shrieked covering her face, “it is she indeed! hide me Claudina, hide me from my injured parents.”
Her exclamation brought them into the room, at the moment when she had thrown herself on her knees, and concealed her face with her hands. “My Everilda, my darling child,” said the agitated Marchesa, fondly hanging over her, “will you not embrace your mother?” Lady Courtney looked not up; her bosom heaved with convulsive sobs, and she shrunk from the kind caresses of her afflicted parents. “I deserve your reproaches,” said she, “spare them not; I deserve them, and I shall not live very long to be tortured by the recollection of them.” “Ah! replied the Marchesa, “can you think so harshly of us my child, as to believe that we should reproach you in affliction? No; God forbid that any severity of ours should add to it! but you have forgotten us, and this wished-for meeting, only plants new daggers in my heart, by showing me that to you it gives no pleasure.” “My love, my Everilda,” said the Marchese affectionately, endeavouring to raise her, “you will not afflict your mother; she is in tears, will you not speak one word of comfort to her?” “In tears!” exclaimed Everilda, starting up, and throwing herself into her mother’s arms, “oh! my mother, weep not for me; let not my own unhappiness be aggravated by witnessing yours.” She wept herself in saying those words, and relieved by it, alternately embraced her parents, and uttered the most endearing expressions. She soon recollected Lord Drelincourt, and anxious to

shew him every mark of respect, desired that he, and the remainder of the party might be immediately sent for, as she was able, and anxious to see them. When they arrived, exhausted by her previous emotions, she received them with affectionate and melancholy composure; she spoke little more during the evening, and by degrees the conversation subsided into perfect silence; all testifying in their looks, the surprise and sorrow, inspired by the striking alteration in her appearance. It seemed as if nature had only waited this affecting scene to begin her operations. Lady Courtney was taken ill, and though at first, she attributed her disorder to the agitation that she had undergone, yet her sensations soon convinced her, that whatever might be the cause, the effects could not long be doubtful. “The hour to which I have looked forward,” said she, “through months of anxiety and unhappiness is then at length arrived,” and feeling the love of life revive as it became endangered, she added with the despondency generally attending a situation, which even under the happiest circumstances, subdues the firmness of the firmest, “I shall not survive this trial. Alas! I may not even be spared to embrace my Henry’s child; oh God! grant only that I may live to give it birth, and then teach me to be resigned in death.”
Her weeping mother endeavoured to encourage her, and besought Heaven to impart consolation to her; but her despondency was such, as to retard even the progress of nature, and every hour added to her sufferings, and encreased her danger. “Oh! my Henry,” exclaimed the almost exhausted Everilda, “hadst thou been with me in this trying moment, what could I not have endured!”
At the commencement of Lady Courtney’s illness, the gentlemen had retired to Mr. Price’s; and as the Earl measured the little parlour with quick and uneasy steps, all the delightful sensations of hope, with which he had been agitated, twenty three years before, on a similar occasion, were recalled to his mind. The intermediate time appeared to him as a dream, of happiness, from which he had awakened to regret that he had ever had so fair a vision. One moment he moralized on the vanity of human wishes; the next, he yielded to the hope which threw sunshine over his breast, of loving his darling son, with increased, though chastened fondness in his offspring “I never” said he “knew the extent of my poor Henry’s worth, or of my own regard for him, until death snatched him for ever from me; I had not sufficiently considered the real value of the blessing I enjoyed, and perhaps I was deprived of it, only to make me sensible that I had not appreciated it as I ought. But if Heaven should in mercy vouchsafe again to grant me so inestimable a treasure, I trust that my affection being purified from the dreams of ambition, would not be displeasing; for my study should be to train the object of it, in the purest paths of religion, and morality, and by so doing, to ensure his happiness and make him truly great.” Whilst the Earl reflected thus, Giuseppe came, out of breath, to inform him, that Lady Courtney had given birth to a son. “Thank God.” exclaimed the Earl with fervency, in an instant forgetting that he had ever been unhappy. The Marchese equally grateful and delighted, was going to reward the messenger, but on looking in his face he perceived expressions of distress, and evident traces of tears. Parental anxiety was easily roused, he hastily enquired the cause of this appearance of sorrow, and the poor fellow after in vain endeavouring to excuse it, sobbed out that his lady was so ill, it was scarcely expected she could long survive the birth of her child. The Earl’s joy was not of a selfish kind, and his heart disowned its influence, from the moment when his friends could no longer participate in it. The unhappy Marchese immediately

proposed going to his daughter; and Edmund distressed beyond measure, at the dangerous situation of his sister, whom he had from infancy admired, and loved, accompanied him with the Earl. They found Everilda gazing on her new-born babe, her tears dropped slowly on its features, as she traced in them the remembrance of her lamented husband. “Poor child,” said she as she pressed it to a bosom, where even maternal delight was poisoned by the recollection of him, who ought to have shared it with her, “poor child, thou hast no father; ah! had he lived to embrace thee, what pure felicity might have been mine! But I shall not long be separated from him; yet how can I leave thee, thou guiltless cherub! thou drawst thy mother back to earth; for thy sake I have lived till now, for thy sake I would still gladly live.” She wept again, her agitation encreased, and her attendants fearing the most fatal consequences from its excess, prevailed on her to part with her child for a few minutes, and endeavour to compose herself. She received the congratulations and caresses of her friends with calmness, but as she was too much exhausted to converse with them, they left her to the care of her mother and Lady Drelincourt. The former knelt by her bedside in a state of the most agonizing suspence; she saw the first-born darling of her heart in a situation, too strongly authorizing apprehension, for already were the once brilliant eyes of Lady Courtney closed, already had death spread his paleness over her once glowing complexion. The Marchesa endeavoured in vain to disguise her grief; it burst out with encreased violence from the effort to restrain it. “I shall lose her,” said she, wildly wringing her hands, “I shall lose the dear child who first taught me the delights of a mother! oh! merciful Heaven, spare me this heavy blow; deprive me not of my only daughter, at the moment when she is doubly dear to me.”
Lady Courtney faintly endeavoured to speak, but in vain; her voice was so low that it was inaudible, her lips moved, but no sound was uttered. The Marchesa burst into tears, “I cannot distinguish her inarticulate murmurs,” she said, “alas! it may be her last request, and I am not able to promise her compliance!” Lady Courtney made another effort to speak, and her voice became rather stronger. She asked for her child, it was brought to her; she laid it upon her bosom, and clasping it in one arm, she extended her other hand towards her mother, cast her eyes to Heaven, a smile played upon her lips, and in a gentle sigh her spirit was released, and fled to join her husband’s in happier regions. The sea of fortune doth not ever flow, She draws her favour to the lowest ebb;
Her tides have equal times to come and go,
Her loom doth weave the fine and coarsest web:
No joy so great but runneth to an end, No hap so hard but may in fine amend. Not always fall of leaf nor ever spring, Not endless night, nor yet eternal day:
The saddest birds a season find to sing;
The roughest storm a calm may soon allay. Thus with succeeding turns, God tempereth all That man may hope to rise, yet fear to fall. SOUTHWELL
WE will not detain our readers in the chamber of death; nor will we dismiss them impressed only with gloomy ideas: We will therefore briefly inform them of the principal events which befel the principal characters in this history, and leave them to supply every deficiency from the fruitful source of their own imaginations. Sir Edward Clayton did not forget the obligations which he conceived he owed to Mr. Price; and a few days after his departure, that worthy man received a letter from him, enclosing a bill of one hundred pounds, and requesting his acceptance of the same sum annually; saying that as a larger might rather have the appearance of a favour, than a token of friendly remembrance, he trusted the insignificance of what he offered, would induce Mr. Price to oblige him by retaining it. The present so delicately made, created a sigh in the bosom of the receiver, for it recalled to his remembrance the time when such an addition to his income would have been affluence, and might have ensured his felicity. It seemed as if the evening of this good man’s day was to be gilded by the rays of prosperity; but alas! they came too late and only reminded him more forcibly of the gloom, in which the dark clouds of poverty had involved the meridian. The Earl, with the liberal spirit that ever distinguished his proceedings, offered him a valuable living, on the death of the incumbent, who was in a very advanced age; adding, “And I shall think myself highly favoured, if, until you obtain it, you will grant me the pleasure of your society at Castle Drelincourt, either as a guest, or my domestic chaplain; which would perhaps be preferred by a mind like yours, active and intent to do good.” Mr. Price thanked the Earl in the most grateful terms, but declined accepting the honor; “I have been too long a resident in this humble vale, my lord,” said he, “to leave it for any other earthly abode; I am attached to it by ties stronger than any worldly temptations could offer to me in another situation. A treasure lies buried there, my lord,” pointing to his Maria’s grave,

“which I am too much a miser to leave; and I must reply to your goodness in the language of the Scythian, ‘Can I say to her ashes, arise, and go with me to a foreign land;’ oh! no, my heart is buried with them, and every addition to my comforts, would only make me guilty of a fault, in wishing to recal an angel to earth to share them with me:” he paused a moment, and then continued, “but your kindness my lord, will not be forgotten by me; and I may say with Marshal Tallard, that in enumerating my years of sorrow, I shall omit that, in which I had the honor of becoming acquainted with your lordship, and your amiable family:” he paused again; he walked to the window, and the Earl forbore to press him further on a point, that seemed only to give him pain. But though he declined every pecuniary acknowledgment, his claims on gratitude were not forgotten, and soon after the Earl’s arrival in town, an elegant assortment of books, and instruments, with wine, and many little luxuries before unknown in Llewenmawr, were received by Mr. Price, as tokens of remembrance. “How happy would these favours have rendered me twenty years since,” he exclaimed, as he looked over them, “but now they make the loneliness of my state still more lonely; ah! it is surely more easy to bear affliction, than happiness, if either must be borne without participation.”
The Marchese and his lady, when the first violence of their grief was subdued, persuaded Lord and Lady Drelincourt to part with their beloved Emma, who became the happy wife of the amiable Edmund; and in her, his parents felt their affliction for the untimely death of Everilda, alleviated. Soon after the nuptials, the Marchese and his family returned to Italy, accompanied by Claudina, who at the expiration of a few months was prevailed on to give her hand to the man, who had long possessed her heart; and Sir Edward Clayton found with her the rare felicity that can only be tasted in perfection, by sensibility like his; which if it sometimes create imaginary evils, and magnify real ones, yet, when fortunately called forth, heightens rapture, and perpetuates esteem. Claudina transferred to Emma the pure and faithful friendship, which she had entertained for Everilda, and Edmund experienced in the innumerable virtues of his gentle bride, that shining talents and dazzling accomplishments, are not such solid foundations for happiness as are the retiring graces of domestic life, and the sweets of mutual love. The Marchese and his lady in time became resigned to the loss of their Everilda, and in embracing a little grand-daughter of the same name, they were sensible of a pleasure, which admitted not of embittering recollections. The Earl dedicated the whole of his time to the young Lord Courtney, who daily gained a stronger resemblance to his father, whose graces he displayed even in infancy; and promised to unfold a thousand amiable qualities, which dawning every day with encreased lustre, cheered the evening of his grandfather’s days with the mild radiance of hope, and called forth once more, all the affections the exercise of which had always laudably constituted the happiness of his life. Mary Macdonald had, from motives of virtuous delicacy, remained in Italy, notwithstanding the kind entreaties of Mr. Batlowe that she would take up her abode under his roof. She wished not to revisit a country, where her presence might occasion uneasiness to the man whom she still fondly loved.