"I will not be interrupted. Hear me in silence. My daughter and my nephew are formed for each
other. They are descended, on the maternal side, from the same noble line; and, on the father's,
from respectable, honourable, and ancient-though untitled-families. Their fortune on both sides is
splendid. They are destined for each other by the voice of every member of their respective houses;
and what is to divide them? The upstart pretensions of a young woman without family, connections,
or fortune. Is this to be endured! But it must not, shall not be. If you were sensible of your own good,
you would not wish to quit the sphere in which you have been brought up." "In marrying your nephew, I should not consider myself as quitting that sphere. He is a gentleman; I
am a gentleman's daughter; so far we are equal." "True. You are a gentleman's daughter. But who was your mother? Who are your uncles and aunts? Do not imagine me ignorant of their condition." "Whatever my connections may be," said Elizabeth, "if your nephew does not object to them, they
can be nothing to you." "Tell me once for all, are you engaged to him?" Though Elizabeth would not, for the mere purpose of obliging Lady Catherine, have answered this
question, she could not but say, after a moment's deliberation:
"I am not." Lady Catherine seemed pleased. "And will you promise me, never to enter into such an engagement?" "I will make no promise of the kind." "Miss Bennet I am shocked and astonished. I expected to find a more reasonable young woman. But
do not deceive yourself into a belief that I will ever recede. I shall not go away till you have given me
the assurance I require." "And I certainly never shall give it. I am not to be intimidated into anything so wholly unreasonable. Your ladyship wants Mr. Darcy to marry your daughter; but would my giving you the wished-for
promise make their marriage at all more probable? Supposing him to be attached to me, would my
refusing to accept his hand make him wish to bestow it on his cousin? Allow me to say, Lady
Catherine, that the arguments with which you have supported this extraordinary application have
been as frivolous as the application was ill-judged. You have widely mistaken my character, if you
think I can be worked on by such persuasions as these. How far your nephew might approve of your
interference in his affairs, I cannot tell; but you have certainly no right to concern yourself in mine. I
must beg, therefore, to be importuned no farther on the subject." "Not so hasty, if you please. I have by no means done. To all the objections I have already urged, I
have still another to add. I am no stranger to the particulars of your youngest sister's infamous
elopement. I know it all; that the young man's marrying her was a patched-up business, at the
expence of your father and uncles. And is such a girl to be my nephew's sister? Is her husband, is the
son of his late father's steward, to be his brother? Heaven and earth!-of what are you thinking? Are
the shades of Pemberley to be thus polluted?" "You can now have nothing further to say," she resentfully answered. "You have insulted me in every
possible method. I must beg to return to the house." And she rose as she spoke. Lady Catherine rose also, and they turned back. Her ladyship was highly
incensed. "You have no regard, then, for the honour and credit of my nephew! Unfeeling, selfish girl! Do you
not consider that a connection with you must disgrace him in the eyes of everybody?" "Lady Catherine, I have nothing further to say. You know my sentiments." "You are then resolved to have him?" "I have said no such thing. I am only resolved to act in that manner, which will, in my own opinion,
constitute my happiness, without reference to you, or to any person so wholly unconnected with
me." "It is well. You refuse, then, to oblige me. You refuse to obey the claims of duty, honour, and
gratitude. You are determined to ruin him in the opinion of all his friends, and make him the
contempt of the world." "Neither duty, nor honour, nor gratitude," replied Elizabeth, "have any possible claim on me, in the
present instance. No principle of either would be violated by my marriage with Mr. Darcy. And with
regard to the resentment of his family, or the indignation of the world, if the former were excited by
his marrying me, it would not give me one moment's concern-and the world in general would have
too much sense to join in the scorn." "And this is your real opinion! This is your final resolve! Very well. I shall now know how to act. Do
not imagine, Miss Bennet, that your ambition will ever be gratified. I came to try you. I hoped to find
you reasonable; but, depend upon it, I will carry my point." In this manner Lady Catherine talked on, till they were at the door of the carriage, when, turning
hastily round, she added, "I take no leave of you, Miss Bennet. I send no compliments to your
mother. You deserve no such attention. I am most seriously displeased." Elizabeth made no answer; and without attempting to persuade her ladyship to return into the
house, walked quietly into it herself. She heard the carriage drive away as she proceeded up stairs. Her mother impatiently met her at the door of the dressing-room, to ask why Lady Catherine would
not come in again and rest herself. "She did not choose it," said her daughter, "she would go." "She is a very fine-looking woman! and her calling here was prodigiously civil! for she only came, I
suppose, to tell us the Collinses were well. She is on her road somewhere, I dare say, and so, passing
through Meryton, thought she might as well call on you. I suppose she had nothing particular to say
to you, Lizzy?" Elizabeth was forced to give into a little falsehood here; for to acknowledge the substance of their
conversation was impossible. The discomposure of spirits which this extraordinary visit threw Elizabeth into, could not be easily
overcome; nor could she, for many hours, learn to think of it less than incessantly. Lady Catherine, it
appeared, had actually taken the trouble of this journey from Rosings, for the sole purpose of
breaking off her supposed engagement with Mr. Darcy. It was a rational scheme, to be sure! but
from what the report of their engagement could originate, Elizabeth was at a loss to imagine; till she
recollected that his being the intimate friend of Bingley, and herbeing the sister of Jane, was enough,
at a time when the expectation of one wedding made everybody eager for another, to supply the
idea. She had not herself forgotten to feel that the marriage of her sister must bring them more
frequently together. And her neighbours at Lucas Lodge, therefore (for through their communication
with the Collinses, the report, she concluded, had reached Lady Catherine), had only set that down as
almost certain and immediate, which she had looked forward to as possible at some future time. In revolving Lady Catherine's expressions, however, she could not help feeling some uneasiness as to
the possible consequence of her persisting in this interference. From what she had said of her
resolution to prevent their marriage, it occurred to Elizabeth that she must meditate an application
to her nephew; and how he might take a similar representation of the evils attached to a connection
with her, she dared not pronounce. She knew not the exact degree of his affection for his aunt, or his
dependence on her judgment, but it was natural to suppose that he thought much higher of her
ladyship than she could do; and it was certain that, in enumerating the miseries of a marriage
with one, whose immediate connections were so unequal to his own, his aunt would address him on
his weakest side. With his notions of dignity, he would probably feel that the arguments, which to
Elizabeth had appeared weak and ridiculous, contained much good sense and solid reasoning. If he had been wavering before as to what he should do, which had often seemed likely, the advice
and entreaty of so near a relation might settle every doubt, and determine him at once to be as
happy as dignity unblemished could make him. In that case he would return no more. Lady Catherine
might see him in her way through town; and his engagement to Bingley of coming again to
Netherfield must give way. "If, therefore, an excuse for not keeping his promise should come to his friend within a few days,"
she added, "I shall know how to understand it. I shall then give over every expectation, every wish of
his constancy. If he is satisfied with only regretting me, when he might have obtained my affections
and hand, I shall soon cease to regret him at all." The surprise of the rest of the family, on hearing who their visitor had been, was very great; but they
obligingly satisfied it, with the same kind of supposition which had appeased Mrs. Bennet's curiosity;
and Elizabeth was spared from much teasing on the subject. The next morning, as she was going downstairs, she was met by her father, who came out of his
library with a letter in his hand. "Lizzy," said he, "I was going to look for you; come into my room." She followed him thither; and her curiosity to know what he had to tell her was heightened by the
supposition of its being in some manner connected with the letter he held. It suddenly struck her
that it might be from Lady Catherine; and she anticipated with dismay all the consequent
explanations. She followed her father to the fire place, and they both sat down. He then said,
"I have received a letter this morning that has astonished me exceedingly. As it principally concerns
yourself, you ought to know its contents. I did not know before, that I had two daughters on the
brink of matrimony. Let me congratulate you on a very important conquest." The colour now rushed into Elizabeth's cheeks in the instantaneous conviction of its being a letter
from the nephew, instead of the aunt; and she was undetermined whether most to be pleased that
he explained himself at all, or offended that his letter was not rather addressed to herself; when her
father continued:
"You look conscious. Young ladies have great penetration in such matters as these; but I think I may
defy even your sagacity, to discover the name of your admirer. This letter is from Mr. Collins." "From Mr. Collins! and what can he have to say?" "Something very much to the purpose of course. He begins with congratulations on the approaching
nuptials of my eldest daughter, of which, it seems, he has been told by some of the good-natured,
gossiping Lucases. I shall not sport with your impatience, by reading what he says on that point. What relates to yourself, is as follows: 'Having thus offered you the sincere congratulations of Mrs.
Collins and myself on this happy event, let me now add a short hint on the subject of another; of
which we have been advertised by the same authority. Your daughter Elizabeth, it is presumed, will
not long bear the name of Bennet, after her elder sister has resigned it, and the chosen partner of
her fate may be reasonably looked up to as one of the most illustrious personages in this land.' "Can you possibly guess, Lizzy, who is meant by this? 'This young gentleman is blessed, in a peculiar
way, with every thing the heart of mortal can most desire,-splendid property, noble kindred, and
extensive patronage. Yet in spite of all these temptations, let me warn my cousin Elizabeth, and
yourself, of what evils you may incur by a precipitate closure with this gentleman's proposals, which,
of course, you will be inclined to take immediate advantage of.' "Have you any idea, Lizzy, who this gentleman is? But now it comes out:
"'My motive for cautioning you is as follows. We have reason to imagine that his aunt, Lady Catherine
de Bourgh, does not look on the match with a friendly eye.' "Mr. Darcy, you see, is the man! Now, Lizzy, I think I have surprised you. Could he, or the Lucases,
have pitched on any man within the circle of our acquaintance, whose name would have given the lie
more effectually to what they related? Mr. Darcy, who never looks at any woman but to see a
blemish, and who probably never looked at you in his life! It is admirable!" Elizabeth tried to join in her father's pleasantry, but could only force one most reluctant smile. Never
had his wit been directed in a manner so little agreeable to her. "Are you not diverted?" "Oh! yes. Pray read on." "'After mentioning the likelihood of this marriage to her ladyship last night, she immediately, with
her usual condescension, expressed what she felt on the occasion; when it became apparent, that on
the score of some family objections on the part of my cousin, she would never give her consent to
what she termed so disgraceful a match. I thought it my duty to give the speediest intelligence of this
to my cousin, that she and her noble admirer may be aware of what they are about, and not run
hastily into a marriage which has not been properly sanctioned.' Mr. Collins moreover adds, 'I am
truly rejoiced that my cousin Lydia's sad business has been so well hushed up, and am only
concerned that their living together before the marriage took place should be so generally known. I
must not, however, neglect the duties of my station, or refrain from declaring my amazement at
hearing that you received the young couple into your house as soon as they were married. It was an
encouragement of vice; and had I been the rector of Longbourn, I should very strenuously have
opposed it. You ought certainly to forgive them, as a Christian, but never to admit them in your sight,
or allow their names to be mentioned in your hearing.' That is his notion of Christian forgiveness! The
rest of his letter is only about his dear Charlotte's situation, and his expectation of a young olive-
branch. But, Lizzy, you look as if you did not enjoy it. You are not going to be missish, I hope, and
pretend to be affronted at an idle report. For what do we live, but to make sport for our neighbours,
and laugh at them in our turn?" "Oh!" cried Elizabeth, "I am excessively diverted. But it is so strange!" "Yes-that is what makes it amusing. Had they fixed on any other man it would have been nothing;
but his perfect indifference, and your pointed dislike, make it so delightfully absurd! Much as I
abominate writing, I would not give up Mr. Collins's correspondence for any consideration. Nay,
when I read a letter of his, I cannot help giving him the preference even over Wickham, much as I
value the impudence and hypocrisy of my son-in-law. And pray, Lizzy, what said Lady Catherine about
this report? Did she call to refuse her consent?" To this question his daughter replied only with a laugh; and as it had been asked without the least
suspicion, she was not distressed by his repeating it. Elizabeth had never been more at a loss to make
her feelings appear what they were not. It was necessary to laugh, when she would rather have
cried. Her father had most cruelly mortified her, by what he said of Mr. Darcy's indifference, and she
could do nothing but wonder at such a want of penetration, or fear that perhaps, instead of his
seeing too little, she might have fancied too much. Instead of receiving any such letter of excuse from his friend, as Elizabeth half expected Mr. Bingley
to do, he was able to bring Darcy with him to Longbourn before many days had passed after Lady
Catherine's visit. The gentlemen arrived early; and, before Mrs. Bennet had time to tell him of their
having seen his aunt, of which her daughter sat in momentary dread, Bingley, who wanted to be
alone with Jane, proposed their all walking out. It was agreed to. Mrs. Bennet was not in the habit of
walking; Mary could never spare time; but the remaining five set off together. Bingley and Jane,
however, soon allowed the others to outstrip them. They lagged behind, while Elizabeth, Kitty, and
Darcy were to entertain each other. Very little was said by either; Kitty was too much afraid of him to
talk; Elizabeth was secretly forming a desperate resolution; and perhaps he might be doing the same. They walked towards the Lucases, because Kitty wished to call upon Maria; and as Elizabeth saw no
occasion for making it a general concern, when Kitty left them she went boldly on with him alone. Now was the moment for her resolution to be executed, and, while her courage was high, she
immediately said:
"Mr. Darcy, I am a very selfish creature; and, for the sake of giving relief to my own feelings, care not
how much I may be wounding yours. I can no longer help thanking you for your unexampled kindness
to my poor sister. Ever since I have known it, I have been most anxious to acknowledge to you how
gratefully I feel it. Were it known to the rest of my family, I should not have merely my own gratitude
to express." "I am sorry, exceedingly sorry," replied Darcy, in a tone of surprise and emotion, "that you have ever
been informed of what may, in a mistaken light, have given you uneasiness. I did not think Mrs.
Gardiner was so little to be trusted." "You must not blame my aunt. Lydia's thoughtlessness first betrayed to me that you had been
concerned in the matter; and, of course, I could not rest till I knew the particulars. Let me thank you
again and again, in the name of all my family, for that generous compassion which induced you to
take so much trouble, and bear so many mortifications, for the sake of discovering them." "If you will thank me," he replied, "let it be for yourself alone. That the wish of giving happiness to
you might add force to the other inducements which led me on, I shall not attempt to deny. But
your family owe me nothing. Much as I respect them, I believe I thought only of you." Elizabeth was too much embarrassed to say a word. After a short pause, her companion added, "You
are too generous to trifle with me. If your feelings are still what they were last April, tell me so at
once. My affections and wishes are unchanged, but one word from you will silence me on this
subject for ever." Elizabeth, feeling all the more than common awkwardness and anxiety of his situation, now forced
herself to speak; and immediately, though not very fluently, gave him to understand that her
sentiments had undergone so material a change, since the period to which he alluded, as to make
her receive with gratitude and pleasure his present assurances. The happiness which this reply
produced, was such as he had probably never felt before; and he expressed himself on the occasion
as sensibly and as warmly as a man violently in love can be supposed to do. Had Elizabeth been able
to encounter his eye, she might have seen how well the expression of heartfelt delight, diffused over
his face, became him; but, though she could not look, she could listen, and he told her of feelings,
which, in proving of what importance she was to him, made his affection every moment more
valuable. They walked on, without knowing in what direction. There was too much to be thought, and felt, and
said, for attention to any other objects. She soon learnt that they were indebted for their present
good understanding to the efforts of his aunt, who did call on him in her return through London, and
there relate her journey to Longbourn, its motive, and the substance of her conversation with
Elizabeth; dwelling emphatically on every expression of the latter which, in her ladyship's
apprehension, peculiarly denoted her perverseness and assurance; in the belief that such a relation
must assist her endeavours to obtain that promise from her nephew which she had refused to give. But, unluckily for her ladyship, its effect had been exactly contrariwise. "It taught me to hope," said he, "as I had scarcely ever allowed myself to hope before. I knew enough
of your disposition to be certain that, had you been absolutely, irrevocably decided against me, you
would have acknowledged it to Lady Catherine, frankly and openly." Elizabeth coloured and laughed as she replied, "Yes, you know enough of my frankness to believe me
capable of that. After abusing you so abominably to your face, I could have no scruple in abusing you
to all your relations." "What did you say of me, that I did not deserve? For, though your accusations were ill-founded,
formed on mistaken premises, my behaviour to you at the time had merited the severest reproof. It
was unpardonable. I cannot think of it without abhorrence." "We will not quarrel for the greater share of blame annexed to that evening," said Elizabeth. "The
conduct of neither, if strictly examined, will be irreproachable; but since then, we have both, I hope,
improved in civility." "I cannot be so easily reconciled to myself. The recollection of what I then said, of my conduct, my
manners, my expressions during the whole of it, is now, and has been many months, inexpressibly
painful to me. Your reproof, so well applied, I shall never forget: 'had you behaved in a more
gentlemanlike manner.' Those were your words. You know not, you can scarcely conceive, how they
have tortured me;-though it was some time, I confess, before I was reasonable enough to allow
their justice." "I was certainly very far from expecting them to make so strong an impression. I had not the smallest
idea of their being ever felt in such a way." "I can easily believe it. You thought me then devoid of every proper feeling, I am sure you did. The
turn of your countenance I shall never forget, as you said that I could not have addressed you in any
possible way that would induce you to accept me." "Oh! do not repeat what I then said. These recollections will not do at all. I assure you that I have
long been most heartily ashamed of it." Darcy mentioned his letter. "Did it," said he, "did it soon make you think better of me? Did you, on
reading it, give any credit to its contents?" She explained what its effect on her had been, and how gradually all her former prejudices had been
removed. "I knew," said he, "that what I wrote must give you pain, but it was necessary. I hope you have
destroyed the letter. There was one part especially, the opening of it, which I should dread your
having the power of reading again. I can remember some expressions which might justly make you
hate me." "The letter shall certainly be burnt, if you believe it essential to the preservation of my regard; but,
though we have both reason to think my opinions not entirely unalterable, they are not, I hope, quite
so easily changed as that implies." "When I wrote that letter," replied Darcy, "I believed myself perfectly calm and cool, but I am since
convinced that it was written in a dreadful bitterness of spirit." "The letter, perhaps, began in bitterness, but it did not end so. The adieu is charity itself. But think no
more of the letter. The feelings of the person who wrote, and the person who received it, are now so
widely different from what they were then, that every unpleasant circumstance attending it ought to
be forgotten. You must learn some of my philosophy. Think only of the past as its remembrance gives
you pleasure." "I cannot give you credit for any philosophy of the kind. Your retrospections must be so totally void
of reproach, that the contentment arising from them is not of philosophy, but, what is much better,
of innocence. But with me, it is not so. Painful recollections will intrude which cannot, which ought
not, to be repelled. I have been a selfish being all my life, in practice, though not in principle. As a
child I was taught what was right, but I was not taught to correct my temper. I was given good
principles, but left to follow them in pride and conceit. Unfortunately an only son (for many years an
only child), I was spoilt by my parents, who, though good themselves (my father, particularly, all that
was benevolent and amiable), allowed, encouraged, almost taught me to be selfish and overbearing;
to care for none beyond my own family circle; to think meanly of all the rest of the world; to wish at
least to think meanly of their sense and worth compared with my own. Such I was, from eight to
eight and twenty; and such I might still have been but for you, dearest, loveliest Elizabeth! What do I
not owe you! You taught me a lesson, hard indeed at first, but most advantageous. By you, I was
properly humbled. I came to you without a doubt of my reception. You showed me how insufficient
were all my pretensions to please a woman worthy of being pleased." "Had you then persuaded yourself that I should?" "Indeed I had. What will you think of my vanity? I believed you to be wishing, expecting my
addresses." "My manners must have been in fault, but not intentionally, I assure you. I never meant to deceive
you, but my spirits might often lead me wrong. How you must have hated me after thatevening?" "Hate you! I was angry perhaps at first, but my anger soon began to take a proper direction." "I am almost afraid of asking what you thought of me, when we met at Pemberley. You blamed me
for coming?" "No indeed; I felt nothing but surprise." "Your surprise could not be greater than mine in being noticed by you. My conscience told me that I
deserved no extraordinary politeness, and I confess that I did not expect to receivemore than my
due." "My object then," replied Darcy, "was to show you, by every civility in my power, that I was not so
mean as to resent the past; and I hoped to obtain your forgiveness, to lessen your ill opinion, by
letting you see that your reproofs had been attended to. How soon any other wishes introduced
themselves I can hardly tell, but I believe in about half an hour after I had seen you." He then told her of Georgiana's delight in her acquaintance, and of her disappointment at its sudden
interruption; which naturally leading to the cause of that interruption, she soon learnt that his
resolution of following her from Derbyshire in quest of her sister had been formed before he quitted
the inn, and that his gravity and thoughtfulness there had arisen from no other struggles than what
such a purpose must comprehend. She expressed her gratitude again, but it was too painful a subject to each, to be dwelt on farther. After walking several miles in a leisurely manner, and too busy to know anything about it, they found
at last, on examining their watches, that it was time to be at home. "What could become of Mr. Bingley and Jane!" was a wonder which introduced the discussion of
their affairs. Darcy was delighted with their engagement; his friend had given him the earliest
information of it. "I must ask whether you were surprised?" said Elizabeth. "Not at all. When I went away, I felt that it would soon happen." "That is to say, you had given your permission. I guessed as much." And though he exclaimed at the
term, she found that it had been pretty much the case. "On the evening before my going to London," said he, "I made a confession to him, which I believe I
ought to have made long ago. I told him of all that had occurred to make my former interference in
his affairs absurd and impertinent. His surprise was great. He had never had the slightest suspicion. I
told him, moreover, that I believed myself mistaken in supposing, as I had done, that your sister was
indifferent to him; and as I could easily perceive that his attachment to her was unabated, I felt no
doubt of their happiness together." Elizabeth could not help smiling at his easy manner of directing his friend. "Did you speak from your own observation," said she, "when you told him that my sister loved him,
or merely from my information last spring?" "From the former. I had narrowly observed her during the two visits which I had lately made here;
and I was convinced of her affection." "And your assurance of it, I suppose, carried immediate conviction to him." "It did. Bingley is most unaffectedly modest. His diffidence had prevented his depending on his own
judgment in so anxious a case, but his reliance on mine made every thing easy. I was obliged to
confess one thing, which for a time, and not unjustly, offended him. I could not allow myself to
conceal that your sister had been in town three months last winter, that I had known it, and
purposely kept it from him. He was angry. But his anger, I am persuaded, lasted no longer than he
remained in any doubt of your sister's sentiments. He has heartily forgiven me now." Elizabeth longed to observe that Mr. Bingley had been a most delightful friend; so easily guided that
his worth was invaluable; but she checked herself.