They then walked so quick to the fatal bason, that Edward had much ado to
overtake them, and prevent the dreadful plan which he found was in agitation. He
endeavoured to exalt his voice, and cry, "Hold!" but the palpitation of his heart made the
word die amongst the rustling of the leaves, which were agitated by a rising wind: he
plainly, however, distinguished the voice of Lady Isabella Raymond calling to her friend,
"Now I set you the example," and gave the fatal plunge before Edward had time to
prevent it. He seized the other trembler in his arms, and said, "Stop, rash young woman,
and I will save your friend." He then rushed into the water, and bore her breathless to the
shore: he alarmed the Park-gate-keeper, and between them, they conveyed her to the
nearest public-house, where medical assistance being immediately sent for, the wretched
Isabella was soon recovered. During this scene, Edward had not once turned towards Margaret; having little
idea that his daughter could be residing with, and the avowed friend of, the woman who
had destroyed her sister's peace: she had been strictly watched, in the fear that she might
escape, and still commit what these desperate young women had seemed resolved upon. Margaret had soon discovered her father in the deliverer of Lady Isabella; and
dreading to encounter his looks and reproaches, she had knelt by the bed-side, with her
face hid by, and resting on her arms: the physician, however, whom Edward had called in,
said, "I think it is requisite to attend to this young woman; I have remarked her posture
for some time, and what little I can see of her face, is pale as death. Edward helped him to raise her: what a sight for a father to behold! a daughter in
the evident situation of disgrace to her family, the avowed friend of the woman to whom
his other daughter owed her conjugal misery, and ready, with her, to rush into eternity,
with her unborn infant! She sank, covered with guilt and shame, at the feet of her father; nor could that
father, notwithstanding the anguish of mind he felt, which had more in it of "sorrow than
of anger," spurn her from him: ideas crowded on his soul, that villainous and sophistical
arts had wrought on an imbecile mind, to tempt it to dishonour, inconsistency, and
irreligion; and he resolved in spite of every worldly prejudice to call her back, by
tenderness and paternal soothings. "Thou hast been faulty, Margaret," said he, "but fear
not thy father, he will forgive thee. Look up, forlorn and abandoned one, abandoned by all
thou hast most loved and trusted in, and now nearly forsaken by thy God! thy lover and
thy friend have taught thee vice, and what comfort have they afforded thee? Thy
impoverished parent will give thee all in his power to bestow, and guide thy wandering
mind to repentance and peace." "And is this," thought Margaret, as she again received the parental embrace, "is
this the father I once thought so rigid? O life, life! how do thy real events condemn the


fictitious joys and sorrows of romance, and shew the folly of such idle and improbable
adventures!" How different, also, felt the Lady Isabella, as she lay on an humble bed, restored
to life, and snatched from eternity! how did she prove the truth of the poet, who says,
"Leaving the old, both worlds at once they view,
Who stand upon the threshold of the new." She, who was resolved no longer to live, when public infamy had branded her
name, when she could no longer shine honoured, the gayest of the gay, now felt happy
again to "breathe the vital air, and triumph in existence" only.-"If the true Christian is
deluded," thought she, "oh! how happy is such sweet, such powerful delusion! hope ever
dwells in his bosom, amidst all his severest misfortunes. My brother, whose life is a
reproach to his doctrine, will see me no more! a world of continual crime condemns me,
and shuts me out: he, whose sacred character forbids him to associate with guilt, to whose
eyes the very sight of my form must be repugnant, saves my life, at the hazard of his own. "Mr. Marsham," said she, "how can you bear my odious presence? I beg you will leave
me; I cannot meet your reproachful eye. "-"Have I then reproached you, Lady Isabella,"
replied Edward, "even with my looks? "-"No, sir, but they strike me with awe: methinks,
you should have rejoiced to see me perish." "Pardon me, madam, it is the duty of every man to step forward to rescue a
fellow-creature from destruction: to me, peculiarly belongs the exertion of saving souls,
not the wish that they may perish. Every worldly prejudice must therefore be now done
away: as Lady Isabella Raymond can no longer shine with dignity, amongst the great and
gay, be it my part to soothe her mind with devotion's fairest hopes, and her own in
retirement to pass her days in quiet and virtue: for retirement, to a lady of your cultivated
mind, will not bring with it that dreary gloom which you may now imagine. At present, be
calm; at some future period, we will speak more of those subjects, to which you have
hitherto, I fear, given but a very little portion of thought except to despise. I am happy to
find you so perfectly recovered: I have just ordered a coach, and when you find yourself
able to rise, I will accompany you back to your lodgings; but you must pardon me, and I
am sure your good sense will see the propriety of my resolution, that I cannot think of my
child being any longer an inmate in the same dwelling with you; honour, decorum, the
ties of sisterhood equally forbid it; and you both part this night, to meet no more while I
live, to have any influence or authority over my daughter. You weep, Margaret; and I
rejoice to see that Lady Isabella weeps also, these tears are salutary and will relieve you;
and, trust me," added the good man, with much mildness, "I will do all in my power to
befriend you: assistance, alas! poor as I am, I cannot offer you; but I can ensure it you
from a quarter whence you might least expect, and least merit it." "What!" said the still
proud Isabella, "do you imagine I would consent to receive assistance from her I have so
deeply injured? No, nor from any one, sir, who is even in the smallest degree allied to her;
I would sooner toil for hard-earned existence, in the very lowest occupation: but it is
needless. I have jewels of considerable value in the hands of my banker, which, whenever
I should die, I bequeathed to my sister, Beatrice, whom you know not, and* the world



have disclaimed her. Those jewels I shall convert into money; they will support me for
some time in that retirement, where I may choose hereafter to end my days: and if my
friends succeed in making my unfeeling and sordid husband allow me, out of the damages
he gains, the half only of the sum he received as my fortune after our marriage, I shall
then have no farther pecuniary wants. I feel myself now, sir, able to rise, and I will
accompany you from hence." The day began to break, as Mr. Marsham led the unhappy Isabella Raymond to the
hackney-coach which stood in waiting: much did he say to her, during her ride to her
former lodgings in St. James's-street; deeply did he impress her mind with her sole
dependence on a superior power: the haughty, high-born, the once flattered and caressed
Lady Isabella Raymond now sank humbled before a poor country Curate, whose dictates
she would once, not only have despised, but looked upon, had they been directed to her
with that superiority which virtue now gave him, the height of insolence. She ventured
however to remark, and that very judiciously, as she agreed with Mr. Marsham that he
could not take his daughter, in her situation, to Sir Edward Harrington's, that it would not
be possible to fix her in any temporary lodging, that was reputable, till a later hour in the
day; and with so much sad and forlorn meekness, with so much polished and native
sweetness, did she urge her request, that Edward and his daughter not only stayed and
partook of her breakfast, but he sat near two hours after with her, enforcing his pious and
gentle precepts, and advising the plan of life he wished her in future to adopt. He had long
studied the human heart, he had often witnessed the real contrition of the sincere penitent,
as he has attended the bed of sickness and death; and he feared not now to trust Lady
Isabella with the worst of all her enemies-herself! He meant, after he had seen her reestablished
in her lodgings, to take Margaret to an hotel for that day; but he found it
impossible to resist her persuasions, especially in her disconsolate and wretched situation. The parting between her and Margaret was affecting, even to agony: they saw
each other for the last time, and the worthy Edward chid not their frequent
procrastination; he even tenderly took the hand of the deeply abashed Isabella, and said,
as his eyes were moistened with the tear of pity, "Persevere! think how many years are yet
before you. Remember always the mercy of Omnipotence, and you will, I am sure, you
will be happy." Lady Isabella dropped on her knees, and gratefully bedewed the hand,
which she fervently grasped, with her tears. They then all solemnly repeated the word,
farewell, and Edward and his daughter departed. They drove a short distance from London, and the father took an humble lodging
for his daughter, where he left her, promising to see her (as indeed he promised the same
to her wretched friend, who stood so much in need of consolation and advice) the next
day. He then returned to St. James's-square. "I was much surprised and alarmed," said Sir Edward, after the usual salutations,
"that you did not sleep here last night. Did you return to Twickenham?" "My best of
friends," replied he, "I have such wonderful events to relate to you, that you will no
longer be surprised at my absence, when I unfold them." "I shall be most happy to hear you," said the Baronet, with a degree of cold
severity, "for I have both heard and seen what has much astonished me." Edward then gave a full detail of all the reader has been informed of in the
commencement of this chapter. "Excellent, best of men!" said Sir Edward, as he cordially
took his hand, "how much do I glory in taking to my heart the true christian, who sets
aside all personal animosity, and discovers, with the benevolent eye of charity, latent
virtues, under appearances the most vicious, and seemingly lost amongst actions the most
reprehensible; while he saves the sinner who injures him, with equal joy and delight, as
he would the dearest of his earthly friends. Yet, such a character as thine stands as a more
certain mark for the arrows of slander: would you believe that calumny has most severely
handled you this morning? Mr. Leslie was returning from a masquerade, as you handed
into an hackney-coach, from a little obscure public-house, his sister-in-law, Lady Isabella! He huddled his domino round him, for the revered gentleman, by what chance I know not,
was on foot, and traced the coach, till he saw it stop at an house in St. James's-street: he
marked well the house, and then repaired to the St. James's Coffee-house, where
bereaving himself of his domino, he sat and watched this house, to which he was nearly
opposite. "I walked in there early, from taking a walk round the Park; I had not met Mr.
Leslie since the affair of my nephew with Lady Isabella, and I was desirous of quitting the
coffee-room, as an interview, I judged, would not be very pleasant to either party; but Mr.
Leslie rose and intreated a few minutes conversation with me, at the window in which he
was posted: he related to me what he had seen; I told him it was impossible: "Do you
think," said he, "I do not know Lady Caroline's sister? "-"Assuredly, sir, any one who
had often seen Lady Isabella, could not easily be mistaken in her person, in Mr.
Marsham's you might."-"What! in my late Curate?" said the noble Rector of Eglantine. "Yes, sir, your late Curate," said I. Leslie dropt his bold eyes;-however, to make short
my story, to satisfy his repeated request, I stood and gazed with him at the window, and,
to my great surprise, saw you hand a female into a hackney-coach; she was so enveloped
in a shawl, and her face so concealed in a huge bonnet, that no one could distinguish her
form or features: but we had little doubt but it was Lady Isabella. I was much mortified,
took my leave, and came away; for it was nearly two hours after my arrival at the coffeehouse,
before you took your leave: and I must say, that I thought within myself, whatever
may be Edward Marsham's motives, he surely carries Christian charity too far, to be thus
mysteriously in company with the woman who has, by an adulterous commerce with his
daughter's husband, made that daughter miserable. But this was not all I was fated to
endure this morning. "I called in at a fruit-shop, to pay for some fruit I had purchased a few days ago,
and there stood a gossiping awkward-looking girl of a servant maid, twirling the key of a
street-door round her finger. "Why, yes," said she to the shop-woman, (while I was
speaking to the master,) "I thinks, indeed, they be but queer ones! they brought home a
gentleman at day-break this morning; and there's been such crying and kissing one
another's hands with he and the tall handsome un, as nothing can be like; and he does
seem so to love her, and look so pitiful at her."-"Ay!" said the shop-woman, "they went
off, I fancy, together in a hack: he took some lady, but she so muddled herself up, that
nobody should know her, I suppose."-"Sure! well, like enough," said the wench, "I
hasn't been at home some time, and I dare say I shall get a fine noise; for I'se been giving
it our butcher's boy! he axed me which of the ladies that gentleman in black was a-going


to take into keeping? I'd no notion of his inperance; 'tisn't, you know, ma'am, like you,
who has a right to axe about their neighbours." She then began a long gossip's tale, in
which I found you and your ladies no more concerned, and I went home: but recollecting
that I had appointed my banker to meet me at his house at a certain hour, I went there; and
as I came back, met with an old friend, and whom nothing would serve, but we must
lounge away an hour at the Panorama, in the Strand. I accompanied him, malgr� moi, in
his carriage. "When I arrived at the Panorama, I met with several acquaintance, who all seemed
to regard me with a queer pity, like that of Mrs. Candour in the School for Scandal:
presently I got behind a knot of genteel-looking people, but of whom I knew nothing, and
I am sure they did not personally know me, by what they said. "Well!" said a lady of a
certain age, "What will the depravity of these times come to?"-"Oh!" said an affected
puppy, on her right hand, "C'est tout bien commode! the poor parson wanted to marry his
pretty daughter well, at any rate, and on easy terms: and so, it is thought, between them
all they agreed to let the handsome and dashing Mr. Harrington, who could never keep to
one woman for one month, enjoy himself with every yielding fair-one, that might chance
to please him: so, I think the least they can do, after giving him so much latitude, is to
take notice of her that has made him so happy! "-"I maintain," said the lady who had
first spoken, "that it is the height of depravity, for* young Mrs. Harrington and her father,
and Lady Isabella Raymond, to be all living together: it seems the father has just taken her
down to his daughter's this very morning. "-"The person I pity most," said a young lady,
"is Sir Edward Harrington: they say, he has lavished immense sums upon the education of
Mrs. Harrington, who, I believe, before her marriage, could hardly read or write: and now,
you see, they are all revelling and living together upon the good Baronet, for I am told, he
entirely supports Mrs. Harrington and her father; and I dare say, he does not know that the
shameless Lady Isabella is among them." "I could not help smiling, as I looked on my friend; but I observed that he kept a
petrifying kind of gravity, nor did he return my smile; and, vexed at what I had heard, and
also at what I had seen in the morning, I moved to come home. As we came through Pall-
Mall, for curiosity's sake, I said we would step into the Historic Gallery; I there heard a
general buz of - "*Is not it very strange that they should be all living together?" while a
pert Miss amongst them, said, "I am sure, when I am a wife, my husband will not find me
so very accommodating!" "Disgusted at what I had heard, I took leave of my friend: but he said, "My dear
Sir Edward, I can tell you the meaning of all this: it was all through the coffee-room of
the St. James's, this morning, that Mr. Harrington, his wife, and Lady Isabella are all
living together en famille, as comfortably as can be, and have for some time; that the
father knows it, and not only has winked at it, but approves, and frequently comes up to
town with her ladyship to transact her business, and meets her at a little public-house, in
the vicinity of Piccadilly, or at private lodgings in St. James's Street: I would not tell you,
did I not know it to be a fact, for my intelligence came from the Reverend Mr. Leslie
himself. "-"Depend upon it," said I, "much has been added to it, both by him and those
* Remarks on a recent affaire historique verbatim. * Historique. who carried the tale to you. "-We then parted, and when I came home, I found it was
past four o'clock, and that you had not yet returned: this vexed me, I own:-We will dine
now, and after dinner I have more to say to you." "The banished are not unfortunate, so long as they
are not prevented from taking their virtue with
them into banishment. Wise Providence! thy
loveliest possessions are independent of human
power." GENERAL MOREAU'S MSS. AS this work has already exceeded its intended limits, we inform the reader, as
briefly as we can, that the dinner, to which Sir Edward Harrington was so particularly
engaged, the day he returned with Mr. Marsham from Twickenham, and to which he so
much wished the Curate to accompany him, was, to meet his penitent nephew; for so his
friend had contrived for it, unknown to Sir Edward. We will pass over Frederic's
unfeigned contrition, and his reconciliation with his uncle: again Sir Edward promised to
restore him to his favour, and to employ all his powers, to gain him the pardon of his
affectionate and excellent wife. Retirement the most secluded, was now become absolutely requisite for most of
the conspicuous actors in this piece. Sir Edward had an estate in Wales: and as his
imprudent and thoughtless nephew, notwithstanding his own riches, had greatly impaired
his uncle's large fortune, it was judged expedient that he, the good Curate and his
daughter, with her contrite and deeply humbled Frederic, should occupy the retired
mansion in Wales; Edward Marsham as resident chaplain to the Baronet, who would also
put him in possession of a small Welch living, then vacant and in his own gift, but which
he had never thought sufficiently good to present him with, having higher views for him. The poor romantic wanderer, Margaret, was still to retain the name she had
adopted, and to pass for a young widow; for, as Sir Edward remarked, a little deception
which does no harm, must sometimes be practised in a deceptive world, to enable us to
pass through it, when we have erred, not only for our own credit, but chiefly for that of
our families and connexions. This good man carried his generosity so far, as even to propose that Margaret
might make a part of his family, at his mansion in Wales; but this her father would by no
means admit; and it was agreed that a comfortable lodging should be provided for her
near them, with some respectable matron, with whom she might board. When all these
plans were laid, and ready to be put in execution, Charles Marsham arrived from
Walcheren. Prosperous in his situation, honoured by all his superior officers, and beloved by
those beneath him, he had obtained, through the interest of those in power, who were well
disposed to serve him, and to whom his merits were long unknown, the most rapid
promotion; and had an appointment of still higher trust, honour, and profit bestowed upon
him, but which, however, would compel him again to quit his country, and that in a very
few days. When this became known to his excellent brother and worthy benefactor, they
judged it best not to pain his susceptible heart, nor irritate his over-warm temper, by a
detail of many afflicting circumstances. Margaret was, therefore, reported to be on a visit
to a lady in the country. The infidelity of Harrington to his amiable and favourite niece,
they could not conceal from him; the public-papers had too much dwelt on the painful
circumstance: men are too apt to excuse each other, in their promiscuous gallantry; of
Harrington's fault he said but little, but perhaps it was owing to the presence of his uncle. Many, however, were the bitter epithets, which he bestowed on Lady Isabella; and
boasted his prophetic powers, saying, he always knew her daring spirit would never come
to any good. Edward, who now felt for her only those emotions excited by pity, said, he made
no doubt but she deeply repented her crime; that she had retired from the world, and was
truly afflicted at her past conduct. Charles made no other reply than "the d--l help her; God forgive her, but I'll be
shot if I ever shall." He gave fresh tears to the memory of poor Ralph; of whose fatal
accident he had been previously informed by letters: and then asked, "What sort of being
is his son?-who has come so unlooked and unwished for!" "Such an one," replied
Edward, "whom every body must love,"-"Ay!" said Charles, "with your grave
countenance, and often frowning brow, you would have said the same of a poor donkey;
for I believe, Ned, you are disposed to love every thing that has life! "-"But," said Sir
Edward, on whose judgment Charles implicitly relied, "Mr. Matthew Marsham is the
most amiable of human beings." Charles said no more, but hastened to Twickenham, to
his dear and favourite niece, whom he ever thought the most amiable among women. She
now, though a soft sorrow was seated on her countenance, which, though much dispelled
by the return of her Frederic's affection, yet remained visible, appeared more lovely than
ever: elegance had succeeded to the untaught and uncultivated graces she had received
from nature; and before her uncle Charles departed, she astonished him with her progress
in the accomplishments she had been taught. Charles stayed but three days, before he again received his orders to go abroad;
and the remainder of Mr. Marsham's family, accompanied by Sir Edward and his penitent
nephew, soon after set off for Wales. It will not be displeasing, we think, to the reader to learn, that Mrs. Susanna
Bradbury, able to leave her niece a fortune of seven thousand pounds, readily, and with
the more ready consent of the other parties, gave up the ten, to unite her to her worthy
lover: they still reside at Eglantine; Matthew having purchased Mrs. Harrington's cottage,
where they dwell a pattern of conjugal felicity. While recording a wedding, we must not forget to mention that of the Royal
Phelim O'Gurphy! who soon followed his master to town; was united by him to Jenny
O'Dunnahough; and this doughty descendant of Hibernia's ancient Kings has taken a
little shop in Petty-France, Westminster: Jenny still sells milk, and Phelim vegetables,
pickled salmon, and oysters. Sir Charles Sefton fell a victim to his vices and dissipation, almost as soon as he
reached the Island of Madeira: he expressed some regret at his usage of Margaret; and
owned, that never having met before with a truly innocent female, he loved her better
than any other woman. He bequeathed her one thousand pounds, and two for his child. Margaret wept at the death of its father, and prayed heaven to forgive him, as readily as
she did. *The Honorable and Reverend Theodore Leslie, receiving that rapid church
preferment, which places him in a very conspicuous situation, affects in his outward
demeanour a thorough reformation; and we are happy to say, that we believe this
affectation of goodness will render it in time as real as it is habitual. *The love of gaming is the vice of all others, which takes deepest root, and is the
most difficult to eradicate:-Lady Caroline Leslie yet devotes the greatest part of her time
to the card-table. Mrs. Kennedy is her decided favourite, and still prospers as an authoress: she still
flatters the great, and her own taste and genius ensure her success, while she administers
the charming well-tempered draught of adulation. Lady Isabella Raymond retired, as soon as she could possibly arrange her
pecuniary affairs to her satisfaction, to a small rural cottage, plain and humble, in the
remotest part of Devonshire; and here she met the amiable woman, whom her towering
virtue (which owed itself all to concurring circumstances) once despised, or noticed only
in private, Mrs. Edmonds; who, with her benefactor, Mr. Rouveau, had left Eglantine, not
finding the inhabitants quite congenial to their taste; the house also where they resided,
being infested by damps which injured their health. She found these amiable people true comforters in her affliction; ready to afford
her every kindness and assistance in their power: in depression of spirits their
cheerfulness enlivened her; in sickness their attentions soothed and restored her. She
regularly corresponds with the Reverend Edward Marsham, who is delighted with the
pious style of her letters, and encourages her in the glorious work of reformation: he
teaches her comforted mind to receive the bright blessings of Hope! Her health daily and
rapidly decays; the world has few charms for her; and though with her books, and her
newly-acquired friends, she passes her time more satisfactory than she at first imagined
she could do in seclusion, yet she looks anxiously forward to that period, when she shall
receive the unalloyed happiness promised to the truly penitent. Mr. and Mrs. Davenport still continue the slaves of unmeaning fashion, their lives
prejudicial to themselves, and useless and uninteresting to others.