The mule still continued to eye him with a great deal of jealousy, and
perceiving the brandish that he gave his long sword when he said this,
he set off again full speed; so that it was a good while before the
friar got time to reply. As soon as he got leisure to speak, he opened
his mouth and said,--"My son, wilt thou lift up thine arm against a
multitude? or canst thou contend with the torrent of the mighty
waters?" "Well, well, they may perhaps lead that winna drive," said Charlie; and
he went by the friar at a light gallop, leaving him behind, who prayed
to the other not to leave him nor forsake him; but it was a device of
Yardbire's, and a well conceived one. He saw that as long as he kept the
rear guard, and rode behind the friar, the men that pursued them would
not separate on that long narrow path; therefore he vanished among the
bushes, keeping, however, always within hearing of the mule's feet. Accordingly, at the first turn of the road, the foremost of the English
troopers, seeing the jolly bedesman posting away by himself, put the
spurs to his steed, and made a furious dash at him. The friar cried out
with a loud voice; and, seeing that he would be overtaken, he turned
round and drew his sword to stand on the defensive; and actually not
only bore the first charge of his opponent with considerable firmness,
but had "very nigh smitten him between the joints of the harness," as he
termed it. It happened, moreover, very singularly, from the perversity
of the mule, that in the charge the combatants changed sides, at the
imminent peril of the Englishman; for the mule brushed by his horse with
such violence, and leaned so sore to the one side, that both the horse
and his rider were within an inch of the verge of the precipice. The friar had no sooner made his way by, than he saw another rider
coming like lightning to meet him in the face; but at the same time he
heard the voice of Charlie Scott behind him, and the rending crash of
his weapon. This cheered the drooping spirits of the brave friar, who
had been on the very point of crying for quarter. "They beset me before
and behind," cried he, "yet shall my hand be avenged. Come on, thou
froward and perverse one." So saying he assumed his guard, and met his
foe face to face, seeing he had no alternative. The Englishman drew a
stroke, but got not time to lay it on; for just as the mule and his tall
horse met, the former, in the bitterness of his ire, rushed between his
opponent and the upper bank, and pressed against his fore counters with
such energy, that he made the leg next him to slacken, and the horse
reared from the other. The intention of the irritated mule was to crush
his master's leg, or, if possible, to rub him from off his back; and
therefore, in spite of the rein he closed with the Englishman's tall
steed in a moment, and almost as swift as lightning. The English
moss-trooper had raised his arm to strike, but seeing his horse shoved
and rearing in that perilous place, he seized the rein with his sword
hand. The mule finding the substance to which he leaned give way,
pressed to it the harder. It was all one to him whether it had been a
tree, a horse, or a rock; he shouldered against it with his side
foremost so strenuously, that in spite of all the trooper could do, the
fore feet of his horse on rearing, alighted within the verge of the
precipice. The noble animal made a spring from his hinder legs, in order
to leap by the obstreperous mongrel; but the latter still coming the
closer, instead of springing by he leaped into the open void, aiming at
the branches of an oak that grew in a horizontal direction from the
cliff. It was an old and stubborn tree, the child of a thousand years;
and when the horse and his rider fell upon its hoary branches, it
yielded far to the weight. But its roots being entwined in the rifted
rock as far as the stomach of the mountain, it sprung upward again with
a prodigious force to regain its primitive position, and tossed the
intruding weight afar into the unfathomed deep. Horse and rider went
down in a rolling motion till they lessened to the eye, and fell on the
rocks and water below with such a shock, that the clash sounded among
the echoes of the linn like the first burst of the artillery of heaven,
or the roar of an earthquake from the depths of the earth. Charlie Scott gazed on the scene with horror; every feature of his
countenance was changed, and every hair on his great burly head stood on
end. He gave a look to heaven, crossed himself, and said a short prayer,
if a prayer it may be called that consisted only of four syllables. It
consisted merely in the pronunciation of a name, too sacred to be set
down in an idle tale; but he pronounced it with an emphasis that made
it doubly affecting. The friar, on the contrary, astonished at his own
prowess, or rather at that of his mule, beheld the scene with wonder, it
is true, but also with a shade of ostentation. "I have overthrown the
horse and his rider," said he, "and they are sunk down as a stone into
the mighty waters." Corby manifested the fright that he was in, by loud
and reiterated snortings; the mule also was astonied, and, that he might
witness the horrific scene in more perfection, he kept his tail close to
the precipice, and looked back. "Now, by my honour as a man and a warrior, father," said Charlie, "you
are a man amang ten thousand. I never knew of a bedesman who behaved so
gallantly, nor have I seen a knight behave better. How durst you close
so instantaneously and furiously with both these valiant troopers?" "Thou hadst better put that question to my mule," said the friar,--"for
it is a truth that he hath that in him that is the ruin of many people,
viz. obstinacy of heart. When he smelleth the battle he disdaineth all
parley or courtesy, as thou beholdest, but rusheth upon his adversary
like one of the bulls of Bashan." At that moment the friar's eye caught a glance of several horsemen close
upon them, but as they could only come one man rank, they paused at
seeing their enemies in quiet possession of the way, and standing in
peaceful colloquy, apparently about something else. "By the life of Pharaoh," said the friar, gazing all around, "I had
forgot the man whom I first engaged and smote as he passed by." "You will see nae mair o' him, father," said Charlie; "I gae him a
deadly wound, but the saddle was locked to the horse, and the man to the
saddle, and the furious animal has escaped away to the forest with the
dead man on its back." "Thou art indeed a man of valour," said the friar; "and here will we
keep our ground. I will do more in our defence than thou hast yet
witnessed; therefore, be not afraid, my son, for that sword of thine is
a good sword." "It is a good sword at a straik," returned Charlie; "but it's no very
handy at making a defence. But an I get the first yerk of a chield, I'm
no unco feared for his return. However, father, this sword, sic as it
is, shall be raised in your defence as lang as my arm can wag it. I like
the man that will stand a brush when a pinch comes,--see, thae chaps
darena come on us. But, ill luck to the coward! gin they winna come to
us, we'll gang to them." "I will certainly go with thee," said the friar; "but I know the nature
of the beast that I bestride, and that it will at the first onset bear
me into the thickest of the battle; therefore, be not thou far from me
in my need, for, though nothing afraid, yet I know it will carry me into
peril. Come, let us go and smite these men with the edge of the sword." "Gallant friar," said Charlie, "the Thief-road is lang an' narrow, an'
there's hardly a bit o't that they can come on us twa in a breast; stand
ye still; or be chopping on your way, an' I'll let you see yon lads get
a surprise for aince." "Nay, I will certainly stand with thee in battle," said the friar;
"thinkest thou I will stand and be a looker on, when my preserver is in
jeopardy? Lo, my heart is as thy heart, my arm as thy arm, and--but I
cannot say my horse is as thy horse, for the beast is indeed froward in
his ways, and perverse in all his doings." Charlie hardly smiled at the phrase of the worthy friar,--for he
meditated an attack on their pursuers, and his eye kindled with his
heart toward the battle. He heaved up his sword-arm twice at its full
stretch, to feel if it was nowise encumbered in the armour, and putting
Corby in motion, he rode deliberately up to the face of his enemies. The
foremost man spoke to him, demanding what he wanted; but he only
answered by heaving his sword a little higher, and making his horse mend
his pace. In one second after that he was engaged with the first man,
and in two seconds the horse and his rider had fallen in the middle of
the path. Charlie listed not coming to close quarter; his sword was so
long and heavy, that it was quite unhandy in warding the blows of a
short and light weapon. His aim, therefore, was always to get the first
stroke, which was as apt to light on the horse as the man, and thus down
both of them went. Springing by the prostrate warrior, he attacked the
second and the third in the same manner, and with the same success,
always either cutting down the trooper or cleaving the head of his horse
at the first stroke. The path was now in the utmost confusion. Owing to
the pause that had taken place, all the riders had come up and crowded
each other behind, some crying, "He is a devil!" and others at a greater
distance shouting out, "Down with the Scot! down with him!" Charlie
regarded not their cries, but laid about him with all his might, till,
after striking down three of the foremost and one horse, those next to
him were glad to turn in order to effect their escape; but the
hindermost on the path refusing for a while to give way, many of their
friends fell a sacrifice to Charlie's wrath. He pursued them for a
space, and might have cut them off every man, had he been sure that all
was safe behind,--but he had rushed by some wounded men and wounded
horses, and knew not how matters stood with the friar. As he dreaded, so it fell out. Two of the Englishmen who had fallen
perhaps under their horses, had scrambled up the bosky precipice, and,
as he returned, assailed him with large stones, a mode of attack against
which he was unable to make the least resistance. Therefore, it was at
the utmost peril of his life that he made his way back through the
encumbered path to his friend the friar. This latter worthy had found it
impossible to lend his friend any assistance. The beast that he bestrode
was fonder of rubbing shoulders with a living brute, than a mangled or
dead one; so he refused to come nearer the first that fell than about
twice his own length, where he stood firm, turning his tail to the scene
of battle, and looking back. Our two heroes now set off at full speed
after the rest of their party, whom they expected to overtake before
reaching the outposts of the beleaguering army. _Lord Duffus._--I saw the appearance of a mounted warrior. Whence did it come, or whither did it go? Or whom did it seek here? Hush thee, my lord;
              The apparition spoke not, but passed on. 'Tis something dreadful; and, I fear me much,
             Betokens evil to this fair array. _Trag. of the Prioress._

The rest of our cavalcade continued to advance at a quick pace, not
without anxiety. They were not afraid of their enemies coming behind
them, for they had strong faith in the prowess of their friend, as well
as his horse Corby. But when they came to the end of the narrow path,
called the Thief-gate, there were two roads, and they knew not which of
these to follow. As bad luck would have it, they took the most easterly,
which led towards Yetholm, and left the Scottish army to the westward. In that path they continued to jog on, turning many a long look behind
them for the approach of Charlie; and, at one time, they thought they
got a view of him coming at a furious pace all alone; but the rider
being at a great space behind them, he was shortly hid from their view
in an intervening hollow, and it was long before they saw him any more. They judged that the friar was taken or slain, and began to talk of his
loss in a very indifferent manner. "Alas, how frigid and ungenial must be the hearts of you men in
Scotland," said Delany. "Now, of all the men I have met with since I was
brought from my own country, there is only one whose death I would more
regret than that of the worthy and kind friar. He may have his whims and
his peculiarities, but his manner is pleasing, and his speech has a
strain of grandeur which I love. Where did he acquire that speech?" "He gets it frae some auld-fashioned beuk," said Tam, "that he has pored
on a' his days, an' translatit out o' other tongues, till he was nearly
hanged for it; and it's weel kend that he is now in hiding wi' our
warden for fear o' his life, and has been these half dozen o' years; and
though he pretends to be only a friar, he was aince a monk o' the first
order of St Benedict, and president of a grand college in France." "I would like to converse with him," said Delany, "for I have always
thought that he feigned to be something a degree lower than he is." "You said there was _but one_ you would lament the loss of more," said
the poet: "Pray, who may that _one_ be?" "Could you not guess?" returned she. "How can I?" said he; "but this I know, that to be the favoured one I
would dive into the depths of the ocean,--"

"It wad be for fear then," said Tam. "Or traverse the regions of ice," continued the bard, "or wander
barefoot over burning sands, or--"

"O, alak for your poor feet!" said Delany, interrupting him; "but rest
satisfied you shall not be put to the test: it is not you." With such kind of chat did they beguile the way, till Elias, looking
back, exclaimed, "Mercy! see what a guise Yardbire is coming in!" "St Mary protect us!" said the maid; "he must be grievously wounded. See how he rides!" Every one turned round his horse and looked at the approaching warrior;
but it was wearing late, and they could not see with distinctness. The
horse was coming rapidly, and with apparent impatience, but Charlie
appeared as if he were riding in his sleep. When the horse came down
hill he bent forward, and on climbing an ascent he bent back, riding
with that sort of motion as if his back or neck were out of joint. The
whole group showed manifest signs of fear at the approach of such a
hideous apparition; and, quite in earnest, though in a pretended frolic,
they wheeled about again, and gallopped away. The ground being uneven,
and the night-fall coming on, they soon lost sight of him; and,
continuing their career as fast as the road would permit, they seemed
inclined to escape from their friend altogether. The maid had just begun
to remonstrate on their unfriendly procedure, when they beheld the same
unaccountable figure coming at the full gallop close behind them. Seeing
that he was determined to be of the party, they suffered him to
overtake them quietly. He came driving furiously up till he was in the
middle of them, and then paused. No one had the courage to speak to him,
for he looked not up, nor regarded any of them. His helmed head nodded
on his breast, and his arms hung loosely down by his side, the steel
armlets rattling on the cuishes. At one time his horse came so near to
that on which Delany rode, that she weened she saw the rider all covered
with blood, and screamed out; yet in the twilight she could not be
certain. The poet, who was never far from her side, and on whom her
voice always acted like electricity, immediately demanded the cause of
her alarm. "O Carol!" said she, in an agitated whisper, "we are haunted. That is a
dead man that rides in our company." If the maid was alarmed, the poet was ten times more so. If she had said
that a lion or a bear was in the company, it could not have struck such
a chillness to the poor bard's heart; and, after all, it was no wonder,
for there is something exceedingly appalling in the idea of having a
dead man riding in one's company. The poet felt this in its fullest
measure. He held in his horse and attempted a reply, but a dryness
pervaded his mouth so much that he could not make himself intelligible. A damp had fallen on the whole party, and a breathless silence
prevailed. Tam put the question, so natural, to him as he passed,
"Charlie, is this you?" --but none answered or regarded. They were riding
up a slanting hill when the bard was first apprised of the nature of
their guest, and shortly after the figure coming between him and the
evening sky, its motions were altogether so hideous, that he roared out
in perfect terror as loud as he could bray, scarce letting one bellow
await another. This was still worse than the dumb appalling uncertainty
in which they were before involved; till at last Tam, losing all
patience, let loose his rage against the poet, calling him a bellowing
beast, and many other opprobrious names. This encouraging Gibbie, who
had the bard at no good will on account of the damsel, he said he
brought him "amind of a story that the fo'k o' Annandale tauld about
Andrew Jardine's bull, that was better at booing than breeding." The boy
Elias now coming in behind them, and having heard what Delany said,
cried softly, "Hush! yeomen! hush! we are haunted; it is a ghost that
rides in our company." They all turned their eyes to the mysterious figure, which they still
thought resembled their champion Yardbire, as well as the horse did that
which he rode, the redoubted Corby. The horse had started a little
forward at the cries of the poet, but when the rest paused the figure
seemed to wheel his horse around, and made a dead pause also, standing
still with his face toward them, and straight on the path before. Not
one durst proceed.