The door of the hearse was opened to receive the glittering coffin, the Earl contemplated it with firmness, and not one sigh escaped his agonized bosom, till some obstacle impeded the closing of the door, when one of the attendants shut it with a degree of violence that echoed through the street, and roughly shook the sable plumes, which had before gently waved in solemn dignity. The unhappy father groaned, and hiding his face, abandoned himself to all the bitterness of despair, seeming never to have felt the full extent of his irreparable loss, till the rattling of the carriages told him that his son was for ever gone. Ah! what avail that o’er the vassal plain
His rights, and rich demesnes extended wide, That honor, and his knights composed his train, And chivalry stood marshall’d by his side. CUNNINGHAM. THE Earl instead of recovering his composure, when he had no longer the body of his son to weep over, appeared to devote himself to yet more unmeasurable grief. After giving orders to get every thing in readiness to leave town, he shut himself up in his own apartment, and refused to see any of his family. In proportion as his grief for the loss of his son faded from his memory, the disappointment of all his hopes returned with additional force. One hour he wept the early doom of one so engaging and so worthy, the next he deplored his own misfortunes in living to see his family extinct, and his estates devolve to a distant relation of despicable character. The dead are seldom remembered long with very acute sufferings, when we are reminded of them only by the recollection of their virtues. But Lord Drelincourt’s loss was daily recalled to him by its consequences; and he daily felt it the more keenly, as he became more sensible of its effects. Life seemed no longer to possess a charm for him, no longer could he hope to feel interested in it, and he even appeared careless of its preservation. Lady Drelincourt wept incessantly, her grief for the death of her son, was encreased by her anxiety for her husband who had repeatedly refused to see her; at length she intreated Everilda to go to him without any previous notice, thinking that he could not repulse the widow of his son: and perhaps he might take a melancholy pleasure in her society; and be induced once more, to cheer his disconsolate family with his presence. But alas! grief and disappointment had rendered the Earl unjust; and when Everilda with streaming eyes, and a breaking heart, came into his presence, and knelt before him, eloquently looking the sorrows to which she was unable to give utterance, he could not conceal that he only beheld in her the bane of his domestic peace, the destroyer of all his hopes, and the cause of all his miseries. He endeavoured however, to disguise the impression she made on him, by saying that he wished to be entirely alone, and thought his wishes had been generally understood; he was turning away, but she caught his hand, exclaiming, “Oh! my lord, will you forsake me thus? have I deserved this anger from you? oh! I am already too, too wretched, make me not more so by your coldness.” The Earl stood irresolute, the image of his friend the Marchese, rose to his view, but it was chased by that of his son, wounded, expiring, lifeless, and before this dreadful image, every other consideration vanished. “They who wish to draw me from my solitude,” said he in a voice choked by his emotions, “have acted very injudiciously, by sending one to invite me back to society, whose presence can recal none but painful ideas; let me, my lady, recover this shock, before I hazard my feelings to encounter others, though none more trying can await me.” The bitterness with which he spoke, pierced Everilda’s soul, but nature had done with her resentments in her; and though the hectic of a moment passed across her cheek, it tarried not; she rose from

her humble posture with an air of dignified sorrow, and casting her eyes to heaven she exclaimed, “Never again, my lord, shall the unfortunate Everilda voluntarily intrude upon you; your coldness has stabbed me to the heart; it may be good for me to be afflicted, but you know not what effect your conduct may have on me, or how deeply you may be interested in it. Farewell my lord, you will at some time think better of me.” So saying, she left him, and retiring immediately to her room, refused to see any one except Claudina, whom she sent to Lady Drelincourt with an account of her reception; that excellent woman wept, as she lamented the alteration which grief must have produced in the temper of her lord, ere he could have been urged to treat with harshness, one already overpowered by affliction. The affectionate Claudina, sympathized in Lady Drelincourt’s sorrows, but she could stay only a short time with her, as Everilda complained of being much indisposed, and expressed a desire to remain in her apartment. Lord Drelincourt was not however, of a disposition to continue long under the dominion of prejudice or injustice; he felt that he had treated Everilda unkindly, and he resolved not only to acknowledge it to her, but to abandon a solitude, in which he only added to his sorrows, by fruitless repinings for the blessings he had lost, ungratefully neglecting those that were yet spared to him. With a laudable resolution to conquer the excess of grief, that had rendered him unjust to the remainder of his family, he made them comparatively happy the next day, by joining them at the dinner table. Everilda and Claudina were absent, the Earl enquired for them, but Lady Drelincourt answered, that the former being indisposed, had dined in her own apartment with the latter; indeed since the unfortunate death of Lord Courtney, Everilda had lived so much without any other society, than that of her faithful Claudina, that her absence was no unusual circumstance. But the Earl’s affectionate heart, soon expanded with the tenderness natural to it; and uneasy whilst any part of his family were absent, he repeated his enquiries, desiring that a servant might be dispatched to Lady Courtney’s room, to request her company. Still she came not; neither did the servant return to account for her delay, and Lady Drelincourt fearing that she might be seriously indisposed, said, “Go, my Emma, and see if Lady Courtney be ill; and if she be not, tell her that your father is with us, and wishes to have the pleasure of her company.” Lady Emma went, but returned in a few minutes, paler than alpine snows; she endeavoured to speak, but a sudden gush of tears, deprived her of utterance. Lady Drelincourt was inconceivably alarmed, she imagined that Everilda must be dying, or perhaps already dead. “Speak my dear child,” she exclaimed, “speak if it be but one word, is Lady Courtney ill?” “Indeed I do not know, for I have not seen either her or Claudina,” replied the weeping Emma. “But have you not been in her apartment?” enquired her mother. “Yes Madam, but I did not see them.” “And why not my dear?” “Because they were not there,” replied Emma with the utmost simplicity. “Not there!” exclaimed Edmund, starting from his seat, “what, have they fled? Lost Everilda! but no, I wrong her even by the momentary admittance of such a thought.” He then went to Emma, and taking her hand, said in the tenderest accents, “Do not distress yourself, my dearest Emma, tell me what you know of her departure, I will follow her instantly, and all may yet be well.” Emma could only weep, and declare her entire ignorance of Everilda’s intentions. The Earl now rang the bell, and ordered Bianca to be sent for. “She has not been seen since last night, my lord,” said the servant. “Then send Giuseppe,” said the Earl impatiently. “Giuseppe it is thought has accompanied her, my lord,” replied the man, scarcely able to suppress a smile, for as Bianca and Giuseppe were known to be mutually attached, the

domestics imagined that they had gone to be privately married, and never thought of Lady Courtney, of whose departure they were all utterly ignorant. “Leave the room,” said the Earl, and as soon as the door was closed, the family began to consult on the measures necessary to be taken, with the hope of recovering the fugitives. That Everilda in a moment of grief and mortification, should have thought of leaving the house, was only consistent with the natural violence of her temper, and uncontrolled susceptibility of feeling; but that the gentle, prudent, and timid Claudina, should act in a manner so contrary to her usual principles, as to countenance Everilda in such imprudent conduct, and even to become the partner of her flight, was strange and incomprehensible; though scarcely more so, than that so large a party should leave the house, without being suspected, or observed; this however on further consideration was found less surprising, as it was recollected that the family had been in confusion, on account of preparing to leave town; and it now appeared, that Lady Courtney and Claudina’s trunks, which had been packed ready with several others, were removed, which left no doubt that their departure was intended to he permanent. It naturally struck every one, that Italy was the object of their destination, and Edmund proposed sending expresses to the different sea-ports, where they would probably attempt to embark. The Earl could hardly conceive it possible, that two females utterly unprotected, should have the temerity to think of travelling through foreign countries, at a time, when the hostility of every continental power, made the attempt hazardous, even for one of the more courageous sex, possessed of every advantage of different passports and numerous letters of introduction; however he could conjecture nothing more probable, particularly as Giuseppe and Bianca had likewise disappeared. These two servants were most faithfully attached to their mistress, and to each other; but possessing much of the fiery impatience of their country’s spirit, they seldom agreed with any other of the domestics, and the Earl had frequently wished his son to dismiss them, on account of the perpetual quarrels they occasioned in his household; but Henrietta the illustrious consort of Charles the first, was not more jealous of any attempt to deprive her of her French attendants, than was Lady Courtney, of every hint that bespoke a desire to discharge her Italians: in this instance, her obstinacy was very easily excused by Lord Courtney, who knew that Bianca was the orphan of two of the Marchese’s vassals, at their death, she was left friendless, and the young Everilda, not then twelve years old, had taken Bianca, who was of her own age, under her protection; she had taught her reading, writing, and needle-work; and was rewarded by finding her a faithful and unwearied attendant. Giuseppe had been yet more, if possible, the object of his lady’s bounty; he was the only son of two cottagers whose poverty was so extreme, that their utmost efforts, could not procure for him, the comforts necessary during a long and severe illness. Everilda in her rambles, found the afflicted parents weeping over their son, whom they believed to be dying, but who was evidently sinking more from inanition than disease; her compassion was easily excited, she ran home, and begged her father to save the poor boy from misery and death. The Marchese never thought his bounty so well employed as when it made his daughter happy, and in a few weeks the object of her cares was restored to health, and received into the family of the Marchese, whom he served with the fidelity and cheerfulness, continually inspired by the remembrance of his obligation to him. Whilst Edmund was consulting with the Earl, on the most likely means of gaining intelligence of his sister, Lady Drelincourt had visited her apartment, and found in one of her dressing boxes two letters, which she delivered to the Earl, to whom they were directed. The first

was from Everilda, it was written in Italian, and was to the following purport: “MY LORD,
“I have unhappily been too little accustomed to the language of severity, to subject myself to a repetition of it, where I cannot but think it was unmerited; alas! could I have foreseen the unhappiness I have unintentionally occasioned in your family, by my union with your son, I trust you will believe me when I solemnly declare, that my own life should have been spent in all the languor of a hopeless attachment, ere by indulging it, I would have caused the misery of yours; it is passed, but I might yet have been bound to your family, and endeared to yourself by the tenderest ties; that hope, has hitherto enabled me to support the dreadful trial I have undergone, but your unkindness has destroyed the pleasing illusion; pardon me, my lord, I mean not to reproach you; ill would it become me to condemn, when my own conduct has been so censurable; no, believe me, it is not resentment that urges me to the step on which I now meditate, the favours I have received from you and your family, will never be forgotten by me, or cease to excite in my bosom the liveliest gratitude, which can end only with my wretched existence. The recollection of the happy hours I have enjoyed in your society, will cheer the solitude I am about to seek. The remembrance of the past I cannot be deprived of; it is now my only treasure, and in dwelling on it, my heart will always acknowledge the virtues of the family that I must yet resolve to leave for ever. Alas! I live not for myself alone, a being ten thousand times more dear to me, will owe its existence to my care; oh! my lord, I cannot give birth to my child, if I know it will be taught to hate its mother, execrate her whose follies deprived it of a father. I quit for ever the rank and splendor which have no charms for a broken heart, and which I never knew how to enjoy rationally. In solitude I shall reflect on my errors, I shall repent them with daily contrition, and in time, I trust they will be forgiven. If my child be a daughter, it cannot be thought an injustice to retain the blessing which will reconcile me to life, in the hope of teaching her to avoid her mother’s failings: if it be a son, I shall not gratify my own feelings at the expence of yours; I will resign him to you, when he no longer requires my cares; deprived of him, my existence will soon exhaust itself by its languor, in the grave I shall find repose, and my son will perhaps weep over me, forgetting all my faults in the remembrance that I was his mother, and lived but for him. Farewell, my dear lord, let the tears that now stream from my eyes, expiate my past misconduct, I am punished severely for it, by the incessant recollection of its consequences; oh! let me hope that by you I am forgiven. “EVERILDA.” Claudina’s letter was written also in Italian, and contained the following words. “It is the peculiar unhappiness of Claudina’s fate to make her appear ungrateful to her benefactors; but in this instance she hopes the motives of her actions may excuse their apparent impropriety. A solemn promise of secresy was required by Lady Courtney, and Claudina knowing her critical situation, feared lest any opposition might deprive Lord Drelincourt of a hope now inestimably valuable. For this reason she complied with Lady Courtney’s request, and what she promised she considers herself bound to perform, trusting that

an anxious attendance on the object of her care, may be of such service, that Lord Drelincourt will pardon, in its future effects, the temporary estrangement from his hospitable roof.”
These letters seemed to oppose the idea of the fugitives having intended to return to Italy, and Claudina appeared to have hinted a temporary absence, in order to make the mind of the Earl as easy as she could, without betraying her trust by more fully disclosing their intentions. The Earl was greatly agitated at the discovery that Everilda had made of her unexpected situation; one moment he bitterly reproached himself for the coldness by which he had repulsed her when she sought an interview with him, the next he pleased himself with the thought of consoling her for it, by every testimony of affection which he could lavish on her: now the delightful hope of living to embrace a grandson, diffused rapture over his bosom, so lately the seat of despair; and then fearing to indulge in a vision so extatic, he mentally implored heaven to grant him resolution to withdraw his thoughts from worldly views, and to teach him to bear the disappointment of them with fortitude. Weeks elapsed and no tidings of Everilda could be gained: the suspense between hope and fear was too torturing for the Earl; in a fit of despondency he resolved to forget entirely the dream of happiness, on which he had with fondness dwelt, and weary of continuing enquiries which raised perpetual hopes, ending only in new disappointments, he returned once more to Castle Drelincourt, whilst Edmund tore himself reluctantly from his Emma, to whom his heart became still more fondly attached by a sympathy in grief, and prepared to return to Florence to pursue his search on the continent, and to acquit himself of the painful but necessary task of informing his parents of the late melancholy occurrences. Ah! fruitless now my hopes, my anxious fears, Fruitless my prospects for thy tender years. Once smiling fancy to my mental view, Brightened the scenes that expectation drew;
I saw thy youth in all the flush of may,
I saw thy manhood rip’ning to the day: Reflection now must sadden o’er thy tomb, And gather painful knowledge from thy doom. Now vain to me the genial mornings shine,
In vain the evenings blush with light divine; In vain the summer blows, the autum glows, Since grief to me such pensive joy bestows. Then scenes of life—ye rosy hours depart,
For only sacred sorrow sooths my heart. HOW ARD. THE distraction of the Marchese and his Lady may be easily imagined. In their despair they determined to proceed immediately to England. The Marchese declared that he would search round the world for his daughter, and the Marchesa knew not whether more to lament her disappearance, or the unhappiness which had forced her to it. How different the present meeting between the Earl and the Marchese from their former ones; both unhappy; both feeling injured; and both wishing to disguise their feelings. Their embrace was colder than either intended it to be, yet warmer than either intended it to be, yet warmer than they really felt inclined to bestow; but they could not be long together without reviving the sentiments of friendship which had formed the happiness of their youth, and of which the remembrance shed a pleasing influence over the tranquillity of middle life. The Marchesa and Lady Drelincourt were of dispositions exactly similar; they lamented the unhappy circumstance under which their acquaintance had commenced, and in lamenting them together they found a consolation which lessened the poignancy of their affliction. Much as the Marchesa was pleased with the whole of Lady Drelincourt’s family, yet to Emma she felt particularly attached; probably the hope of Edmund being made happy by her, was the foundation of an esteem, to which her unaffected loveliness, her feminine sensibility, and retiring modesty, daily added new strength. But the excessive anxiety caused by the mysterious uncertainty of Everilda’s fate, and the interesting situation in which she was known to be, precluded every idea of tranquillity. The Earl also still devoted himself to solitude, and though he appeared highly gratified in the society of the Marchese, yet he avoided him whenever he could do it without breaking the laws of hospitality and politeness. He always breakfasted alone, contriving not so see his guests until dinner, under pretence of being occupied in some alterations on his estate; and after dinner he left the table as soon as

possible, with an excuse of writing letters, or looking over papers. But one day the Marchese had unintentionally traced his steps to the mausoleum, where reposed the ashes of that beloved child, whose untimely death had nipped in the bud, every fair and flattering hope of happiness. The building stood in the shelter of a small wood, where the gloomy cypress, the mournful larch, and sable yew, cast around a melancholy shade well according with the sad purpose to which it was dedicated. A few flowering shrubs were intermixed, but the season of their sweets was past, and their scanty number, and drooping faded appearance, afforded a melancholy emblem of the paucity and uncertainty of sublunary pleasures. The wind howled with the complaining shrillness that generally attends the declining year, and whirled the dead leaves in its blast, whilst the chilling damp of the atmosphere communicated its influence to the heart. Lord Drelincourt’s feelings were in unison with the gloom around him. The temporary suspension of the beauties of nature was congenial to a mind, whose brightest prospects had faded under the stern mandate of death: the spring would bring no pleasure to him, for in his heart it could revive no hopes; the glare of summer suns would have been intolerable when contrasted with the darkness reigning in his bosom, but “the pale descending year was pleasing still,” and to him the reluctance with which nature delivers her treasures, and her charms, to “stern winter ruler of th’ inverted year,” was grateful. At dinner the Earl appeared as usual, Lady Drelincourt asked him if the alterations he had been planning succeeded to his wishes, “ I have been attending to them all the morning,” he replied “I cannot say my success equals my desires; but in time I trust I shall be rewarded; had I begun sooner to conquer the obstacles which now oppose them, I might have found less difficulty in the efforts which I find necessary, and the consequences might have been infinitely more fortunate than they can now ever prove.” He sighed deeply as he concluded, and it was easy to perceive that he had spoken enigmatically, and that the alterations he alluded to, were those which he was anxious to make in his ideas, not in his estates. He left the room soon after, saying that he had papers of consequence to inspect. The ladies shortly followed, and as the drawing room which they used when the company consisted only of a small party, commanded from one of the windows a view of the wood in which the mausoleum was erected, the Marchese could not resist an inclination he felt, to know if the Earl continued his solitary walks, at the hours when he affected to be engrossed by business or study. The moon was shining in unclouded brightness, and under pretence of admiring it, he drew aside curtain, and stood near the window. He had not been there many minutes, before he perceived by the stream of silver light which illumined and pleasingly contrasted the gloom, on which it was poured, the figure of the Earl slowly emerging from the thickest part of the wood; he was soon lost among the trees, and then reappeared; his pace was sometimes so slow that it could scarcely be determined whether he moved, or was rooted to the earth; then, as if recollecting himself, he suddenly walked with quick and unequal steps; pausing, again he looked stedfastly on the mild luminary which seemed to send forth its softest beams, as if to calm his troubled bosom. He gazed on it for some moments, and then with folded arms, and downcast eyes again he disappeared in the impervious gloom. The Marchese was struck to the soul by the despair which this conduct evinced in his friend; He mentally retraced the time when the Earl was blooming, animated, and gay, as the youth he now lamented with such hopeless anguish; and memory fondly dwelt upon the days in

which they had together planted a thousand schemes of pleasure, for that charming season of life, in which the delicious sensations of expected and undefinable happiness are so strongly imprinted on the mind, that it delights to recall the time when it was so agreeably deceived, long after the delusion has for ever fled. The Marchese remembering the past, and comparing it with the present, shrunk from the contrast. Never did he feel more attached to his friend, than at the moment when he considered him so changed. A tear involuntarily strayed down his cheek; it was a tribute to past happiness. A sigh broke from his oppressed heart, it was emblematical of the transient nature of the felicity he lamented. One evening the family had formed a circle round the fire, to enjoy, if not conversation, at least that agreeable unrestrained silence, which among friends who rightly understand each others feelings, is not less agreeable. Every one spoke, only when he wished to communicate some idea which might gratify the rest; and none intruded a frivolous remark merely from thinking it necessaay to say something, to exempt themselves from the charge of not being able to say any thing. A servant however entered with a letter for the Earl, which he said had just arrived by an express, and this incident interrupted the silence that reigned for some time, if we may call that an interruption which was given by looks and gestures, rather than by words. The mention of the express had fixed the attention of the party, and had roused that of the Marchese and his lady to a painful height; they had been so inured to disappointment respecting their enquiries after their beloved daughter, that they had almost ceased to hope; but as they had still numerous emissaries continually pursuing their search, this express might be from one of them; Everilda might be found, might be waiting to embrace her parents, or she might be languishing in sickness and distress, and needing all their tendernest consolations. These thoughts passed in quick succession thro’ the minds of more than the anxious parents, and every eye was fixed on the Earl, who had turned pale as he examined the seal and direction of the letter. Instead of opening it, he laid it on the table before him, and appeared lost in thought, till hastily rising he was leaving the room to read it in private, when he saw in the Marchesa’s countenance, such evident tokens of anxious doubt and mortified impatience, that he stopped irresolute, and after a short pause exclaimed, “Why should I disguise my feeling from those so dear to me, who will imagine as easily as they will pardon them. I know the seal and writing of this letter; it is from,” he paused, and making an effort to repeat the name with firmness, continued, “it is from Sir Edward Clayton. He has written I fear to revive my sorrows by craving an oblivion of the cause; he should have known that there are injuries, for which perpetual silence is the most soothing atonement that can be made.” He then looked over the contents of the letter, and whilst so employed, the frequent changes in his countenance evinced, that they were of an interesting and apparently of a pleasing nature. When he had concluded, he went to the Marchese and his lady, and taking their hands, said, “let us be grateful my dear friends, our Everilda is found, and heaven teaches us a lesson of forgiveness by granting that the man who deprived us of a son, should restore to us a daughter.” The rapture diffused by this information was general, but on the Marchesa it rushed with such force, that overpowered by its influence, she fainted in her husband’s arms. In a few minutes however, she recovered, and was

sufficiently calm to peruse the letter that had occasioned her emotion, and of which the contents were as follows. “MY LORD,
“The hope of imparting pleasure to your lordship’s breast, has excited in mine, sensations to which it has long been a stranger. If, my lord, you will condescend to receive intelligence from a man, who has, as unintentionally as unhappily, injured you beyond the power of reparation, by acknowledgment, or repentance, I trust that mine will be found interesting, when I enform you it relates to Lady Courtney, of whose retreat, I understand you have hitherto been ignorant; and which I accidentally discovered in Wales at a small village, situated in so retired a spot, that if the poverty and humble condition of the few inhabitants which it contains, were not sufficient to prevent intrusion, nature has effectually guarded them from it by concealing them in a deep valley, which even the eye of curiosity might fail to discern, and by surrounding them with mountains, which the hardiest courage might on the first view deem inaccessible. “I am sorry to be under the necessity of adding that Lady Courtney’s health appears in a very precarious state, but perhaps much ought to be allowed for her present situation, and I hope her anxiety to see her friends, may be equalled by the benefit which she may receive from their society: I am at present with the worthy clergyman of the village, whose guest I shall remain, until I have the satisfaction of resigning to some of your lordship’s family, the responsibility that I at present feel; I shall then leave England, perhaps for ever, but never shall I cease to remember, that it contains those, whose welfare will always be ardently wished, by
“my lord,
“your lordship’s most obedient, “humble servant,
“EDWARD CLAYTON.”
The person whe had brought the letter, was Sir Edward’s valet, and by his master’s orders, he remained with the Earl, in order to attend him on his journey, and to act as a guide, which it was indispensably necessary to have. It was determined that the Marchese and his lady, Lord and Lady Drelincourt, Edmund, and Lady Emma, should set off the next day; attended only by Lady Drelincourt’s woman, and one man servant, as from Sir Edward’s description of the village, it appeared very improbable that a large retinue could be accommodated in it. Lady Emma was chosen in preference to her elder sisters, from Lady Courtney having always appeared particularly partial to her, as well as her being now considered by the Marchesa, as scarcely less dear to her, than the daughter for whom she had wept so many hours away, and to whom she was now about to hasten, with all the speed of maternal rapture. Leaving the party then to pursue their journey, under the direction of Bernard their trusty conductor, we shall request the attention of our readers, to a retrospective view of the

circumstances which led to the discovery of Lady Courtney by Sir Edward Clayton. Come patience, come and take me by the hande, And trewe repentance teach myne eyes to weepe; Humyllity, in neede of thee I stande,
My soul desires thy companie to keepe:
Base worldly thoughts, vanish out of my mynde, Leave not a spot of you, or your’s behind. ROBERT DEVEREUX, EARL OF ESSEX. THE anguish felt by Lady Courtney, when Lord Drelincourt coldly dismissed her from his presence, was unmixed with resentment. She recollected the kindness with which she had always been treated until that moment; she felt that to the excessive grief in which he had indulged, since the death of his son, was to be imputed the change in his disposition, which had produced a similar change in his manners. The former had become gloomy, and inert; the latter, harsh, and repulsive. “And to whom is this sad alteration owing?” she asked herself. “Who introduced dissension and misery into a family, before admired for domestic happiness and love?” Every enquiry she made, received the same answer; she alone was to blame, and she resolved to expiate the mischief that she had occasioned, by withdrawing herself from a family, in which her presence inspired no ideas, but those of the ills that it had diffused around.