"Sickness!" said Montgomery, now seizing, grasping the hand of Miss Moreton. "Sickness! Good God, Miss Moreton! Sickness! say you? and did you, could you leave her?" "I did, I could, Montgomery, for I came to you!" The expression of Miss Moreton's look; the emphasis on her words, could no longer be
misconstrued. Montgomery experienced a total revulsion of his frame; the blood seemed to chill at his
heart; too late he discovered his error; an error into which his passion for Mary Cuthbert, and a
fatal infatuation, had precipitated him. But Mary was ill, was stretched on the bed of sickness! and while, at one moment, he
released Miss Moreton's passive hand, and started back as from a venomous reptile, he, the next,
more precipitately approached towards her, as he said, "Is her disorder considered dangerous?" "I fear it is," replied Miss Moreton, "and if she dies, Walwyn, that treacherous ingrate,
will have much to answer for. In accompanying me to visit him at H-- barracks, I took the
fever which is now so prevalent there. I recovered, and was anxious to follow the leading star of
my destiny, which pointed my steps hither. My ward's fate was doubtful when I quitted her,
but-" "Madam," interrupted Montgomery, "there exists not a word which language can utter, to
convey a palliation for such unheard of barbarity. What! leave her to the mercy of strangers! leave her when visited by a pestilential disease, to breathe her last sigh unseen, unheard,
unpitied! Miss Moreton, your romantic eccentricities have borne away the common feelings of
humanity, and of your sex!" "Montgomery, Montgomery! surely I do not understand you." said
Miss Moreton, while Mrs. Montgomery looked at her son with surprize, though it was unmixed
by displeasure; and the two girls held back still further from the strange lady. "I believe, Madam, that you do not," said Montgomery; "seldom does plain truth reach
the ear of her, who, inflated by vanity and conceit, is wholly swallowed up in self!-Miss
Moreton, ere it be too late, take the advice of a friend: Return to your own residence-desist
from those capricious and culpable vagaries which you have indulged at the expence of your
character and your fame-return to the paths prescribed to your sex; and shew, ere you are lost
for ever, that you have some feeling of shame in your nature!" "And this from you;-this from Montgomery, the obliged, the devoted Montgomery?" asked Miss Moreton, stamping her foot furiously on the floor. "To what cause may I impute this
alteration, Sir?-Where is the perspective of happiness which you talked of in your letter to
me?" "Where, indeed!" said Montgomery, hiding his face with both his hands, and retiring in
confusion to another part of the room. "Look, Madam," said Miss Moreton, hastily searching her bosom, and producing the
letter she had received from Montgomery, "Read here, and account to me, if you can, for his
frantic conduct of this moment!" "Oh! rather say my frantic conduct at that moment!" said Montgomery, snatching the
letter from his mother.-"This letter, this hateful letter was written when my senses were
infatuated, entranced! It owed its origin to an error as gross, as it was unpardonable, and I am
now justly suffering for my almost unparalelled stupidity! Suffice it to say, Miss Moreton, that I
am extremely sorry for the mistake into which it has led you; and I hope that you will forget that
you ever received it!" and he hastily threw it into the fire. "Forget it? oh! never, never, never!" cried Miss Moreton; "Cruel, barbarous
Montgomery! Have I not learnt every word of it?-Have I not lived on every syllable?-Did you
not write this never-to-be-forgotten sentence-"When my mind is a little more at ease, I will
resume my pen to express all with which this heart is fraught, to the object of my fondest
affection and gratitude-"
"Oh! no more, no more! it is insupportable, it is madness!" said Montgomery. "My dear Frederic, what is, what can be the meaning of all this?" asked his mother. "If
you have deceived this lady by false professions; if-"
"I never did, Ma'am," answered Montgomery; "A most unhappy, a most unfortunate
mistake involved my mind at the moment when I wrote to Miss Moreton; but I call Heaven to
witness (except what originated from this error, and which was wholly a misapprehension) that I
never professed by look, word, or action, an atom, a shadow of regard for this lady; nay more,
that while her guest at the Attic Villa, I might frequently have been accused of failing in common
politeness towards her." "Oh! hear, earth and heaven," cried Miss Moreton; "thus, thus it is-even the tenderness,
the softness of my nature betrays me; and I, like my prototype, Corinna, am doomed to bear
distress in every shape, ere I reach the climax of my destiny! but this from thee! from thee,
much-favoured youth!-Oh! 'tis hard, too hard to bear! "-and, sinking on the ground, Miss
Moreton fell into strong hysterics.-Mrs. Montgomery and her daughters essayed their skill to
restore her to composure, while Montgomery quitted the room. "Ah! still propitious may'st thou deign
"To soothe an anxious lover's pain. LANGHORNE. MONTGOMERY rushed out of doors to give way to all the tumultuous agony of his
mind, unheard, unseen!-The mad folly of Miss Moreton had disordered his temper; but the
intelligence of Mary Cuthbert's illness had sunk deep into his heart.-From reveries of the most
flattering kind, he had been awakened to hear that this tenderly beloved girl was, in all
probability, breathing her last, the victim of a contagious disorder; that she was unattended,
unknown, placed amongst strangers. And what had preceded the direful malady?-A visit to H-- barracks. Heaven and
earth! the lovely, the modest Mary taken to be gazed at by soldiers-to be exposed to their
unlicensed stare, their rude and brutal insults; perhaps her fame, her reputation gone! "Oh! can I ever forget the day, when, beaming with modesty and native loveliness, she
entered the Attic Villa!" cried he, clasping his hands together;-"Can I ever forget the thousand
nameless fears which glowed on her cheek when she found that the remarks of Walwyn applied
to her cousin! Oh! Mary, Mary, and art thou gone for ever!" This last exclamation seemed to bring reason to the aid of Montgomery.-He returned to
the house with more haste than he had quitted it; and, without inquiring about the heroine in
hysterics, he took a candle into the little study, which had lately been his father's, and there he
immediately addressed a few lines to Mrs. Deborah Moreton. Apologizing in as methodical a way as his agitation would permit, he informed her of the
sudden arrival of her niece at Elmsly, and the intelligence which she had communicated
concerning Miss Cuthbert, and, with no common energy, he besought Mrs. Moreton to take some
immediate steps for her comfort and safety. Having finished the letter, he instantly dispatched a servant with it to the next town, in
order to save the mail of that night; and, feeling his mind a little relieved from a knowledge of its
being on the way, and having offered up earnest prayers for the recovery of Mary Cuthbert, he
sat down to a calmer retrospect of recent occurrences, than he had hitherto been able to give
them. Through the misunderstanding of himself and Miss Moreton, it plainly appeared that
Mary Cuthbert remained wholly in ignorance of his regard for her; and it was probable that she
entertained no warmer wishes towards him than a common acquaintance would receive. If he felt
some mortification at the last supposition, it yet brought with it a proportionable share of
consolation. There had been something repugnant to his feelings, and derogatory to the opinion
he had previously formed of Miss Cuthbert's character, in the idea of her having confided her
attachment to Miss Moreton, and in her having been privy to the letter she had written him; but
this was entirely an error-an error, into which he had most strangely involved himself, by the
effervescent emotions of his heart, and his credulous vanity. The character, the delicacy of Mary was still unimpeached;-She was still-alas! she
was dying! Perhaps even now she had breathed her last! Miss Moreton, on recovering from her fit, and finding that the cold, the insensate
Montgomery had left her, could scarcely be persuaded to stay under his mother's roof for the
remaining part of the night; but this Mrs. Montgomery insisted on, and, having laid her
troublesome guest on her pillow, she besought her son to give her an explanation of the
extraordinary scene which she had witnessed. To his mother and his sisters, Montgomery would no longer have any reserve. He gave a
short history of his first introduction to Mary Cuthbert, and of his succeeding visit to the Attic
Villa. He painted Miss Moreton's character in the colours which he had viewed it in; and he took
shame to himself, in the mixture of blindness and vanity which had bewildered him, so as to
make him misconstrue her letter. "Thus far, my dear Madam," said Montgomery, "I have explained myself, as it is
necessary to your Frederic's peace of mind, that his mother should have no doubts of his
conduct, but no farther shall I go.-Never shall Miss Moreton hear me confess the origin of my
mistake-never shall the name of Mary Cuthbert be breathed by me in her hearing.-I cannot so
profane my passion-a passion, of which the object of it must ever remain in ignorance. I took
no steps to gain her affections; for, knowing my situation, it would have been base and cruel to
have done so. The lovely girl is unacquainted with my partiality; but I know the selfish, the
ungenerous disposition of Miss Moreton; and, if she beheld a rival in her ward, the situation of
poor Mary would be worse than it is at present-the present, did I say? Alas! the present may be
her's no longer!" Montgomery paused to stifle his emotions. His mother and his sisters cast on him a fond,
a commiserating glance. "I have already written to the aunt of Miss Moreton, acquainting her of Miss Cuthbert's
danger," said Montgomery; "and, if it please Heaven to let me hear of her safety, I shall exert all
my fortitude to struggle against an hopeless passion, and will sedulously endeavour to lose every
other feeling in that of son and brother!" and he respectfully kissed the hand of his mother,
whose tears flowed silently down her cheeks, as her grateful heart was lifted up to Heaven, in the
conscious exultation of having such a blessing still left to her in her son! Montgomery purposely quitted the house at day-break, in order to elude another
interview with Miss Moreton; and finding, by this behaviour, that he was resolved to continue
inexorable, the disappointed heroine departed, sighing as she got into the chaise, and muttering
to the civil good wishes of Arabella Montgomery, who attended her to the door-"False, perjur'd
Frederic!" Miss Moreton had now determined on going to London. There she might, in congenial
society, try to forget Montgomery's perfidy. She took H-- in her way, in order to make
inquiries concerning her ward; but she had previously determined on not being troubled with her
company, even were she fit to travel. Spite of the taciturnity of Montgomery, her suspicions had been turned towards Mary;
and she saw in her the insipid Lucilia Edgermond of Lord Nelville's present attachment. To be rivalled by such a mawkish, ignorant girl, in the affections of the only man for
whom she had felt a passion, was torture; and had she had an interview with her unconscious
ward, in the present state of her feelings, she would doubtless have exhibited pretty strong
symptoms of anger. Hearing that Mary was alive, and slowly mending, she contented herself with sending a
laconic message to Captain Walsingham; informing him that he should hear from her again, and
that she would then give orders for Miss Cuthbert's removal, when sufficiently recovered. Miss Moreton proceeded to town. She took lodgings in -- street, Covent-Garden. The
Signora, the Monsieur, Germ, and Copy were in London; and she soon convened them round
her, and they enjoyed with the Corinna, the pleasures of the metropolis, to which they were
franked by her purse; and they had no sort of objection to partake of the petit soupers to which
she afterwards invited them. In the adulation of these sycophantic flatterers, Corinna derived some consolation for her
rupture with Walwyn, and the pride-wounding behaviour of Montgomery. The theatre was her
favourite amusement. There, with her paper and her pencil, she criticised on actors and actresses;
and there she attracted general notice by her extraordinary deportment, and the studious display
of her manner. The Signora introduced her to many persons of genius, in singing, dancing, and acting;
and a ci-devant chere amie of that lady's, of good person and assured address, who had been
hair-dresser, valet-de-chambre, strolling player, and stage-harlequin in rotation, now bid fair to
wrest the palm of Miss Moreton's favour from all beside. His person was not so attractive, as
was Montgomery's; but then Miss Moreton discovered that he was an enthusiastic disciple of
Sentiment. He reminded her of the dear Chevalier, in his manners, in the softness of his accents,
in the tender melancholy of his looks. Matters were perfectly understood between the Signora and Lauzune (for so had she
y'clept this Proteus); and a liberal sum was to be paid into her hands on his succeeding with the
heiress.