THOMSON. AT length the day fixed on for the ball arrived, and Lord Drelincourt who was fond of his domestics and tenantry, (perhaps not less so from considering them in some measure as his vassals) resolved they should share in the general hilarity. He therefore ordered the good old English fare of roast beef and plumb pudding, to be abundantly provided for them, and that it should be concluded by a dance in the hall, which was at such a distance from the part of the castle, in which the ball was to be held, that there was no probability, of the sounds of rustic mirth, interfering with the refined enjoyments of the fashionable guests, who moreover, probably would not begin their festivity, until that of the honest farmers and their cherry-cheeked daughters was ended. Lord Drelincourt looked with pleasure on his rustic guests, as they were seated round his hospitable board, in the hall of his forefathers. His early prejudices returned in all their force, and his liberal mind, enlarged views, and humane disposition, did not prevent a sigh rising in his breast, when he reflected that the “age of chivalry was past.” His dependants all loved, though they feared him, and as they rose on his entrance, to congratulate him with respectful ardour on his safe return to his native country, he thought of his father, and of the pleasure which a similar spectacle would have afforded him, he sighed involuntarily, a tear trembled in his eye, “a sigh, a tear so sweet, he wish’d not to control.” But soon company of a more exalted, though perhaps less valuable class, demanded his attention. The first carriage which arrived, was one of dark green, drawn slowly by four greys, the coachman and attendants looking as if they had retained their situations from time immemorial, and the two ladies who alighted from it, were to all appearance remnants of great antiquity. They were the Earl’s maiden aunts, of whom we have already made honorable mention. He received them in great state at the top of the stairs; Lady Bertha gave him her hand to kiss, and he then led her into the drawing room, where he introduced Edmund to her, and to her sister, as a young friend for whom he had a particular regard, Lady Maud hearing a foreign name, was rather ungracious in her compliments, but Lady Bertha said with a benevolent smile, “You are welcome, courteous sir, to our island, and I trust that you will find in it, the hospitality which ought always to be shewn to strangers, particularly if distressed, which I hope however, will never be your case.” She then took her seat, leaving Edmund much embarrassed what answer to make, as he did not perfectly understand the epithet of courteous, which he had never before heard in conversation; he supposed therefore from the singular dress and

appearance of the ladies, that they came from some distant province; he however thanked Lady Bertha, and told her in reply to her welcome, that he could willingly have suffered any distress, on condition of becoming acquainted with a country so delightful, and with whose fair inhabitants every stranger must be charmed. Lady Bertha had not heard so gallant a speech for many years, and mentally comparing Edmund to Oroondates, she rose and made him a profound curtsey. Edmund returned it with a low bow, and then took his seat by Lady Emma, whose cheeks were dyed in blushes at the characteristic speech of her aunt. Soon after, a Mr. Fletcher was announced; this gentleman was a relation of Lady Drelincourt; he was a widower, and the early loss of the object of his fondest affections, had communicated a degree of misanthropy to his feelings, which was sometimes evident from his expressions, and made him appear severe, but he was only so in words, for in deeds he was benevolence personified. He had married against the consent of his wife’s relations, who objected to his small fortune, and she, being of a delicate constitution and susceptible disposition, felt their displeasure so keenly, that she fell into a decline; and three years after their union left him an inconsolable mourner. He was, however, a parent, and for the sake of his little girl, he resolved to conquer his grief, the violence of which would inevitably interfere with his duty to her. Accordingly, he went into society to amuse his mind, but being uninterested in it, he lashed its vices, ridiculed its follies, and sometimes unjustly accused it of the insipidity, which his peculiar disappointments made him feel, amidst what it offers as pleasures. He was succeeded by a young lady about sixteen years of age, a fine figure, and so conscious of it, that in endeavouring to make it finer, she distorted its natural elegance by affectation. Lord Drelincourt immediately, with much respect and affection introduced her as Lady Harriett Parkhurst. She was the daughter of the deceased Earl of Lindsey, who had been Lord Drelincourt’s particular friend, he died whilst the Earl was abroad, and had left this much loved daughter to his care; a charge which was received with melancholy pleasure. It had been always the wish of these friends to unite their families by means of their children, and Lord Courtney, and Lady Harriett had been long acquainted with their parents’ intentions. In interested views the match possessed too many advantages not to be ardently desired by Lord Drelincourt. His ward was of a great family, being grand-daughter to the Duke of Moreton, and related to many of the first peers in the realm, there was a probability that her fortune would be very large, but her mind, it must be confessed, had been hitherto neglected. She was, however, very young, and was to reside with the Earl until she was of age; he therefore flattered himself that in the society of his family she could not fail to improve. No other guests being expected till the evening, the party sat down to dinner. Lady Maud looked with a sour aspect on the Earl’s visitor and ward; Lady Bertha smiled good humouredly on all around her; Mr. Fletcher pleased every one by his animated conversation; and Lady Harriett, though she felt a little awe at the idea of being under the immediate care of her guardian, was delighted to find that he had sent for her to make one at the ball, and fell into a deep study how to make the most becoming dress of her mourning. Among the surrounding nobility and gentry, there had lately arrived a newly created peer, who by dint of paying enormously for his ground, and being contented with little more, than was barely necessary for his house and gardens, had been enabled to fix his residence very near Lord Drelincourt, much to the dissatisfaction of that nobleman,

who regarded with indignation and contempt the frequent and often ill-timed elevations in rank, which had taken place within his remembrance. Of exalted birth, and descended from a long train of ancestors, who had never stained their nobility by an unworthy action, he had a nice sense of what was due to every scale in society; always willing to acknowledge a superior himself, he could ill brook a contrary behaviour in others, and though no man entertained more liberal ideas than he did, respecting commerce, which he justly considered as the source of the power and prosperity of the nation, he yet thought, that many respectable merchants, were converted into insignificant and subordinate characters by succeeding in their wishes to reach a higher situation, than that which they might have filled with probity and abilities. Perhaps Lord Drelincourt’s ideas of the deference due to noble blood, would not have been so exalted, had he not conceived that in the present rage for levelling, or as they are more fashionably termed liberal opinions, its claims were unjustly neglected. He could not bear to see the possessors of rank, degrading it by associating with men in every respect inferior to them, and adopting the manners of those, with whom they disgrace themselves, by being familiar, merely to feel a licentious ease, a carelessness of conduct, and to be applauded as good fellows, or merry companions without any buckram, or nonsense in their composition. Lord Drelincourt mortified by the manners of the age, unfortunately fell into the contrary error; if some granted too little he exacted too much, and as extremes are always prejudicial, he made the rank which he admired, appear less amiable, and sometimes ridiculous, by the sternness with which he repressed every attempt towards familiarity. Unluckily for Lord Drelincourt’s prejudices, it happened that the only one of the mushroom peers with whom he was in a manner compelled to associate, was a man of so contracted an education, and of manners so coarse, that an acquaintance with him could not fail to increase the earl’s disgust. Many of those, for whom fortune has paved the way to honors, join such extensive information and knowledge of the world, with real politeness and upright principles, that they must be considered as an acquisition to any society, and no disgrace to the British peerage; but Lord Dunderton was not of this description; however he had left his card immediately on the Earl’s arrival at the castle, and of course it was impossible to omit his family in the invitations to the ball. Lord Drelincourt was too humane ever to be unpolite, for he considered that man as unfit to live in society, who could without provocation, wilfully wound the feelings of another. The company began to assemble at an early hour, and the dancing commenced with great spirit. Edmund had solicited Lady Rosamond’s hand, but she was previously engaged to a Captain Clayton of the guards, whose entrance gave her visible pleasure, and by the respectful ardour of his complimentary inquiries, Edmund imagined him to be a lover and apparently a favoured one. Lady Maria likewise was engaged though she acknowledged it reluctantly, for the young Italian had already made an impression on her heart, that roused her from the languor of indolence into which she had unhappily fallen, from the idea of its being very irresistible and becoming. He was more successful in his application to Lady Emma, whose eloquent blood mantled in her cheeks as she consented to be his partner, and Edmund began to think that he had been fortunate in finding her sisters engaged. Lord Courtney of course danced with Lady Harriett Parkhurst, and the Earl was delighted to hear his ward generally admired, for though she was far from being handsome, her figure was striking, and vanity gave animation to her countenance, whilst the embarrassment that she felt from her situation, wore the resemblance of an amiable modesty which made her appear extremely interesting. Henry came up to Edmund, when the set was finished to inquire what he thought of his bride elect, adding, “I have looked so successfully into her eyes, all the time we have been dancing, and seen myself reflected in them so languishingly, that I dare say she thinks me on the rack of expectation, and that I shall be a most enraptured husband—not very well furnished in the upper story,” continued he, laughing as he pointed to his forehead, “but that is not at all necessary.” Edmund answered with truth that her appearance was pleasing, but that, of her mind he did not think there had been sufficient time to form a correct opinion. Henry smiled significantly, and left his friend, astonished at the indifference, with which he could acknowledge that he believed a woman deficient in sense, and yet think of connecting himself with her for life, by the most solemn ties. Edmund’s reflections were however diverted by the sound of the music, which struck up a lively tune, and Lady Emma informed him he must choose another partner, as it was not customary to continue the same for more than two dances; this he was sorry to hear, as he was so well satisfied with his present partner, that he felt no wish to change. She pleased without an effort to shine, no forced attentions were requisite to keep up hers, no inordinate flattery to charm her into good humour, gentle and unassuming, her manners harmonized with her partner’s, if he was gay, she was cheerful, if he was grave, she became serious; many were dazzled by the majestic figure of Lady Rosamond, many allured by the languishing beauty of Lady Maria, but none who knew Lady Emma, could be insensible to her artless charms, and unaffected virtues. Edmund could not forbear expressing the reluctance with which he relinquished her hand; she blushed at the warmth of his expressions, not that they were so ardent as the fashionable cant of the day, with which the young men continually assailed her ears, but in Edmund they appeared natural, at least she perhaps wished to believe them so. At the very moment, when Emma’s blushes made her appear doubly interesting in Edmund’s eyes, Henry came to request that he would dance with Miss Clayton, “you will find her a lively partner I assure you,” said he “only do not bring her too near my aunt Maud, or you will probably have to defend her from the furious attacks of the old lady, as they by no means assimilate well.” He then introduced Edmund to a pretty blooming girl, whose simplicity of dress and pleasing appearance, left him to conjecture what there could be in her behaviour to distress Lady Maud’s feelings. He had however no time for discovery, as his partner’s place was at the top of the dance; he therefore led her there immediately. When they had gone down twenty couples, with a velocity which precluded the possibility of conversation, they arrived at the bottom of the set, and the young lady drawing a cambric handkerchief from her side, and rubbing her face in a manner which must have convinced the most sceptical, that she was indebted solely to nature for a fine complexion, exclaimed, “Cursedly hot, don’t you think so?” Edmund thought that he did not hear rightly what she said, and lamented to himself, only having a knowledge of the English language from books, as he foresaw that the greatest attention, and nicety of oracular information, would be necessary, before he could feel perfectly at ease whilst sustaining a part in conversation. He however ventured to reply

that having been used to a warm climate, he did not feel any inconvenience from the temperature in which they were at that time. “Oh,” replied Miss Clayton, “I remember Courtney told me you were Italian, pray is there good hunting with you?” Edmund was again surprised, for he had never had the question put to him before by a lady, but he thought, as he had imagined of Lady Bertha, that she also might be from a distant province, where the customs were probably different. He therefore replied with the utmost politeness, and began to inform her in what the field sports of Italy, differed from those which had been described to him in England. Miss Clayton listened with great attention, then told him that she could not bear the summer, as it deprived her of her most pleasing recreations, adding that she had given her favourite horse Highflyer, a breathing in the morning, to which circumstance she believed it might be owing, that she was in such a confounded heat, with only going down one dance. Edmund was rather disconcerted by language, which he could no longer entirely misunderstand, and began to wish, that the heat of which she so forcibly complained in the first set, might prevent her standing up for another, but she resumed her place with great alacrity, and Lady Emma at that instant going down the dance with the lightness and precision of a fairy, Miss Clayton said, “That girl dances like a sylph, and indeed she does every thing well, I like few maukish misses of quality, but she pleases every body.” Edmund acquiesced in this opinion, praised her candor, and began to think her very agreeable, in spite of the provincial peculiarities of her dialect. “You think then,” answered she, in return for his compliment, “that women can see no merit in each other; it might have been the case when there was more in your sex, but now let me tell you, there is too little to be jealous of it, consequently we can acknowledge perfection more cheerfully in each other, as we are not often dazzled by seeing it in the gentlemen.” Edmund laughed at the compliment that she paid the male creation, and she continued, “I dare say you think Lady Emma a mere child, she does not look more than fifteen, and her sisters will not rectify the mistake. She is only just emancipated from the nursery, where luckily she has had the advantage of a very worthy and well-informed woman for her governess, and companion, and her sisters would gladly have confined her there, until they were disposed of to advantage. Unfortunately however, Lady Rosamond reared her stately form amidst the circles of fashion, for a succession of winters, without any title courting her acceptance, and Lady Maria died away, and told all her nervous susceptibilities, and sensibilities, without finding any one to listen to them but female friends, who were somewhat wearied with hearing them too often; Lady Drelincourt then recollected that Lady Emma was eighteen years of age, and a very good girl, she therefore could not think of secluding her from the world any longer. In vain her sisters kindly urged the impropriety of bringing girls out too soon, in vain with unaffected sorrow, they adduced themselves as melancholy examples of its impolicy, Lady Drelincourt only replied, that they had thought the time very long until the arrival of their fourteenth year, in which they were introduced into the gay world, at their earnest request, and if their expectations had been disappointed, she was sorry for it, but hoped that Emma would be more fortunate. This insinuation did not reconcile the elder branches to the plan, but their mother gained her point; Emma was released, and by dint of goodnature, sitting on her brother’s knee, kissing papa before she goes to bed, and never interfering with her sister’s imaginary conquests, they are fond of her, and always tell every one, that she is an amiable docile

child, and will in a few years make a charming woman.” Miss Clayton here finished the family biography, and Edmund was amused by the animated manner, in which she had delivered it, though he inwardly condemned the severity, with which she had mentioned ladies, one at least of whom, she ought to have respected, as it was evident that her brother, Captain Clayton felt towards Lady Rosamond, a sentiment more tender than that of esteem alone. The dancing was now suspended, and an elegant room thrown open, where a collation was set out, with such taste and profusion, as formed a gratifying sight to the eyes of the epicure, and a tempting one even to those of the abstemious. In going into the supper room, Miss Clayton unfortunately met Lady Maud, who was in no very good humour, having lost her money at quadrille, the only game that she ever played. Clayton Hall was very near Courtney Lodge, where the old ladies had resided since the death of their brother, who had devised it to them; consequently Miss Clayton was an old acquaintance, and she made a very polite obeisance to Lady Maud, who scarcely condescended to observe it, exclaiming, “Bless me child, I did not know you, and indeed it is so long, since you have troubled yourself with calling at the lodge, that it would be no great wonder if I had forgotten your face.” “I am sure my Lady,” replied Miss Clayton with affected humility. “I should have called at the lodge the other day, but seeing the windows closed, I feared there might be death in the house, I am happy to find that my anxieties for you, and Lady Bertha, have been groundless.” “You knew very well I believe,” grumbled the old lady, “that I always have the south front windows closed, to preserve my yellow damask furniture, and I do not think even the pleasure of your company, will induce me to alter a custom which I have observed long before you were born.” “I am sure Madam,” replied Miss Clayton, “if my company were to be the condition of the yellow damask seeing the daylight, I should not have had the temerity to mention it.” “I want no one’s company,” said the angry Lady Maud, “who gallops about the country, in the indecent manner that you do, for all the world like that heathen man Nimrod, you may think it very clever, but I think such masculine affectation, very disgusting in a young lady.” Miss Clayton crimsoned at the harsh truth, that she had involuntarily subjected herself to hear, and began to wish that she had not provoked it by her flippancy, whilst the goodnatured Lady Bertha, fearing her sister had gone too far, strove to give a different turn to the conversation, by saying, that though it was certainly very dangerous to ride about the country unprotected, yet she thought it pretty enough, to see ladies ambling on little ponies, adding that it was not many years, since she had given up riding a favourite white palfrey herself. The idea of seeing Lady Bertha ambling on her white palfrey, restored the smiles to Miss Clayton’s countenance, but she resolved to take a seat at the supper table, quite out of Lady Maud’s hearing. “My dear creature,” cried a half naked belle of quality, to Lady Rosamond, “for heaven’s sake lend me some books: have you any novels? you are I know an immense reader, and therefore you will pity me, when I declare to you that I have not touched a page this fortnight.” “I believe,” replied Lady Rosamond rather coolly, “my reading, and your Ladyship’s, are not exactly similar.” “Oh yes, I am sure I shall like your books, I very seldom read one through, just look at what is new, and miss all the rest, for three fourths of them are alike.” “Is Lady Louisa Delany turning critic,” said Mr. Fletcher, “how must the poor wretches of authors tremble, when they hear of the fiery ordeal

through which they will have to pass.” “Oh you severe creature,” rejoined the lady, “I am sure you mean to laugh at me, do not you think he does?” turning to Henry, who replied very gravely, “He can only then mean to declare himself ignorant of your ladyship’s well known information and taste.” Lady Laura was delighted, and her vanity prompted her to regard as true the speeches, which her conscience told her, could only be uttered in ridicule. She resolved however to secure the literary reputation, that she fancied she was acquiring; but unfortunately silence would have befriended her more in her design, than did the torrent of nonsense which she poured forth. “Well I dare say you only want to flatter me, but I confess I am naturally of a retired turn, and perhaps too much addicted to study.” “Your Ladyship’s merit is then undoubtedly very great,” replied Mr. Fletcher, “for in good nature to the follies of the world, you hide your inclinations so admirably, that many would be unjust enough to suppose you highly gratified, by the trifling amusements, which your superior attainments, must in reality teach you to despise.” “Oh yes,” exclaimed the literary fair one, “as Shakespeare says so charmingly, ‘An elegant retirement, books and friends, our chain, our fates, our fortunes and our beings blend! oh I am very fond of pretty verses, do not you like poetry?” again addressing herself to Henry, who replied. “Poetry, I adore it! I would never speak in prose, but, from the fear of being singular, poetry is the language of the soul, the vehicle for truth. “Love I feel thy rapturous pow’r
Thine is all the present hour,
Strong delight tumultuous reigns,
And throbs throughout my bursting veins, Lo, behold the Cyprian queen! Mark her soul-subduing mein! Snatch, oh, snatch me to thy arms The willing votary of thy charms! Let me feast without controul
And breathe in rapture all my soul!”
“Oh you naughty man, I must not hear you talk such nonsense,” cried the fashionable Lady Laura, at the same time tapping him with her fan, and looking down, after vainly endeavouring to blush; she then assumed a tender embarrassed air, but unfortunately it was lost on Lord Courtney, who had already turned from her, to pay his compliments to some other females equally fashionable, and well informed with her ladyship. Disappointed by his departure she began to pay Edmund some attention, and as his face and figure were too striking to be slightly passed over, she inquired of Lady Rosamond in an audible whisper, who he was, and when her curiosity in that particular was gratified, she in a whisper yet more audible, exclaimed. “He is a very handsome fellow, what prodigious fine eyes!” Shall we acknowledge, that even the lords of the creation are not entirely exempt from the failing yclep’d vanity, of which they so liberally accuse the weaker vessels? shall we acknowledge that this failing in Edmund was gratified for the moment even by a compliment paid with so little delicacy, and by so frivolous an object? Alas! we must unwillingly confess it, and if our male readers be mortified by the discovery, they must blame human nature, and not its humble

delineators. Though Edmund undoubtedly felt a temporary sensation of pleasure, yet he blushed at having it excited by one of whose abilities, and even delicacy, he had not conceived a high opinion from the conversation, in which he had overheard her engaged. The blush however was not unnoticed by the lady, who drew her own conclusions from it, and resolved to try the utmost strength of her charms, on the unexperienced heart of the young foreigner. She commenced the attack, by requesting him to help her to some sweet meats, and the difficulty of fixing her choice, and her whimsical rejection or acceptance of them, introduced all the trifling, which in genteel society is considered ready conversation; and all the pert gaiety which is mistaken for wit. However she contrived to keep him by her, until the dancing was resumed, and then as he was an entire stranger to the major part of the ladies, he thought that he could not do better, than request the honor of her hand. Dancing was her ladyship’s forte, in which she certainly excelled; and as she possessed all the refined arts, and studied allurements, which a vain female, stimulated by the desire of conquest, easily acquires, Edmund began to think her elegant and agreeable, and as to her foolish conversation with Lord Courtney, perhaps it was customary to talk nonsense at meetings like the present, at least he had overheard so much from different parties, that hers was by no means singular. With these ideas, he began to feel rather flattered by her ladyship’s excessive attention. The dance being finished, they retired to the bottom of the room, as that part was the coolest and the least crowded. She gave him her fan and gloves to hold, whilst she adjusted a locket, which always came loose on these occasions; and Edmund in gallantry, could not but admire her fine hands, though they were neither so small, nor so white as Lady Emma’s. The comparison altogether was certainly not advantageous to Lady Laura, but she soon roused him from the study into which it had thrown him, by asking a thousand questions about his friends, with an air of obliging interest, that could not fail to gratify him, accompanying her inquiries with an earnest survey of his countenance, yet looking down with a well-feigned confusion every time that her eyes met his; then she was silent for a few moments; forgot what she was going to say, and laughed at her own embarrassment. To Edmund all this was new, he had never seen coquetry before, and to whom, does it on a first acquaintance appear in its true colour? On standing up again, they were near Lady Emma, whom Edmund addressed with his usual attention, but she answered him coldly, and the lively colour which rose in her cheeks on the slightest emotion, almost assumed the crimson hue of anger. She turned from him to conceal it, and he redoubled his attentions to Lady Laura, to hide his mortification. The evening concluded to the satisfaction of all parties. Even Lady Maud condescended to say that there had been much innocent cheerfulness, and that if all the gaieties of the present day were conducted in as orderly a manner, she should not so often condemn them. Lady Bertha was enchanted with any appearance of shew and gallantry, of which in her youth she had been passionately fond, and Lady Harriett Parkhurst was delighted with so charming a debut into her guardian’s residence; particularly as she had met an old friend in Miss Dunderton, with whom she had been two years at a fashionable boarding-school. The young ladies renewed their professions of attachment; Miss Dunderton informed Lady Harriett that her papa was made a lord, and in return had the

pleasure of hearing that her friend was to remain at Castle Drelincourt, and that she should therefore have the satisfaction of seeing her frequently; nor perhaps was Lord Courtney entirely left out of the scheme of felicity. They then criticised the ladies dresses, and informed each other what their partners said to them, and with whom they should like to have danced. As for Lord and Lady Dunderton they acquitted themselves so well, as to make the Earl declare that when their stiffness and embarrassment should be worn off, and a little attention and politeness acquired, they would not be very exceptionable in their behaviour, and that in a couple of centuries the family might begin to be respectable. Mr. Dunderton terrified with the reports of Lord Drelincourt’s hauteur, had contented himself by making a bow in the crowd, en passant, and escaping without further notice, declared to his papa and mamma on their return home, that the world might call the Earl proud, but for his part he thought him very affable and polite. “Yes, yes,” said my Lord, “I saw nothing but to like in all of them, and now we’ve broken the ice however, and we’ll keep it open, we must always pretend to give up to his ancient family, and all that, and it will be a good thing to get to know people’s titles and how to behave one’s self, for I declare I feel quite dashed, to think of making so many new acquaintance at my time of life, but Sophia may catch that young Lord Courtney, he’s a spirited young fellow, I like his looks, and I’m sure he cannot see better cloaths on any body’s back than she wears.”
Miss promised to do every thing papa wished, and her brother said he should have no objection to Lady Maria, but he must own he was frightened of Lady Rosamond. His father, however, soon silenced him, by saying he would have neither, for that poor ladies of quality were useless expensive articles, laying dead without any interest, and that it was well known Lord Drelincourt lived up to his income, and his estate being all entailed on his son, he supposed the daughters might “go whistle for what they would have,” with this elegant illustration Lord Dunderton dismissed his family to bed, and we will have the humanity to give our, perhaps, yet more wearied readers, a temporary rest from the labour of perusing these pages. “Here freedom reign’d without the least alloy, Nor gossip’s tale nor ancient maiden’s gall; Nor saintly spleen didst murmur at our joy, And with envenom’d tongue our pleasures pall; And why? There was but one great rule for all, To wit, that each should work his own desire, And eat, drink, study, sleep, as it may fall,
Or melt the time in love, or wake the lyre,
And carol what unbid, the muses might inspire. THOMPSON. WHEN Edmund entered the breakfast room the next morning, he found so large a party assembled there, that he began to think the revels of the preceding evening were to be continued through the next day. Lady Harriett Parkhurst was of course now considered as an inmate; Lady Maud and Lady Bertha had been prevailed on to emerge from the retirement of Courtney Lodge, in compliment to their beloved nephew’s return; and the family circle had received the addition of Captain Clayton, who was the acknowledged lover of Lady Rosamond; Miss Clayton, his sister; Mr. Fletcher, who was a frequent and valued guest; and a Mr. Breresford, a young man of remarkably gentle manners, who paid his addresses to Lady Maria. The Earl’s hospitality and benevolence were gratified, by seeing so large an assemblage round him, and he gaily declared, that he would challenge the country to produce a finer breakfast scene. After it was over, the whole party were requested to consult only their own inclinations in the disposal of their time until five o’clock, which was the dinner hour. Miss Clayton said that she should visit the stables, as she always saw her favorite Highflyer dressed over before she rode out. Lady Maud lifted up her hands and eyes in silence! The elder ladies retired to the working-room, the younger to music, and the gentlemen to the library, with the exception of Mr. Breresford, who followed the young ladies, to whom he could be useful in a thousand ways, as he could turn over the leaves of their music books, excelled in winding silks, was unequalled for skill in varnishing, and was extremely expert in making flowers. The gentlemen passed two or three hours very agreeably in the library, which presented to them learning in its most pleasing forms; the room was splendidly fitted up with busts of eminent authors, ancient and modern, whose works were all to be found in the noble collection of books, which the Earl’s taste and love of reading encreased every year. Science had here every aid, and study every advantage; the windows looked only towards the thickest part of the wood, and a waterfall sometimes dashed over a rocky bed with noisy velocity, and sometimes dropped at regular intervals, or softly murmured in a gentle stream. Over the door of this elegant retreat, Lord Drelincourt had placed the

celebrated Cardan’s motto, “Tempus ager meus.”* It was indeed an estate of which he knew the inestimable value, and which he cultivated with unwearied assiduity. Captain Clayton, unlike the generality of military men, appeared in his element in this place, where most of his brethren would have felt very awkwardly situated. This gentleman had a pale, clear complexion, fine teeth, animated hazle eyes, and an aquiline nose, particularly calculated to express contempt, to the language of which it appeared to be accustomed; his countenance was interesting, although there was in it an air of discontent, and an expression of melancholy almost amounting to peevishness, which rendered it unpleasing to the superficial observer; but when animated by the happy elucidation of a subject, the discussion of a favorite topic, or the starting of some new idea, the fire of genius shone in his eyes, the glow of ardour suffused his pale complexion, and every turn of his countenance bespoke the emotions of no common mind. He soon discovered an intimate acquaintance with the ancients, joined to a minute knowledge of the moderns; and unfolded the stores of a cultivated mind, with an amiable readiness, equally removed from the arrogant presumption of knowing more than the rest of the company, or the contemptible littleness which fears the discovery of not knowing so much. He spoke with fluency, and listened with attention; in short, he gained the admiration of all, particularly of Edmund, who had before only remarked the frigid gloom of his reserved manners. To dissipate the stupor which is sometimes created by fixing the attention too long on any subject, the gentlemen ordered their horses, highly to the gratification of Miss Clayton, who called them good fellows, and told them that she would ride a match with any of them, as a reward for their kindness in leaving the fusty ancients and foolish moderns. The other young ladies were soon prevailed on to join the party, and Captain Clayton drove Lady Rosamond in his curricle; Mr. Breresford wished Lady Maria would allow him the honour of her company in his gig; but she was dying in a nervous head- ache, and could only trust herself in a close carriage. Unfortunately Miss Clayton overheard the request, and offered to supply her place; this was far from being Mr. Breresford’s wish, he knew the Phaeton-like spirit of the young lady, and it would be no consolation to him, if he were thrown out by her madness, that she would in all probability fall with him. But unhappily the same timidity which inspired his present fears, prevented his ever offering an argument or opinion, in contradiction to any that might be advanced. However, though the monosyllable, no, was rarely pronounced by him, yet, on this occasion, he endeavoured to hint an unwillingness to consent; he therefore hesitatingly replied, that he knew Miss Clayton preferred being on horseback, to the confinement of any carriage, and that he would make interest for a place with the ladies. “Oh, lord!” exclaimed the Amazonian lady, “trust me I should not, through politeness, have offered to let you drive me; no, indeed, but my poor devil has hurt his off-foot, or wants a shoe, for he limps like a wooden-legged beggar this morning. I must send him immediately to a good farrier, one of the veterinary professed; for I had rather hop for a month on one leg myself, than have any thing happen to my Highflyer; so come, order your chariot, and your fiery footed steed, and we shall soon shew them how to drive, and leave the country behind us in style.” Poor Breresford trembled, and impelled by his fears, which every moment gained strength, he entreated to be allowed a place with Lady Maria. Miss Clayton cruelly persisted that the parties were all arranged, appealed to
*
 Time is my estate. his politeness, ridiculed his scruples, laughed at his fears, and at last gained her point.