'Well; this is very strange, and seems very unkind,' cried Adeline: 'I
will speak to them.' So saying, she drew near the other children, who
had interrupted their play to watch Adeline and their rejected playmate. 'What can be the reason,' said she, 'that you will not let that little
boy play with you?' The boys looked down, and said nothing. 'Is he ill-natured?' 'No.' 'Does he not play fair?' 'Yes.' 'Don't you like him?' 'Yes.' 'Then why do you make him unhappy, by not letting him join in your
sport?' 'Tell the lady. Jack,' cries one; and Jack, the biggest boy of the
party, said: 'Because he is not a gentleman's son like us, and is only a
little bastard.' 'Yes,' cried one of the other children; 'and his mamma is so proud she
dresses him finer than we are, for all he is base-born: and our papas
and mammas don't think him fit company for us.' They might have gone on for an hour--Adeline could not interrupt them. The cause of the child's affliction was a dagger in her heart; and,
while she listened to the now redoubled sobs of the disgraced and
proudly afflicted boy, she was driven almost to phrensy: for 'Such,' she
exclaimed, 'may one time or other be the pangs of my child, and so to
him may the hours of childhood be embittered!' Again she seated herself
by the little mourner--and her tears accompanied his. 'My dear child, you had better go home,' said she, struggling with her
feelings; 'your mother will certainly be glad of your company.' 'No, I won't go to her; I don't love her: they say she is a bad woman,
and my papa a bad man, because they are not married.' Again Adeline's horrors returned. 'But, my dear, they love you, no
doubt; and you ought to love them,' she replied with effort. 'There, there comes your papa,' cried one of the boys; 'go and cry to
him;--go.' At these words Adeline looked up, and saw an elegant-looking man
approaching with a look of anxiety. 'Charles, my dear boy, what has happened?' said he, taking his hand;
which the boy sullenly withdrew. 'Come home directly,' continued his
father, 'and tell me what is the matter, as we go along.' But again
snatching his hand away, the proud and deeply wounded child resentfully
pushed the shoulder next him forward, whenever his father tried to take
his arm, and elbowed him angrily as he went. Adeline felt the child's action to the bottom of her heart. It was a
volume of reproach to the father; and she sighed to think what the
parents, if they had hearts, must feel, when the afflicted boy told the
cause of his grief. 'But, unhappy boy, perhaps my child may live to
bless you!' she exclaimed, clasping her hands together: 'never, never
will I expose my child to the pangs which you have experienced to-day.' So saying, she returned instantly to her lodgings; and having just
strength left to enter Glenmurray's room, she faintly exclaimed: 'For
pity's sake, make me your wife to-morrow!' and fell senseless on the
floor. On her recovery she saw Glenmurray pale with agitation, yet with an
expression of satisfaction in his countenance, bending over her. 'Adeline! my dearest love!' he whispered as her head lay on his bosom,
'blessed be the words you have spoken, whatever be their cause! To-morrow you shall be my wife.' 'And then our child will be legitimate, will he not?' she eagerly
replied. 'It will.' 'Thank God!' cried Adeline, and relapsed into a fainting fit. For it was
not decreed that the object of her maternal solicitude should ever be
born to reward it. Anxiety and agitation had had a fatal effect on the
health of Adeline; and the day after her encounter on the terrace she
brought forth a dead child. As soon as Adeline, languid and disappointed, was able to leave
her room, Glenmurray, whom anxiety during her illness had rendered
considerably weaker, urged her to let the marriage ceremony be performed
immediately. But with her hopes of being a mother vanished her wishes to
become a wife, and all her former reasons against marriage recurred in
their full force. In vain did Glenmurray entreat her to keep her lately formed resolution:
she still attributed his persuasions to generosity, and the heroic
resolve of sacrificing his principles, with the consistency of his
character, to her supposed good, and it was a point of honour with her
to be as generous in return: consequently the subject was again dropped;
nor was it likely to be soon renewed; and anxiety of a more pressing
nature disturbed their peace and engrossed their attention. They had
been three months at Richmond, and had incurred there a considerable
debt; and Glenmurray, not having sufficient money with him to discharge
it, drew upon his banker for half the half-year's rents from his estate,
which he had just deposited in his hands; when to his unspeakable
astonishment he found that the house had stopped payment, and that the
principal partner had gone off with the deposits! Scarcely could the firm mind of Glenmurray support itself under the
stroke. He looked forward to the certainty of passing the little
remainder of his life not only in pain but in poverty, and of seeing
increase as fast as his wants the difficulty of supplying them; while
the woman of his heart bent in increased agony over his restless couch;
for he well knew that to raise money on his estate, or to anticipate the
next half-year's rents, was impossible, as he had only a life interest
in it; and, as he held the fatal letter in his hand, his frame shook
with agitation. 'I could not have believed,' cried Adeline, 'that the loss of any sum of
money could have so violently affected you.' 'Not the loss of my all! my support during the tedious scenes of
illness!' 'Your all!' faltered out Adeline; and when she heard the true state of
the case she found her agitation equalled that of Glenmurray, and in
hopeless anguish she leaned on the table beside him. 'What is to be done,' said she, 'till the next half-year's rents become
due? Where can we procure money?' 'Till the next half-year's rents become due!' replied he, looking at her
mournfully: 'I shall not be distressed for money then.' 'No?' answered Adeline (not understanding him): 'our expenses have never
yet been more than that sum can supply.' Glenmurray looked at her, and, seeing how unconscious she was of the
certainty of the evil that awaited her, had not the courage to distress
her by explaining his meaning; and she went on to ask him what steps he
meant to take to raise money. 'My only resource,' said he, 'is dunning a near relation of mine who
owes me three hundred pounds: he is now, I believe, able to pay it. He
is in Holland, indeed, at present; but he is daily expected in England,
and will come to see me here. I have named him to you before, I believe. His name is Berrendale.' It was then agreed that Glenmurray should write to Mr Berrendale
immediately; and that, to prevent the necessity of incurring a further
debt for present provisions and necessaries, some of their books and
linen should be sold:--but week after week elapsed, and no letter was
received from Mr Berrendale. Glenmurray grew rapidly worse;--and their landlord was clamorous for
his rent;--advice from London also became necessary to quiet Adeline's
mind,--though Glenmurray knew that he was past cure: and after she had
paid a small sum to quiet the demands of the landlord for a while, she
had scarcely enough left to pay a physician: however, she sent for one
recommended by Dr Norberry, and by selling a writing-desk inlaid with
silver, which she valued because it was the gift of her father, she
raised money sufficient for the occasion. Dr. ---- arrived, but not to speak peace to the mind of Adeline. She saw, though he did not absolutely say so, that all chance of
Glenmurray's recovery was over: and though with the sanguine feelings
of nineteen she could 'hope though hope were lost,' when she watched
Dr. ----'s countenance as he turned from the bed-side of Glenmurray, she
felt the coldness of despair thrill through her frame; and, scarcely
able to stand, she followed him into the next room, and awaited his
orders with a sort of desperate tranquillity. After prescribing alleviations of the ill beyond his power to cure, Dr.
---- added that terrible confirmation of the fears of anxious affection. 'Let him have whatever he likes; nothing can hurt him now; and all your
endeavours must be to make the remaining hours of his existence as
comfortable as you can, by every indulgence possible: and indeed, my
dear madam,' he continued, 'you must be prepared for the trial that
awaits you.' 'Prepared! did you say?' cried Adeline in the broken voice of tearless
and almost phrensied sorrow. 'O God! if he must die, in mercy let me die
with him. If I have sinned,' (here she fell on her knees,) 'surely,
surely, the agony of this moment is atonement sufficient.' Dr. ----, greatly affected, raised her from the ground, and conjured her
for the sake of Glenmurray, and that she might not make his last hours
miserable, to bear her trial with more fortitude. 'And can you talk of his "last hours" and yet expect me to be composed?--O
sir! say but there is one little little gleam of hope for me, and I will
be calm.' 'Well,' replied Dr. ----, 'I _may_ be mistaken; Mr Glenmurray is young,
and--and--' here his voice faltered, and he was unable to proceed; for
the expression of Adeline's countenance, changing as it instantly did
from misery to joy,--joy of which he knew the fallacy,--while her eyes
were intently fixed on him, was too much for a man of any feeling to
support; and when she pressed his hand in the convulsive emotions of
her gratitude, he was forced to turn away his head to conceal the
starting tear. 'Well, I may be mistaken--Mr Glenmurray is young,' Adeline repeated
again and again, as his carriage drove off; and she flew to Glenmurray's
bed-side to impart to him the satisfaction which he rejoiced to see her
feel, but in which he could not share. Her recovered security did not, however, last long; the change in
Glenmurray grew every day more visible; and to increase her distress,
they were forced, to avoid disagreeable altercations, to give the
landlord a draft on Mr Berrendale for the sum due to him, and remove to
very humble lodgings in a closer part of the town. Here their misery was a little alleviated by the unexpected receipt of
twenty pounds, sent to Glenmurray by a tenant who was in arrears to
him, which enabled Adeline to procure Glenmurray every thing that his
capricious appetite required; and at his earnest entreaty, in order that
she might sometimes venture to leave him, lest her health should suffer,
she hired a nurse to assist her in her attendance upon him. A hasty letter too was at length received from Mr Berrendale, saying,
that he should very soon be in England, and should hasten to Richmond
immediately on his landing. The terror of wanting money, therefore,
began to subside; but day after day elapsed, and Mr Berrendale came not;
and Adeline, being obliged to deny herself almost necessary sustenance
that Glenmurray's appetite might be tempted, and his nurse, by the
indulgence of hers, kept in good humour, resolved, presuming on the
arrival of Mr Berrendale, to write to Dr Norberry and solicit the loan
of twenty pounds. Having done so, she ceased to be alarmed, though she found herself in
possession of only three guineas to defray the probable expenses of
the ensuing week; and in somewhat less misery than usual, she, at the
earnest entreaty of Glenmurray, set out to take a walk. Scarcely conscious what she did, she strolled through the town, and
seeing some fine grapes at the window of a fruiterer, she went in to ask
the price of them, knowing how welcome fruit was to the feverish palate
of Glenmurray. While the shopman was weighing the grapes, she saw a
pine-apple on the counter, and felt a strong wish to carry it home as a
more welcome present; but with unspeakable disappointment she heard that
the price of it was two guineas--a sum which she could not think herself
justified in expending, in the present state of their finances, even to
please Glenmurray, especially as he had not expressed a wish for such an
indulgence; besides, he liked grapes; and, as medicine, neither of them
could be effectual. It was fortunate for Adeline's feelings that she had not overheard what
the mistress of the shop said to her maid as she left it. 'I should have asked another person only a guinea; but as those sort of
women never mind what they give, I asked two, and I dare say she will
come back for it.' 'I have brought you some grapes,' cried Adeline as she entered
Glenmurray's chamber, 'and I would have brought you a pine-apple, but
that it was too dear.' 'A pine-apple!' said Glenmurray, languidly turning over the grapes, and
with a sort of distaste putting one of them in his mouth, 'a
pine-apple!--I wish you had brought it with all my heart! I protest that
I feel as if I could eat a whole one.' 'Well,' replied Adeline, 'if you would enjoy it so much, you certainly
ought to have it.' 'But the price, my dear girl!--what was it?' 'Only two guineas,' replied Adeline, forcing a smile. 'Two guineas!' exclaimed Glenmurray: 'No,--that is too much to give--I
will not indulge my appetite at such a rate--but, take away the
grapes--I can't eat them.' Adeline, disappointed, removed them from his sight; and, to increase
her vexation, Glenmurray was continually talking of pine-apples, and in
that way that showed how strongly his diseased appetite wished to enjoy
the gratification of eating one. At last, unable to bear to see him
struggling with an ungratified wish, she told him that she believed they
could afford to buy the pine-apple, as she had written to borrow some
money of Dr Norberry, to be paid as soon as Mr Berrendale arrived. In a
moment the dull eye of Glenmurray lighted up with expectation; and he,
who in health was remarkable for self-denial and temperance, scrupled
not, overcome by the influence of the fever which consumed him, to
gratify his palate at a rate the most extravagant. Adeline sighed as she contemplated this change effected by illness; and,
promising to be back as soon as possible, she proceeded to a shop to
dispose of her lace veil, the only ornament which she had retained; and
that not from vanity, but because it concealed from the eye of curiosity
the sorrow marked on her countenance. But she knew a piece of muslin
would do as well; and for two guineas sold a veil worth treble that
sum; but it was to give a minute's pleasure to Glenmurray, and that was
enough for Adeline. On her way to the fruiterer's she saw a crowd at the door of a
mean-looking house, and in the midst of it she beheld a mulatto woman,
the picture of sickness and despair, supporting a young man who seemed
ready to faint every moment, but whom a rough-featured man, regardless
of his weakness, was trying to force from the grasp of the unhappy
woman; while a mulatto boy, known in Richmond by the name of the Tawny
Boy, to whom Adeline had often given halfpence in her walks, was crying
bitterly, and hiding his face in the poor woman's apron. Adeline immediately pressed forward to inquire into the cause of a
distress only too congenial to her feelings; and as she did so, the
tawny boy looked up, and, knowing her immediately, ran eagerly forward
to meet her, seeming, though he did not speak, to associate with her
presence an idea of certain relief. 'Oh! it is only a poor man,' replied an old woman in answer to Adeline's
inquiries, 'who can't pay his debts,--and so they are dragging him to
prison--that's all.' 'They are dragging him to his death too,' cried a
younger woman in a gentle accent; 'for he is only just recovering from a
bad fever: and if he goes to jail the bad air will certainly kill him,
poor soul!' 'Is that his wife?' said Adeline. 'Yes, and my mammy,' said the tawny
boy, looking up in her face, 'and she so ill and sorry.' 'Yes, unhappy creatures,' replied her informant, 'and they have known
great trouble; and now, just as they had got a little money together,
William fell ill, and in doctor's stuff Savanna (that's the mulatto's
name) has spent all the money she had earned, as well as her husband's;
and now she is ill herself, and I am sure William's going to jail will
kill her. And a hard-hearted, wicked wretch Mr Davis is, to arrest
him--that he is--not but what it is his due, I cannot say but it
is--but, poor souls! he'll die, and she'll die, and then what will
become of their poor little boy?' The tawny boy all this time was standing, crying, by Adeline's side, and
had twisted his fingers in her gown, while her heart sympathized most
painfully in the anguish of the mulatto woman. 'What is the amount of
the sum for which he is taken up?' said Adeline. 'Oh! trifling: but Mr Davis owes him a grudge, and so will not wait any
longer. It is in all only ten pounds; and he says if they will pay part
he will wait for the rest; but then he knows they could as well pay all
as part.' Adeline, shocked at the knowledge of a distress which she was not able
to remove, was turning away as the woman said this, when she felt
that the little boy pulled her gown gently, as if appealing to her
generosity; while a surly-looking man, who was the creditor himself,
forcing a passage through the crowd, said, 'Why, bring him along, and
have done with it; here is a fuss to make indeed about that idle dog,
and that ugly black toad!' Adeline till then had not recollected that she was a mulatto; and this
speech, reflecting so brutally on her colour,--a circumstance which made
her an object of greater interest to Adeline,--urged her to step forward
to their joint relief with an almost irresistible impulse; especially
when another man reproached the fellow for his brutality, and added,
that he knew them both to be hard-working, deserving persons. But to
disappoint Glenmurray of his promised pleasure was impossible; and
having put sixpence in the tawny boy's hand, she was hastening to the
fruiterer's, when the crowd, who were following William and the mulatto
to the jail, whither the bailiffs were dragging rather than leading him,
fell back to give air to the poor man, who had fainted on Savanna's
shoulder, and seemed on the point of expiring--while she, with an
expression of fixed despair, was gazing on his wan cheek. Adeline thought on Glenmurray's danger, and shuddered as she beheld the
scene; she felt it but a too probable anticipation of the one in which
she might soon be an actor. At this moment a man observed, 'If he goes to prison he will not live
two days, that every one may see;' and the mulatto uttered a shriek of
agony. Adeline felt it to her very soul; and, rushing forward, 'Sir, sir,' she
exclaimed to the unfeeling creditor, 'if I were to give you a guinea
now, and promise you two more a fortnight hence, would you release this
poor man for the present?' 'No: I must have three guineas this moment,' replied he. Adeline sighed,
and withdrew her hand from her pocket. 'But were Glenmurray here, he
would give up his indulgence, I am sure, to save the lives of, probably
two fellow-creatures,' thought Adeline: 'and he would not forgive me if
I were to sacrifice such an opportunity to the sole gratification of
his palate.' --But then again, Glenmurray eagerly expecting her with
the promised treat, so gratifying to the feverish taste of sickness,
seemed to appear before her, and she turned away; but the eyes of the
mulatto, who had heard her words, and had hung on them breathless with
expectation, followed her with a look of such sad reproach for the
disappointment which she had occasioned her, and the little boy looked
up so wistfully in her face, crying, 'Poor fader, and poor mammy!' that Adeline could not withstand the force of the appeal; but almost
exclaiming 'Glenmurray would upbraid me if I did not act thus,' she gave
the creditor the three guineas, paid the bailiffs their demand, and then
made her way through the crowd, who respectfully drew back to give her
room to pass, saying, 'God bless you, lady! God bless you!' But William was too ill, and Savanna felt too much to speak; and the
surly creditor said, sneeringly, 'If I had been you, I would, at least,
have thanked the lady.' This reproach restored Savanna to the use of
speech; and (but with a violent effort) she uttered in a hoarse and
broken voice, '_I_ tank her! God tank her! I never can:' and Adeline,
kindly pressing her hand, hurried away from her in silence, though
scarcely able to refrain exclaiming, 'you know not the sacrifice which
you have cost me!' The tawny boy still followed her, as loath to leave
her. 'God bless you, my dear!' said she kindly to him: 'there, go to
your mother, and be good to her.' His dark face glowed as she spoke to
him, and holding up his chin, 'Tiss me!' cried he, 'poor tawny boy love
you!' She did so; and then reluctantly, he left her, nodding his head,
and saying, 'Dood bye' till he was out of sight. With him, and with the display of his grateful joy, vanished all that
could give Adeline resolution to bear her own reflections at the idea of
returning home, and of the trial that awaited her. In vain did she now
try to believe that Glenmurray would applaud what she had done.--He was
now the slave of disease, nor was it likely that even his self-denial
and principle benevolence could endure with patience so cruel a
disappointment--and from the woman whom he loved too!--and to whom the
indulgence of his slightest wishes ought to have been the first object. 'What shall I do?' cried she: 'what will he say?--No doubt he is
impatiently expecting me; and, in his weak state, disappointment may--'
Here, unable to hear her apprehensions, she wrung her hands in agony;
and when she arrived in sight of her lodgings she dared not look up,
lest she should see Glenmurray at the window watching for her return. Slowly and fearfully did she open the door; and the first sound she
heard was Glenmurray's voice from the door of his room, saying, 'So, you
are come at last!--I have been so impatient!' And indeed he had risen
and dressed himself, that he might enjoy his treat more than he could do
in a sick-bed. 'How can I bear to look him in the face!' thought Adeline, lingering on
the stairs. 'Adeline, my love! why do you make me wait so long?' cried Glenmurray. 'Here are knives and plates ready; where is the treat I have been so
long expecting?' Adeline entered the room and threw herself on the first chair, avoiding
the sight of Glenmurray, whose countenance, as she hastily glanced her
eyes over it, was animated with the expectation of a pleasure which he
was not to enjoy. 'I have not brought the pine-apple,' she faintly
articulated. 'No!' replied Glenmurray, 'how hard upon me!--the only
thing for weeks that I have wished for, or could have eaten with
pleasure! I suppose you were so long going that it was disposed of
before you got there?' 'No,' replied Adeline, struggling with her tears at this first instance
of pettishness in Glenmurray. 'Pardon me the supposition,' replied Glenmurray, recovering himself:
'more likely you met some dun on the road, and so the two guineas were
disposed of another way--If so, I can't blame you. What say you? Am I
right?' 'No.' 'Then how was it?' gravely asked Glenmurray. 'You must have had a
very powerful and a sufficient reason, to induce you to disappoint a
poor invalid of the indulgence which you had yourself excited him to
wish for.' 'This is terrible, indeed!' thought Adeline, 'and never was I so tempted
to tell a falsehood.' 'Still silent! You are very unkind, Miss Mowbray,' said Glenmurray; 'I
see that I have tired even _you_ out.' These words, by the agony which they excited, restored to Adeline all
her resolution. She ran to Glenmurray; she clasped his burning hands in
hers; and as succinctly as possible she related what had passed. When
she had finished, Glenmurray was silent; the fretfulness of disease
prompted him to say, 'So then, to the relief of strangers you sacrificed
the gratification of the man whom you love, and deprived him of the
only pleasure he may live to enjoy!' But the habitual sweetness and
generosity of his temper struggled, and struggled effectually, with his
malady; and while Adeline, pale and trembling, awaited her sentence, he
caught her suddenly to his bosom, and held her there a few moments in
silence. 'Then you forgive me?' faltered out Adeline. 'Forgive you! I love and admire you more than ever! I know your heart,
Adeline; and I am convinced that depriving yourself of the delight of
giving me the promised treat, in order to do a benevolent action, was
an effort of virtue of the highest order; and never, I trust, have you
known, or will you know again, such bitter feelings as you this moment
experienced.' Adeline, gratified by his generous kindness, and charmed with his
praise, could only weep her thanks. 'And now,' said Glenmurray,
laughing, 'you may bring back the grapes--I am not like Sterne's dear
Jenny; if I cannot get pine-apple, I will not insist on eating crab.' The grapes were brought; but in vain did he try to eat them. At this
time, however, he did not send them away without highly commending their
flavour, and wishing that he dared give way to his inclinations, and
feast upon them. 'O God of mercy!' cried Adeline, bursting into an agony of grief as she
reached her own apartment, and throwing herself on her knees by the
bed-side, 'Must that benevolent being be taken from me for ever, and
must I, must I survive him!'