As they were leading him away, he cast a furious look at the
magistrate, and said:

'Ay, Sir, I suppose you are one of those pensioned justices, who
minister our vague and sanguinary laws, and do dark deeds for our
usurping oligarchy, that has assumed a power of making our most
innocent actions misdemeanours, of determining points of law without
appeal, of imprisoning our persons without trial, and of breaking open
our houses with the standing army. But nothing will go right till we
have a reform in Parliament--neither peace nor war, commerce nor
agriculture----'

'Clocks nor watches, I suppose,' said the magistrate. 'Ay, clocks nor watches,' cried Betterton, in a rage. 'For how can our
mechanics make any thing good, while a packed parliament deprives them
of money and a mart?' 'So then,' said the magistrate, 'if St. Dunstan's clock is out of
order, 'tis owing to the want of a reform in Parliament.' 'I have not the most distant doubt of it,' cried Betterton. ''Tis fair then,' said the magistrate, 'that the reformists should take
such a latitude as they do; for, probably, by their encouragement of
time-pieces, they will at last discover the longitude.' 'No sneering, Sir,' cried Betterton. 'Now do your duty, as you call it,
and abide the consequence.' This gallant grey Lothario was then led off; and our party returned
home. Adieu. I rose early this morning, and repaired to my favourite willow, to
contemplate the placid landscape. Flinging myself on the grass, close
to the brook, I began to warble a rustic madrigal. I then let down my
length of tresses, and, stooping over the streamlet, laved them in the
little urn of the dimpling Naiad. This, you know, was agreeable enough, but the accident that befel me
was not. For, leaning too much over, I lost my balance, and rolled
headlong into the middle of the rivulet. As it was shallow, I did not
fear being drowned, but as I was a heroine, I hoped to be rescued. Therefore, instead of rising, as I might easily have done, there I lay,
shrieking and listening, and now and then lifting up my head, in hopes
to see Stuart come flying towards me on the wings of the wind, Oh no! my gentleman thought proper to make himself scarce; so dripping,
shivering, and indignant, I scrambled out, and bent my steps towards
the cottage. On turning the corner of the hedge, who should I perceive at the door,
but the hopeful youth himself, quite at his ease, and blowing a penny
trumpet for a chubby boy. 'What has happened to you?' said he, seeing me so wet. 'Only that I fell into the brook,' answered I, 'and was under the
disagreeable necessity of saving my own life, when I expected that you
would have condescended to take the trouble off my hands.' 'Expected!' cried he. 'Surely you had no reason for supposing that I
was so near to you, as even to have witnessed the disaster.' 'And it is, therefore,' retorted I, 'that you ought to have been so
near me as to have witnessed it.' 'You deal in riddles,' said he. 'Not at all,' answered I. 'For the farther off a distrest heroine
believes a hero, the nearer he is sure to be. Only let her have good
grounds for supposing him at her Antipodes, and nine times out of ten
she finds him at her elbow.' 'Well,' said he, laughing, 'though I did not save your life, I will not
endanger it, by detaining you in your wet dress. Pray hasten to change
it.' I took his advice, and borrowed some clothes from Mary, while mine were
put to the fire. After breakfast, I once more equipped myself in my
Tuscan costume, and a carriage being ready for us, I took an
affectionate leave of that interesting rustic. Poor girl! Her attempts
at cheerfulness all the morning were truly tragical; and, absorbed in
another sorrow, she felt but little for my departure. On our way, Stuart confessed that he was the person who wrote the
letter to Betterton in my name; and that he did so for the purpose of
entrapping him in such a manner as to prevent him from accompanying me
farther. He was at the window during the whole scene; as he meant to
have seized Betterton himself, had not the peasant done so. 'You will excuse my thus interfering in your concerns,' added he; 'but
gratitude demands of me to protect the daughter of my guardian; and
friendship for her improves the duty to a pleasure.' 'Ah!' said I, 'however it has happened, I fear you dislike me
strangely.' 'Believe me, you mistake,' answered he. 'With a few foibles (which are
themselves as fascinating as foibles can be), you possess many virtues;
and, let me add, a thousand attractions. I who tell you blunt truths,
may well afford you flattery.' 'Flattery,' said I, pleased by his praises, and willing to please him
in return by serious conversation, 'deserves censure only when the
motive for using it is mean or vicious.' 'Your remark is a just one,' observed he. 'Flattery is often but the
hyperbole of friendship; and even though a compliment itself may not be
sincere, our motive for paying it may be good. Flattery, so far from
injuring, may sometimes benefit the object of it; for it is possible to
create a virtue in others, by persuading them that they possess it.' 'Besides,' said I, 'may we not pay a compliment, without intending that
it should be believed; but merely to make ourselves agreeable by an
effort of the wit? And since such an effort shews that we consider the
person flattered worthy of it, the compliment proves a kind intention
at least, and thus tends to cement affection and friendship.' In this manner Stuart insensibly led me to talk on grave topics; and we
continued a delightful conversation the remainder of the day. Sometimes
he seemed greatly gratified at my sprightly sallies, or serious
remarks; but never could I throw him off his guard, by the dangerous
softness of my manner. He now calls me the lovely visionary. Would you believe that this laughing, careless, unpathetic creature, is
a poet, and a poet of feeling, as the following lines will prove. But
whether he wrote them on a real or an imaginary being, I cannot, by any
art, extract from him. THE FAREWELL

    Go, gentle muse, 'tis near the gloomy day,
      Long dreaded; go, and say farewell for me;
    A sad farewell to her who deigned thee, say,
      For far she hastens hence. Ah, hard decree! Tell her I feel that at the parting hour,
      More than the waves will heave in tumult wild:
    More than the skies will threat a gushing shower,
      More than the breeze will breathe a murmur mild. Say that her influence flies not with her form,
      That distant she will still engage my mind:
    That suns are most remote when most they warm,
      That flying Parthians scatter darts behind. Long will I gaze upon her vacant home,
      As the bird lingers near its pilfered nest,
    There, will I cry, she turned the studious tome;
      There sported, there her envied pet caressed. There, while she plied accomplished works of art,
      I saw her form, inclined with Sapphic grace;
    Her radiant eyes, blest emblems of her heart,
      And all the living treasures of her face. The Parian forehead parting clustered hair,
      The cheek of peachy tinct, the meaning brow;
    The witching archness, and the grace so rare,
      So magical, it charmed I knew not how. Light was her footstep as the silent flakes
      Of falling snow; her smile was blithe as morn;
    Her dimple, like the print the berry makes,
      In some smooth lake, when dropping from the thorn. To snatch her passing accents as she spoke,
      To see her slender hand, (that future prize)
    Fling back a ringlet, oft I dared provoke,
      The gentle vengeance of averted eyes. Yet ah, what wonder, if, when shrinking awe
      Withheld me from her sight, I broke my chain? Or when I made a single glance my law,
      What wonder if that law were made in vain? And say, can nought but converse love inspire? What tho' for me her lips have never moved? The vale that speaks but with its feathered choir,
      When long beheld, eternally is loved. Go then, my muse, 'tis near the gloomy day
      Of parting; go, and say farewell for me;
    A sad farewell to her who deigned thee, say,
      Whate'er engage her, wheresoe'er she be. If slumbering, tell her in my dreams she sways,
      If speaking, tell her in my words she glows;
    If thoughtful, tell her in my thoughts she strays,
      If tuneful, tell her in my song she flows. Tell her that soon my dreams unblest will prove;
      That soon my words on absent charms will dwell;
    That soon my thoughts remembered hours will love;
      That soon my song of vain regrets will tell. Then, in romantic moments, I will frame,
      Some scene ideal, where we meet at last;
    Where, by my peril, snatched from wreck or flame,
      She smiles reward and talks of all the past. Now for the lark she flies my wistful lay. Ah, could the bard some winged warbler be,
    Following her form, no longer would he say,
      Go, gentle muse, and bid farewell for me. I write from an inn within a mile of Lady Gwyn's. Another hour and my
fate is decided. Adieu. At length, with a throbbing heart, I now, for the first time, beheld
the mansion of my revered ancestors--the present abode of Lady Gwyn. That unfortunate usurper of my rights was not denied to me; so I
alighted; and though Stuart wished much to be present at the interview,
I would not permit him; but was ushered by the footman into the
sitting-room. I entered with erect, yet gentle majesty; while my Tuscan habit, which
was soiled and shrivelled by the brook, gave me an air of complicated
distress. I found her ladyship at a table, classifying fossils. She was tall and
thin, and bore the remains of beauty; but I could not discover the
family face. She looked at me with some surprise; smiled, and begged to know my
business. 'It is a business,' said I, 'of the most vital importance to your
ladyship's honour and repose; and I lament that an imperious necessity
compels me to the invidious task of acquainting you with it. Could
anything add to the painful nature of my feelings, it would be to find
that I had wounded yours.' 'Your preamble alarms me,' said she. 'Do, pray be explicit.' 'I must begin,' said I, 'with declaring my perfect conviction of your
ignorance, that any person is existing, who has a right to the property
which your ladyship at present possesses.' 'Assuredly such a notion never entered my head,' said she, 'and indeed,
were such a claim made, I should consider it as utterly untenable--in
fact, impossible.' 'I regret,' said I, 'that it is undeniable. There are documents extant,
and witnesses living, to prove it beyond all refutation.' Her ladyship, I thought, changed colour, as she said:

'This is strange; but I cannot believe it. Who would have the face to
set up such a silly claim?' 'I am so unfortunate as to have that face,' answered I, in a tone of
the most touching humility. 'You!' she cried with amazement. 'You!' 'Pardon me the pain I give you,' said I, 'but such is the fact; and
grating as this interview must be to the feelings of both parties, I do
assure you, that I have sought it, solely to prevent the more
disagreeable process of a law-suit.' 'You are welcome to twenty law-suits, if you wish them,' cried she,
'but I fancy they will not deprive me of my property.' 'At least,' said I, 'they may be the means of sullying the character of
your deceased lord.' 'I defy the whole world,' cried she, 'to affix the slightest imputation
on his character.' 'Surely,' said I, 'you cannot pretend ignorance of the fact, that his
lordship had the character of being--I trust, more from misfortune,
than from inherent depravity; for your ladyship well knows that man,
frail man, in a moment of temptation, perpetrates atrocities, which his
better heart afterwards disowns.' 'But his character!' cried she. 'What of his character?' 'Ah!' said I, 'your ladyship will not compel me to mention.' 'You have advanced too far to retreat,' cried she. 'I demand an
unequivocal explanation. What of his character?' 'Well, since I must speak plain,' replied I, 'it was that of
an--assassin!' 'Merciful powers!' said she, in a faint voice, and reddening violently. 'What does the horrid woman mean?' 'I have at this moment,' cried I, 'a person ready to make oath, that
your unhappy husband bribed a servant of my father's to murder me,
while yet an infant, in cold blood.' ''Tis a falsehood!' cried she. 'I would stake my life on its being a
vile, malicious, diabolical falsehood.' 'Would it were!' said I, 'but oh! Lady Gwyn, the circumstances, the
dreadful circumstances--these cannot be contradicted. It was
midnight;--the bones of my noble father had just been deposited in the
grave;--when a tall figure, wrapt in a dark cloak, and armed with a
dagger, stood before the seneschal. _It was the late Lord Gwyn!_'

'Who are you?' cried she, starting up quite pale and horror-struck. 'In
the name of all that is dreadful, who can you be?' 'Your own niece!' said I, meekly kneeling to receive her
blessing--'Lady Cherubina De Willoughby, the daughter of your
ladyship's deceased brother, Lord De Willoughby, and of his much
injured wife, the Lady Hysterica Belamour!' 'Never heard of such persons in all my life!' cried she, ringing the
bell furiously. 'Pray,' said I, 'be calm. Act with dignity in this affair. Do not
disgrace our family. On my honour, I mean to treat you with kindness. Nay, we must positively be on terms of friendship--I make it a point. After all, what is rank? what are riches? How vapid their charms,
compared with the heartfelt joys of truth and virtue! O, Lady Gwyn, O,
my respected aunt; I conjure you by our common ties of blood, by your
brother, who was my father, spurn the perilous toy, fortune, and retire
in time, and without exposing your lost lord, into the peaceful bosom
of obscurity!' 'Conduct this wretch out of the house,' said her ladyship to the
servant who had entered. 'She wants to extort money from me, I
believe.' 'A moment more,' cried I. 'Where is old Eftsoones? Where is that worthy
character?' 'I know no such person,' said she. 'Begone, impostor!' At the word impostor, I smiled; drew aside my ringlets with one hand,
and pointed to my inestimable mole with the other. 'Am I an impostor now?' cried I. 'But learn, unfortunate woman, that I
have a certain parchment too.' ----

'And a great deal of insolence too,' said she. 'The resemblance of it, at least,' cried I, 'for I have your ladyship's
portrait.' 'My portrait!' said she with a sneer. 'As sure as your name is Nell Gwyn,' cried I; 'for Nell Gwyn is written
under it; and let me add, that you would have consulted both your own
taste, and the dignity of our house better, had you got it written
Eleanor instead of Nell.' 'You little impertinent reprobate!' exclaimed she, feeling the peculiar
poignancy of the sarcasm. 'Begone this moment, or I will have you
drummed through the village!' I waved my hand in token of high disdain, and vanished. 'Well,' said Stuart, as I got to the carriage, 'has her ladyship
acknowledged your claims?' 'No, truly,' cried I, 'but she has turned me out of my own house--think
of that!' 'Then,' said he, springing from the chaise, 'I will try whether I
cannot succeed better with her ladyship;' and he went into the house. I remained in a state of the greatest perturbation till he came back. 'Good news!' cried he. 'Her ladyship wishes to see you, and apologize
for her rudeness; and I fancy,' added he, with a significant nod, 'all
will go well in a certain affair.' 'Yes, yes,' said I, nodding in return, 'I flatter myself she now finds
civility the best of her game.' I then alighted, and her ladyship ran forward to meet me. She pressed
my hand, _my-deared_ me twice in a breath, told me that Stuart had
given her my little history--that it was delicious--elegant--exotic;
and concluded with declaring, that I must remain at her house a few
days, to talk over the great object of my visit. Much as I mistrusted this sudden alteration in her conduct, I consented
to spend a short time with her, on the principle, that heroines always
contrive to get under the same roof with their bitterest enemies. Stuart appeared quite delighted at my determination, and after another
private interview with her ladyship, set off for London, to make
further inquiries about Wilkinson. I am, however, resolved not to
release that mischievous farmer, till I have secured my title and
estate. You see I am grown quite sharp. Her ladyship and I had then a long conversation, and she fairly
confessed the probability that my claims are just, but denied all
knowledge of old Eftsoones. I now begin to think rather better of her. She has the sweetest temper in the world, loves literature and
perroquets, scrapes mezzotintos, and spends half her income in buying
any thing that is hardly to be had. She led me through her cabinet,
which contains the most curious assortment in nature--vases of onyx and
sardonyx, cameos and intaglios; subjects in sea-horse teeth, by
Fiamingo and Benvenuto Cellini; and antique gems in jadestone, mochoa,
coral, amber, and Turkish agate. She has already presented me with several dresses, and she calls me
her lovely _protégée_, and the Lady Cherubina,--a sound that makes my
very heart leap within me. Nay, she did me the honour of assuring me,
that her curiosity to know a real heroine was one motive for her
having asked me on this visit; and that she positively considers an
hour with me worth all her curiosities put together. What a delicate
compliment! So could I do less, in return, than repeat my assurances,
that when I succeed in dispossessing her of the property, she shall
never want an asylum in my house. Adieu. Think of its having never once struck me, till I had retired for the
night, that I might be murdered! How so manifest a danger escaped my
recollection, is inconceivable; but so it was, I never thought of it. Lady Gwyn might be (for any thing I could tell to the contrary) just as
capable of plotting an assassination as the Marchesa di Vivaldi; and
surely her motives were far more urgent. I therefore searched in my chamber, for some trap-door, or sliding
pannel, by which assassins might enter it; but I could find none. I
then resolved on exploring the galleries, corridors, and suites of
apartments, in this immense mansion; in hopes to discover some place of
retreat, or at least some mystery relative to my birth. Accordingly, at the celebrated hour of midnight, I took up the taper,
and unbolting my door, stole softly along the lobby. I stopped before one of our family pictures. It was of a lady, pale,
pensive, and interesting; and whose eyes, which appeared to look at me,
were sky-blue, like my own. That was sufficient. 'Gentle image of my departed mother!' ejaculated I, kneeling before it,
'may thy sacred ashes repose in peace!' I then faintly chaunted a fragment of a hymn, and advanced. No sigh met
my listening ear, no moan amidst the pauses of the gust. With a trembling hand I opened a door, and found myself in a spacious
chamber. It was magnificently furnished, and a piano stood in one
corner of it. Intending to run my fingers over the keys, I walked
forward; till a low rustling in that direction made me pause. But how
shall I paint to you my horror, my dismay, when I heard the mysterious
instrument on a sudden begin to sound; not loudly, but (more terrible
still!) with a hurried murmur; as if all its chords were agitated at
once, by the hand of some invisible demon. I did not faint, I did not shriek; but I stood transfixed to the spot. The music ceased. I recovered courage and advanced. The music began
again; and again I paused. What! should I not lift the simple lid of a mere piano, after Emily's
having drawn aside the mysterious veil, and discovered the terrific wax
doll underneath it? Emulation, enthusiasm, curiosity prompted me, and I rushed undaunted to
the piano. Louder and more rapid grew the notes--my desperate hand
raised the cover, and beneath it, I beheld a sight to me the most
hideous and fearful upon earth,--a mouse! I screamed and dropped the candle, which was instantly extinguished. The mouse ran by me; I flew towards the door, but missed it, and fell
against a table; nor was it till after I had made much clamour, that I
got out of the room. As I groped my way through the corridor, I heard
voices and people in confusion above stairs; and presently lights
appeared. The whole house was in a tumult. 'They are coming to murder me at last!' cried I, as I regained my
chamber, and began heaping chairs and tables against the door. Presently several persons arrived at it, and called my name. I said not
a word. They called louder, but still I was silent; till at length they
burst open the door, and Lady Gwyn, with some of her domestics,
entered. They found me kneeling in an attitude of supplication. 'Spare, oh, spare me!' cried I. 'My dear,' said her ladyship, 'no harm shall happen you.' 'Alas, then,' exclaimed I, 'what portends this nocturnal visit? this
assault on my chamber? all these dreadful faces? Was it not enough,
unhappy woman, that thy husband attempted my life, but must thou, too,
thirst for my blood?' Lady Gwyn whispered a servant, who left the room; the rest raised, and
put me to bed; while I read her ladyship such a lecture on murder, as
absolutely astonished her. The servant soon after returned with a cup. 'Here, my love,' said her ladyship, 'is a composing draught for you. Drink it, and you will be quite well to-morrow.' I took it with gladness, for I felt my brain strangely bewildered by
the terror that I had just undergone. Indeed I have sometimes
experienced the same sensation before, and it is extremely
disagreeable. They then left a candle in my room, and departed. My mind still remains uneasy; but I have barricaded the door, and am
determined on not undressing. I believe, however, I must now throw
myself on the bed; for the draught has made me sleepy. Adieu. O Biddy Grimes, I am poisoned! That fatal draught last night--why did I
drink it?--I am in dreadful agony. When this reaches you, all will be
over.--But I would not die without letting you know. Farewell for ever, my poor Biddy! I bequeath you all my ornaments. Yes, my friend, you may well stare at receiving another letter from me;
and at hearing that I have not been poisoned in the least! I must unfold the mystery. When I woke this morning, after my nocturnal
perambulation, I found my limbs so stiff, and such pains in all my
bones, that I was almost unable to move. Judge of my horror and
despair; for it instantly flashed across my mind, that Lady Gwyn had
poisoned me! My whole frame underwent a sudden revulsion; I grew sick,
and rang the bell with violence; nor ceased an instant, till half the
servants, and Lady Gwyn herself, had burst into my chamber. 'If you have a remnant of mercy left,' cried I, 'send for a doctor!' 'What is the matter, my dear,' said her ladyship. 'Only that you have poisoned me, my dear,' cried I. 'Dear, indeed! I
presume your ladyship imagines, that the liberty you have taken with my
life, authorizes all other freedoms. Oh, what will become of me!' 'Do, tell me,' said she, 'how are you unwell?' 'I am sick to death,' cried I. 'I have pains in all my limbs, and I
shall be a corpse in half an hour. Oh, indeed, you have done the
business completely. Lady Eleanor Gwyn, I do here, on my death-bed, and
with all my senses about me, accuse you, before your domestics, of
having administered a deadly potion to me last night.' 'Go for the physician,' said her ladyship to a servant. 'Well may you feel alarmed,' cried I. 'Your life will pay the forfeit
of mine.' 'But you need not feel alarmed,' said her ladyship, 'for really, what I
gave you last night, was merely to make you sleep.' 'Yes,' cried I, 'the sleep of the grave! O Lady Gwyn, what have I done
to you, to deserve death at your hands? And in such a manner too! Had
you even shewn so much regard to custom and common decency, as to have
offered me the potion in a bowl or a goblet, there might have been some
little palliation. But to add insult to injury;--to trick me out of my
life with a paltry tea-cup;--to poison a girl of my pretensions, as
vulgarly as you would a rat;--no, no, Madam, this is not to be
pardoned!' Her ladyship again began assuring me that I had taken nothing more than
a soporific; but I would not hear her, and at length, I sent her and
the domestics out of the chamber, that I might prepare for my
approaching end. How to prepare was the question; for I had never thought of death
seriously, heroines so seldom die. Should I follow the beautiful
precedent of the dying Heloise, who called her friends about her, got
her chamber sprinkled with flowers and perfumes, and then gave up the
ghost, in a state of elegant inebriation with home-made wine, which she
passed for Spanish? Alas! I had no friends--not even Stuart, at hand;
flowers and perfumes I would not condescend to beg from my murderess;
and as for wine, I could not abide the thoughts of it in a morning. But amidst these reflections, a more serious and less agreeable subject
intruded itself upon me,--the thoughts of a future state. I strove to
banish it, but it would not be repulsed. Yet surely, said I, as a
heroine, I am a pattern of perfect virtue; and therefore, I must be
happy hereafter. But was virtue sufficient? At church (seldom as I had
frequented it, in consequence of its sober ceremonies, so unsuited to
my taste,) I remembered to have heard a very different doctrine. There
I had heard, that we cannot learn to do right without the Divine aid,
and that to propitiate it, we must make ourselves acquainted with those
principles of religion, which enable us to prefer duteous prayers, and
to place implicit reliance on the power and goodness of the Deity. Alas, I knew nothing of religion, except from novels; and in these,
though the devotion of heroines is sentimental and graceful to a
degree, it never influences their acts, or appears connected with their
moral duties. It is so speculative and generalized, that it would
answer the Greek or the Persian church, as well as the christian; and
none but the picturesque and enthusiastic part is presented; such as
kissing a cross, chanting a vesper with elevated eyes, or composing a
well-worded prayer. The more I thought, the more horrible appeared my situation. I felt a
confused idea, that I had led a worthless, if not a criminal life; that
I had left myself without a friend in this world, and had not sought to
make one in the next. I became more and more agitated. I tried to turn
my thoughts back to the plan of expiring with grace, but all in vain. I
then wrote the note to you; then endeavoured to pray: nothing could
calm or divert my mind. The pains grew worse, I felt sick at heart, my
palate was parched, and I now expected that every breath would be my
last. My soul recoiled from the thought, and my brain became a confused
chaos. Hideous visions of eternity rushed into my mind; I lay
shivering, groaning, and abandoned to the most deplorable despair. In this state the physician found me. O what a joyful relief, when he
declared, that my disorder was nothing but a violent rheumatism,
contracted, it seems, by my fall into the water the morning before! Never was transport equal to mine; and I assured him that he should
have a place in my memoirs. He prescribed for me; but remarked, that I might remain ill a whole
month, or be quite well in a few days. 'Positively,' said her ladyship, 'you must be quite well in four; for
then my ball comes on; and I mean to make you the most conspicuous
figure at it. I have great plans for you, I assure you.' I thanked her ladyship, and begged pardon for having been so giddy as
to call her a murderess; while she laughed at my mistake, and made
quite light of it. Noble woman! But I dare say magnanimity is our
family virtue. No sooner had I ceased to be miserable about leaving the world, than I
became almost as much so about losing the ball. To lose it from any
cause whatever, was sufficiently provoking; but to lose it by so gross
a disorder as a rheumatism, was, indeed, dreadful. Now, had I even some
pale, genteel, sofa-reclining illness, curable by hartshorn, I would
bless my kind stars, and drink that nauseous cordial, from morning even
unto night. For disguise thyself as thou wilt, hartshorn, still thou
art a bitter draught; and though heroines in all novels have been made
to drink of thee, thou art no less bitter on that account. Being on this subject, I have to lament, that I am utterly unacquainted
with those refined ailments, which every girl that I read of, meets
with, as things of course. The consequence is my wanting that beauty,
which, touched with the languid delicacy of illness, gains from
sentiment what it loses in bloom; so that really this horse's
constitution of mine is a terrible disadvantage to me. I know, had I
the power of inventing my own indispositions, I would strike out
something far beyond even the hectics and head-aches of my fair
predecessors. I believe there is not a sigh-fever; but I would fall ill
of a scald from a lover's tear, or a classic scratch from the thorn of
a rose. Adieu. This morning I awoke almost free from pain; and towards evening, I was
able to appear in the drawing-room. Lady Gwyn had asked several of her
friends to tea, so that I passed a delightful afternoon; the charm,
admiration, and astonishment of all. On retiring for the night to my chamber, I found this note on my
toilette, and read it with a beating heart. _To the Lady Cherubina._

    'YOUR MOTHER LIVES! and is confined in one of the subterranean
    vaults belonging to the villa. At midnight you will hear a tapping
    at your door. Open it, and two men in masks will appear outside.