This was no time to expostulate, or to reason with Miss Moreton, on the impropriety of
her conduct, had she been at leisure to hear it; but she was listening to the flaming professions
which Walwyn was pouring into her ear, when the door suddenly opened, and a gentleman of
graceful mien, and elegant person, entered. Seizing Mary Cuthbert's hand, he cried out, "Good
God! Walwyn, what are you doing? lead out these ladies instantly; do you not know that
contagion is in this room; that they are even now breathing the pestilential air of fever?" And he
forced Mary Cuthbert along the passage, and back again into the guard-room. No fear of infection, no dread of fever, could have induced Mary Cuthbert to re-enter this
room, had she not been forced into it; but Miss Moreton, who, spite of modern philosophy, had
most feminine fears with regard to contagious disorders, absolutely screamed from affright, as
she heard the gentleman speak; and, outstripping Walwyn in speed, she ran like a frantic woman
into the guard-room; and when Captain Walwyn approached both the ladies with wine, Miss
Moreton could scarcely be prevented from casting a reproachful look at him, for exposing her to
such imminent danger; but she recollected herself in time, and was silent, for it was not certainly
by his invitation that she had come to the H-- barracks. Interested by the beautiful countenance of Mary, and seeing her agitation and distress, the
gentleman who had snatched her from lurking and unsuspecting danger, did not quit her, on
having brought her to a place, which he readily perceived it was very repugnant to her wishes to
be seen in. In a manner, at once humane and respectful, a manner calculated to inspire confidence,
and to conciliate esteem, he addressed her; he seemed to have placed a magic circle round him,
to defend her from the rude attacks of all invaders. The other officers remained at a decent distance; and, while they contemplated her
beauty, and entertained themselves with the distress of Miss Moreton, they dared not advance
within the distance prescribed them by the looks of Miss Cuthbert's protector. At length Captain Walwyn's servant announced the chaise. Miss Moreton was now as
eager as Mary Cuthbert to leave a place, in which she had learnt with feelings little short of
horror, that a pestilential fever had appeared within the last week amongst the soldiers. Walwyn attended the ladies to the chaise, apologising for not accompanying them
himself to H--; but as his leaving the barracks that night was impossible, he accepted the offer
of Captain Walsingham's escort, who, jumping after them into the chaise, promised to conduct
them in safety to the town. Miss Moreton squeezed the hand of her "beloved Walwyn," and besought him to come to
her in the morning, as she should sadly want his enlivening converse to detach her mind from the
gloomy pre-sentiments of death and fever, which had taken possession of it; and had filled it
with such profound ideas, that it seemed as if her destiny was fixed. Walwyn assured her that he would not fail to attend her. He besought her to be composed
and tranquil, as he was convinced no ill consequences could accrue to her from the transient visit
that she had made him. The chaise drove off; and, in silence, the travellers reached the place of their destination. Miss Moreton was really apprehensive of a dangerous illness, and imaging a final and untimely
end of her bright career. Mary Cuthbert was retracing the scenes of the past evening with the
most torturing feelings of wounded delicacy and mortification. She was determined to enter into an explanation of her sentiments with Miss Moreton;
and to inform her, that it was impossible she could continue with her, unless she adapted her
conduct to the rules of propriety, and was more careful of the character and reputation of her
ward. Mary even thought that she could obtain legal redress, were she to apply for it; and that in
decent privacy, she might be placed where the interest of her little property would keep her from
absolute want. But she would on no account have recourse to coercive measures, unless Miss
Moreton refused to hear reason. Yet, much as Mary Cuthbert respected the memory of her father, and unwilling as she
must ever feel to depart from his last instructions; her fame and her peace of mind were at stake,
in continuing with Miss Moreton, unless some very essential alteration took place. Mary Cuthbert's disposition was generous and humane. She had not the slightest desire
of trampling on the fallen; and, though some tempers, and those too in general reckoned amiable,
might have enjoyed the sight of Miss Moreton's present distress, in which her own romantic and
extraordinary conduct had alone involved her, yet Mary was full of pity, when she witnessed her
fears and her evident distress, at the idea of having caught the fever; and determined, on no
account, either by word or look, to give her a hint of what was passing in her mind that night. Captain Walsingham saw the ladies to the inn; and Miss Moreton declaring her intention
of going immediately to bed, he left them, having politely desired permission to inquire after
their healths in the morning; a permission which was readily granted him by Miss Moreton. Really fatigued, and extremely frightened, Miss Moreton immediately went to bed. Mary
Cuthbert attended her to her apartment; she tried to pacify her fears; and, by those gentle and
spontaneous attentions, which spring from real humanity, to lull her to repose, and to divert her
from dwelling on the cause of them. Peevish and querulous, Miss Moreton was well inclined to be out of humour with every
thing about her, and most of all with the undeviating sweetness of her companion, she at length
hit on something to keep her ill humour alive; and blaming the weakness and the imbecility of
Mary, who could not bear to meet the faces of two or three strange men, she said, "that if she
died, her death must always lay at her door, for being so foolish as to run away where none
pursued, and take possession of a pest-room! This comes of the overstrained affectation of you
uninformed girls," said Miss Moreton, as Mary was quietly smoothing her pillow, and arranging
the bed-clothes. "You read romances till your brains are turned, and then you fancy every man
you meet with is to turn ravisher; and thus probably is my destiny completed, just as I was
attaining the very climax of fame; and about to receive the suffrage of the whole world!" Mary Cuthbert knew the cruelty and injustice of Miss Moreton's upbraidings; and, secure
in conscious innocence, she disregarded them; though, when she had at length escaped to the
apartment allotted for her, she gave way to those natural bursts of sorrow, into which her whole
soul was swelling, and which were only quelled when raising her hands and her heart towards
Heaven, she besought its protection and support. "Come, gentle Venus, and assuage---"
THOMSON. THE following morning, Miss Moreton, finding herself languid and enervated, as might
naturally be expected after a long journey and the exertions of her mental powers, determined on
having taken the infection the preceding evening, and was sickening of the fever. Medical
assistance was immediately applied to, and Mary Cuthbert was stationary at the side of the bed. She was delighted to hear the physician give it as his decided opinion, that Miss Moreton had not
the least symptom of approaching fever; that her pulse was regular; that her skin was moist; and
that her whole frame wore the appearance of health. Mary had no idea that the powers of imagination could be carried to so great an extent,
and really supposed Miss Moreton to have been as ill as she had described. But when the
physician, who was a sensible, rational man, assured her that her friend was the victim of fancy,
and bade her keep up her spirits, for that there was nothing to be apprehended on her account,
she felt reassured; and, though she continued her gentle attentions to Miss Moreton, yet they
were unaccompanied by the anxiety which she had previously felt. The two Captains, Walwyn and Walsingham, were soon announced. Mary was sitting at
the bed-side of Miss Moreton. "Show Walwyn up, and do you go and entertain Captain
Walsingham, for he seemed exclusively your beau last night," said Miss Moreton, in a tone of
pique, and in a louder key than was quite consistent with the sickening stage of the fever. "Surely not," said Mary Cuthbert. "Surely, Miss Moreton, you cannot mean to admit
Captain Walwyn into your bed-room; and it would be almost as improper for me to entertain
Captain Walsingham alone. Your illness, and consequent confinement to your bed, will be a
sufficient apology to the gentlemen; and I am confident, when they shall be thus informed, they
will not expect admittance." "You seem confident, indeed, Miss," said Miss Moreton, in a sarcastic tone; and, raising
herself in the bed, "What! shall I be refused to see my dearest friends? When lying on the bed of
sickness, I am isolated from all who love me, from all who care for me. "On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
"Some kindred drop the pious eye requires." "And shall I not see Walwyn? Miss Cuthbert, what right have you to keep him from me?" "I have no right, certainly, Madam," answered Mary; "but my sense of propriety, and the
delicacy of the female character, both impel me on this occasion to desire you, my dear Miss
Moreton, to reflect on the injury which such a visit will do your reputation. Of course it is known
in this house, that you were last night at the barracks; this, of itself, is an unpleasant
circumstance; and think how many disagreeable reports may be added to it, if you were known to
receive Captain Walwyn in bed the next morning?" "If I could have foreseen what Mr. Cuthbert had imposed upon me, worlds should not
have tempted me to have undertaken the charge of a person, who, like a baneful planet,
interposes to shroud my destiny with malign influence! Miss Cuthbert, I will see my friend. What! are all our hours of confidence as nothing? Are the sweet interchanges of sentiment to be
forgotten? And shall I discard a rooted and cemented friendship, like ours, to please a prudish
girl, who has taken her cue from Mrs. Deborah Moreton's code of formality, and sticks, chapter
and verse, to her author. Miss Cuthbert, I will have Walwyn admitted; I have much to say to him;
and while the pestilential disease is gradually stealing over my frame; while sense and reflection
are yet mine, and ere my irrevocable destiny be fixed, I would unbosom my full soul to a friend,
able to advise and to assist me!" Mary Cuthbert saw that Miss Moreton was determined. The bell was rang, and Captain
Walwyn was admitted. Mary remained in the room till Miss Moreton commanded her to leave it. She did so very reluctantly; but, instead of going to Captain Walsingham, as she had been
ordered, she retired to her own room, sending a verbal apology to that gentleman on the score of
Miss Moreton's illness. Miss Moreton had really felt great part of the alarm which she had expressed, till the
physician had visited her, when her symptoms gradually yielded to his cheerful countenance; but
she had assumed an illness, and she could not acknowledge that her fears had led her so far,
without discovering great weakness of character; she therefore resolved, that she would have the
disorder slightly, and remain in bed for a few days, which would make her highly interesting in
the eyes of Walwyn, and moreover have a wonderful effect on Montgomery when his friend
should describe it to him. Miss Moreton really panted to behold Montgomery once more. In her latent hope of
meeting him at the-- barracks she had been foiled; his friend's convalescence precluding the
necessity of his attendance. Neither did she understand that Walwyn had lately heard from him. But the passion of Miss Moreton was now grown to such a height, that it could not brook
unnecessary delays, under the pretext of her illness she once thought of sending an express for
the "dear possessor of her heart;" but her affection ought to appear disinterested in his eyes, and
to expose him to the hazard of taking the infection would clash with this sentiment. Assured of the affection of Miss Moreton, of which no greater proof could have been
given, than her having taken this long journey on his slight mention of indisposition, Walwyn
felt grateful for it; and his affairs being just now in a deranged state, it behoved him to make the
most of the present opportunity. Marriage was a bitter pill; and Walwyn had frequently recoiled at the idea. He felt no
regard for Miss Moreton; he had ridiculed her follies in all companies, before he had thought of
making her his wife; and now he felt ashamed of them. But he was determined that, the
connubial knot once tied, the conduct of Mrs. Walwyn should be under his sole direction; and as
he had some regard for his own honourable name, he thought it would be better to conclude on
the marriage, while the lady was still at H--, as this event would be some apology to the
world, for her otherwise most extravagant behaviour. In the most fervid, bombastic, and poetical strains, had Captain Walwyn often breathed
his amorous tale into the ear of Miss Moreton. She had answered him with the melting pathos of
a Monimia and Calista. But the question of marriage between Clarissa Moreton and Charles
Walwyn had never been brought to an issue; nor was there one which was more remote from the
idea of Miss Moreton. Tender and assiduous as was Walwyn, he yet let the first and the second visit escape him,
without having declared his wishes and his expectations to the fair invalid; but the third was to
be the critical one, and, "nothing doubting," he entered the sick chamber of Miss Moreton, the
attentive Mary Cuthbert was dismissed, and raising herself in the bed, in an interesting attitude,
holding out her hand in answer to Walwyn's tender inquiries, the fair invalid pointed to the chair
which Mary had vacated, saying, "sit here, for I have much to say to you." Walwyn was pleased at this beginning; for there was a feminine consciousness in her
manner, which assured him that his premeditated declaration would now be spared him, and that
the lady (acting, as usual, in opposition to the strict observances prescribed to others) was about
to make an avowal of her sentiments in his favour. The address of Miss Moreton corroborated
this idea. "My dearest Walwyn,-I am about to enter into an explanation of feelings, with which
my heart is fraught-I know that, in discovering them to you, I am diverging from the general
line of dissimulation practised by my sex; but you, who know my character, must know that I
pride myself in opposing the foolish laws which enslave the female mind. Yet such is the
contrariety of my feelings, and my sentiments, that while I am acting in concordance with the
latter, I feel as if I was trampling on the former, and my blushes, and my palpitating heart betray
my confusion." "They give you the most interesting air imaginable; you are at once the most bewitching
and the most exalted of women!" said Walwyn, who took advantage of this pause to say
something expressive of his passionate adoration. "This heart was formed for the indulgence of tender sentiment," said Miss Moreton,
laying her hand on it. "I confess to you it was long ere I found an object on whom it could
bestow itself; the foolish distinctions of the world were always trifles in my estimation. I looked
for a kindred soul! my fortune is ample; of what consequence can it be to me, that he, whom I
love, is without one, any more than that I shall have the divine pleasure of imparting to him, with
no sparing hand, the benefits which I enjoy?" "Charming, exalted creature!" said Walwyn, sinking on one knee, and rapturously kissing
the white hand, which had been extended in order to give grace to utterance! "I have an independent mind," continued Miss Moreton, "and, my notions were always at
variance with the marriage vow, and the slavish obedience which it imposes on women; I never
thought that I could become its advocate. But now-now, when every aspiration of my heart is
directed towards the object of my affections; when I would make him mine by the most
endearing, and the closest ties- the sound of husband carries something sweet to my ears,
which never reached them before; and, in bestowing myself and my fortune on the selected
object of my affections, now in the bloom of my fame, when my name has attained so high and
so just a celebrity; I am confident that I shall give him no mean proof of affection!" "Mean," exclaimed Walwyn, passionately clasping his hands;-"No! it is the most
glorious, the most exalted proof of love, which ever was bestowed on mortal-Oh Clarissa! Clarissa! my senses ache in contemplating such transcendent loveliness and virtue!" "That the object on whom I have bestowed my heart feels a reciprocity of sentiment, I am
well assured," said Miss Moreton. "His feelings have betrayed him to me; and the generous
conflict, by which he essays to evade a declaration of passion, imagining that there exists some
disparity in our situations!" "Who that sees,-who that hears you,-but must feel their own inferiority," said
Walwyn, affecting to be overwhelmed with confusion and gratitude. "Having now explained my meaning," said Miss Moreton, "I hesitate not to say, that I
have made up my mind to reward the affection of my lover, and to resign my happiness to his
keeping." "Charming!-incomparable Miss Moreton! How can he sufficiently evince his
gratitude?" cried Walwyn. "It was not till the period of your last visit at the Attic Villa," said
Miss Moreton, "that I yielded up my heart to the influence of the tender passion. My destiny
seemed, then, to have taken a new turn; and my heart, hitherto actuated solely by the emotions of
benevolence and universal philanthropy, involuntarily resigned itself to the imposing sentiment,
which had taken possession of it. Walwyn, pity and respect my feelings; you must have guessed
the object on whom my heart is bestowed; I need not name him to you; I shall write to him, in
order to explain myself more particularly.!" "Why write?