The Monsieur played on his dear Cremona, and smiled at these arrangements; Copy was
too absent to suspect them; and Germ was just now too deep in the mystery of gas, to see any
farther than the parties would have him. "Where'er I turn, how new proofs pour upon
me! "How happily this wond'rous view supports
"My former argument! How strongly strikes
"Immortal life's full demonstration here!" YOUNG'S Night Thoughts. REDUCED to a state of infantine weakness, the return of Mary Cuthbert's mental faculties was
very sparingly followed by an accession of bodily strength; and, when she was perfectly sensible
of her situation, and of the unkindness of Miss Moreton, in leaving her to the mercy of strangers,
she seemed incapable of the least exertion for herself. Her nurse, who had been won upon by the gentle patience of the invalid, with all the
loquacity usually attendant on those of her occupation, and rejoiced at finding that she had once
more an opportunity of making herself heard and understood, was loud in her praises of Dr.
Saville's skill, and also of the kind and incessant attention of the handsome officer from the
barracks. Mary, to whom all that had passed was a mystery, expressed her gratitude to Dr. Saville,
at their next interview. "I am grateful to you, my good Sir," said she, "for the preservation of my
life; grateful, as it is the will of the Almighty, that it should be prolonged; which is apparent by
his having blessed the means which you have used for my recovery. Yet, in a prolongation of
life, I see nothing to hope." "Oh! fie, fie, say not so, young lady," said the Doctor; "I must not hear that language. At
your age, a very unnatural one, let me tell you-Come, come, I know more than you think for;
you shall not always live with this confounded quiz, odd-body cousin of yours! and you have
time before you, to make friends, who are more congenial to your turn of mind. To be sure, this
Miss Moreton is the most uncommon heroine I ever met with in history or fable; and, I believe,
nobody besides herself would have thought of putting you under the management of a gay red
coat, and absolutely leaving him your whole and soul guardian. Ah! now you stare, and look
prettily fearful; but the young fellow has conducted himself very well, and made over his right
and title to you, with great heroism and wonderful self-denial, to an old doctor and an older
nurse-and even now, he waits my permission, ere he pays you a congratulatory visit, though he
comes here about twenty times in a day, and knows to half a second, how long you sit up." "I shall be glad to see Captain Walwyn, if you think it right, Sir, when you are here." "Walwyn, no, no; he is not the man; I have not such an opinion of his forbearance,
believe me; Lesly Walsingham is the gentleman I am speaking of; and I am confident, that if
good wishes could have helped you out of the disorder, he would have forestalled me." A faint suffusion crossed the pale cheek of Mary; the Doctor watched the minutest
symptom; and, thinking the change indicated fatigue, he took his leave. Lesly Walsingham was the next day introduced by Dr. Saville; and thinking that two
visitors at once might be too much for the invalid, he took his leave, promising to call for his
companion, when he thought it right for him to depart. The air of tranquil serenity which was diffused over the delicate countenance of Mary,
impressed Walsingham with respect and tenderness. During her illness he had had many
opportunities of privately conversing with Dr. Saville; and if the good Doctor had been the
restorer of Miss Cuthbert, he had performed a far greater cure on Walsingham, for he had
dispelled the cloud of infidelity from his mind! Dr. Saville's arguments carried great weight with them; for they came from man of
science, and of great philosophical knowledge. He had attained the summit of human learning;
yet he was candid and humble; for he was a Christian! "I know," said he, "that my profession
labours, (unjustly I trust,) under the stigma of infidelity; but, tell me, Walsingham, has any order
of men a greater call for the comforts of the Gospel? When we witness the most heart-rending
and distressful scenes;-when we, in vain, exert out utmost skill to preserve the wife to her
afflicted husband; to save the blooming boy for his distracted mother; to detain the orphan's
friend on earth; what can console us under the failure of our endeavours, but the certainty of an
hereafter; the glorious consolations of a Saviour's mercy, and a Saviour's love. We know in
whom we have believed, and we trust all to him." Lesly Walsingham had thought more within the last three weeks, than he had during his
preceding life. The transitory enjoyments of this world appeared as nothing, when the glories of
another were unfolded to his vision; and he entered the sick room of Mary Cuthbert a new man. All his outrageous passions were chastened, tempered by the convictions of his heart; and he
looked at her with the hallowed softness with which he would have approached an etherial
being! Mary said but little, but that little was impressive. She spoke of her restoration to life as
the mercy of Heaven; and piously clasped her hands as she said, "I trust I shall not be unworthy
of it!" As she said these words; as her dove-like eyes were turned towards Heaven, and
Walsingham was surveying her countenance, with an admiration as unbounded as it was free
from every worldly idea, a light step was heard on the stair-case; the door opened, and Mary
Cuthbert was strained to the bosom of Miss Davenport! while the surprised, the entranced
Walsingham, knelt at her side, and clasping her hand in his, almost devoured it with kisses! "Oh! Clara! Clara! Angel of Mercy!" cried he, "Beatified messenger of heavenly love! Oh! Clara, hear
your Lesly's recantation! behold him not almost, but the altogether Christian." Miss Davenport was busily engaged in encouraging and soothing the trembling and halffainting
Mary; but she remembered the beloved voice of Walsingham; the joyful sounds thrilled
at her heart, and though she withdrew her hand, yet she did it not in anger. Dr. Saville soon made the quartetto of this party. Explanations succeeded
congratulations; and general satisfaction ensued. Miss Davenport accounted for her unlooked-for appearance, by informing Mary
Cuthbert, that she came deputed by Mrs. Deborah Moreton, to bring her back to Marlow. "And is Miss Moreton returned to the Villa?" asked Mary. "No, my love, she is not. It seems Mr. Montgomery became acquainted with your illness;
and wrote an account of it to Mrs. Deborah Moreton." Mary felt a secret pleasure at hearing that she owed any thing to the kind interference of
Montgomery. Eager to accept the proffered invitation of Mrs. Moreton, the recovery of our invalid
seemed to keep pace with her wishes. An explanation of the most happy kind ensued between
Clara Davenport and Walsingham; and the judgment of Miss Davenport now gave a free
sanction to the choice of her heart. In less than a week, Mary Cuthbert was able to travel; and the two ladies left H--,
attended by Lesly Walsingham, and followed by the hearty prayers of Dr. Saville. Mary Cuthbert was much hurt at perceiving the alteration in the countenance and whole
appearance of Mrs. Deborah Moreton. "Ah! child," said she, shaking her head, "if the unheard of
behaviour of my wild niece has almost precipitated you to the grave, it has likewise undermined
my health; a gnawing canker has preyed at my heart for many months; and now, while I am in
uncertainty about her, and do not know what wild freaks she may be about, and into what
frightful schemes she may be plunging, I can never enjoy a moment's peace of mind. "Ah! my poor brother little knew what would become of his free education, as he called
it, and his unfettered notions." Mary Cuthbert tried, by every means in her power, to divert the mind of the old lady. She
palliated the behaviour of Miss Moreton, though conscious that when represented in the mildest
point of view, it must appear wholly unjustifiable. "I had hoped," would Mrs. Moreton say, "that she would have tried to attract Mr.
Montgomery. He is a sensible, steady young man, and I should like to have seen him her
husband; but he saw what a strange fantastic creature she was, and would have nothing to say to
her. I am sure you ought to be grateful to him to the end of your life, my dear; for, had it not been
for his kind and considerate letter, you might have lain for ever at H--. I should never have
heard of it." Mary was grateful to Montgomery; and she began to think that her gratitude was of a
kind, which was calculated to give pain to her bosom. Insensibly she took the walks round the
Villa, in which she had been accompanied by him; and she retraced every word which had there
fallen from his lips. The Attic Villa was undergoing repairs and alterations; but the servants were in ignorance
of Miss Moreton's return, as well as of the place of her present abode. Captain Walsingham had always been a favourite of Mrs. Moreton's. She had never
known the cause which had produced a rupture between him and her favourite, Miss Davenport;
but she was heartily glad, that any circumstance had produced their reconciliation; and when she
looked at the bright prospect which was before them, she only wished that her niece had such an
one. But the prospects of the unfortunate Miss Moreton were closed for ever! Her untimely
fate first reached her aunt, through the medium of the following letter from the Monsieur. "Great heights are hazardous to the weak head." BLAIR'S GRAVE. LETTER. "MADAME MORE-TON. "London, Wednesday, Twentieth
September, 1808. I HAVE de tres honneur to inform you, Madame, a cat-as-tro-phee has happen dat will aston-ish
you ver, ver much in-deed. You, Madame, have, no doubt, heard of de ver dread-ful con-fla-grati-
on dat happen t'oder night at Covent-Garden-Te-a-tre. Ve vas all just come from de seeing of
de play. Madame More-ton, she look ver vell, ver vell, indeed, in de green and de silver; de long
vaists vas ver be-coming to pauvre Ma'amselle More-ton. Vell, ve return to de petit souper, at
her apartment, La Belle Signora, Monsieur Lauzune, Monsieur Jerme, Monsieur Coupee, and
votre tres humble servant. Vell, ve ver merry, ver merry, indeed, ven we heard great noise, great
bus-teel, great ringing of de bells; and den dey said de grand magnifique building, de Co-vent-
Gar-den Te-a tre was all on fire. Madame Moreton, she vent ver fast wid Monsieur Coupee,
Monsieur Jerme, and Lauzune, to see de fire, grand spec-ta-cle, on de top of de house; but, helas! dey should not go, for dey did not know dat de house vas caught, till too late. Monsieur Lauzune
he jump from pa-ra-pet walls, ver high, ver high, indeed; but he vas used to de jumping. Madame More-ton she follow him, but she no thought it so ver high leap; she vas killed, ver
instantaneously, on de ver spot she fell down on. Oh! Mon Dieu! how dreadful acci-dent! Monsieur Jerme, Monsieur Coupee, dey both escape, by assistance of fire-men! but, helas! Madame More-ton could not vait. The Signora be ver much sorry, quite au de despoir; she not
sing one note of de musique since. Charmante Madame Moreton met wid so ver tre-men-dous
mis-for-tune tragique,
"Madame De-bor-ah More-ton,
"J'avois de honneur
"to be, Madame,
"tres humble,
"tres Devoted Serviteur,
"JEAN JACQUES, LOUIS MYRTILLA." N.B. It may be observed, that Monsieur accented in writing, just as he pronounced in speaking. This accident, as related by the Monsieur, was too true, and was of too dreadful a kind to
require any comment. Mary Cuthbert tried to console Mrs. Deborah Moreton; but she felt too
much herself from the shock of this awful event, to be able to tranquillize her own emotions, or
to compose her mind. After an affliction of such a nature, time must be required ere the mind can
recover its tone; but Mrs. Deborah Moreton was able to exert herself before her young
companion, and seemed to derive a new interest in life, whilst securing to Mary Cuthbert the
fortune which had devolved to her by the death of her niece. "I have enough for myself," said she; "every farthing of the poor lost one's must go to
you. Dear child, you will be regular, and steady; may it prove a greater blessing to you than it
was to her!" The sudden acquisition of fortune by such an appalling calamity, gave a superstitious
impression to the mind of Mary Cuthbert.