"I purposely came hither to receive
my cousin," answered Miss Moreton, "thinking that our first meeting required not a
crowd of witnesses; but now that we are known to each other," said she, turning to Mary,
and taking her hand, "let me, my dear girl, introduce you to the apartment where my
friends are anxiously awaiting us.-Mr. Montgomery-Walwyn-you will follow!" The
gentlemen bowed assent, and Mary was led out of the apartment by her cousin. Mr. Moreton had been a man who had indulged himself in speculative inquiries,
and who had professed what he called "liberal opinions;" he had been extremely fortunate
in his mercantile career; and hence his eccentricity had never been tinctured with
misanthropy; and he had been held in general estimation by the world, who, if they could
not fall in with all his visionary theories and undigested plans, yet all agreed, "that he was
a most generous fellow, that his dinners were excellent, that the company round his
convivial board was sure to afford entertainment, and that nobody could envy a man his
good fortune, who evinced so much spirit and liberality in the enjoyment of it." The commercial concerns of Mr. Moreton had been widely extended, and he had
been the peculiar favourite of Fortune, for through the whole of his bartering transactions

he had never had a bad debt; and his schemes had generally turned out as he wished; his
good luck, as it appeared, usually supplying the place of judgment, for he had outstripped
all his competitors; the wary and the prudent had failed where he had been successful; for
to attempt and to achieve had been with Mr. Moreton the same thing. Clarissa Moreton was his only child; she was her father's idol, for he saw in her
enough of his own disposition, and of the traits which marked his character, to make her
so. And it was in vain that Mrs. Moreton would have taught her child to walk in the path
prescribed to her sex; when her father, proud of her "superior mind," and of her "bold and
inquiring spirit," encouraged her in asserting her opinions, and in deviating in her
behaviour and manners from all with whom she conversed. But the superiority of Miss
Moreton's talents, like those of her father, were calculated only for display; there was
nothing solid or substantial in her abilities or acquirements, no depth of argument in her
declamatory harangues, in which she had practised, from the early age of fifteen, to the
attentive auditors round her father's table. And while he, poor mistaken man, proud of her
shining endowments, looked round for the admiration which, as a "levy en masse" he
expected from all his guests, and which they in some sort were constrained to pay, as the
price of their entertainment, Mrs. Moreton's confusion and concern was very apparent,
and her motherly countenance would be covered with blushes at the improper confidence
of her daughter, and the eccentric propositions, and chimerical absurdities, into which her
father's foolish example and blind indulgence, had precipitated her. Miss Moreton's heart
might have been rightly formed, but her good qualities were entirely obscured, by the
extravagance of her opinions, the pertinacity with which she maintained them, and the
most overweening vanity.- Superficial in every acquirement and every accomplishment,
she attempted every thing; fond of the new school of manners, and of philosophy,
"philanthropy" and "benevolence" were words which were constantly jingling in her ears;
and, the inflated victim of vanity and self-conceit, was easily persuaded, that she was the
succouring angel that was sent to patronise genius and virtue on earth. She had a great
tincture of romantic fervour and enthusiasm in her manners, which was called "energy," a
word well understood in the new vocabulary of the moderns, and which has been too
frequently made use of to require any explanation here; not that Miss Moreton was a
modern philosopher, there was not stability enough in her formation to call her any one
distinct thing; she was every thing by starts, and nothing long; in fact, a young woman,
who, with a showy person, a large fortune, and the most inordinate ideas of her own
importance, dared to think and act without regarding the opinion of the world in any
instance; and yet expecting not only to receive its general suffrage, but its applause and
admiration. If our readers wish to see the contrast between the cousins, we hope they will
have patience to follow us through the succeeding pages. Miss Moreton led Mary Cuthbert into a room, where were seated, in different
parts of it, several persons. The tremendous ceremony of introduction being over,
Montgomery and Walwyn formed themselves into a group with the two ladies, whilst the
rest of the company mixed in conversation, or indulged in their particular amusements, or
meditations, as they liked best. Montgomery cast his acute eyes, in a hasty survey, round
the spacious and elegant apartment; it was lighted by a number of Grecian lamps,
supported by lofty Tripods, while Cupids and Sphinxes, Graces and Gorgons, Hebes and
Hydras, covered the walls. Placed at the head of the room was a full length picture of

Miss Moreton; there was a fantastic style of drapery, perfectly in unison with her
character, displayed in this portrait; a group of Cupids appeared sportively playing at her
feet, while the Muses and the Graces were all crowning her with votive wreaths. The
furniture of the room was correspondent to the various taste of the owner, books and
exotics, globes and battledores, telescopes and skipping ropes, old china and dancing
dolls, were strewed round it in elegant confusion; while a grand piano forte, a harp, a
tamborine, a violin, a violoncello, flutes, and hautboys, were huddled promiscuously in
one corner, and enveloped by music books. From inanimate, Mr. Montgomery recurred to
animate objects: a highly rouged and most extravagantly dressed female was reclining on
a sopha; she had made only a half inclination of her body, on being introduced to Miss
Cuthbert; the greatest ease and most perfect assurance seemed to pervade her manners;
and she was now employed, "sans ceremonie," in picking her teeth and arranging her eyebrows,
at a little glass which she had taken from the "ridicule" attached to her side. This
lady appeared nearly forty years of age; and, by the glances which she cast from her large
dark orbs on the male part of the company, Montgomery judged that she had not
"numbered these years in vestal purity." A gentleman sat near her, whose well-powdered
whiskers reached his mouth on either side, and whose shrugs, whose grimaces, and whose
perfumes, bespoke the insignificant coxcomb; he seemed very attentive to the lady. Indeed, the Signora Grosera and the Monsieur Myrtilla were excellent companions; her
voice was the only attraction which she possessed; and the sweet tones which he drew
from his Cremona were the only claims from which he could derive either favour or
sufferance, as his manners were completely ridiculous, and his morals were most
licentiously depraved. A plain dressed and very quizzical-looking man had drawn his
chair in a direct line before Mary Cuthbert; and pursing up his thick lips, was pursuing a
whistle, with his eyes intently fixed on her countenance, and very dexterously twirling his
thumbs, as his hands met on his well-stuffed waistcoat. As Montgomery saw the
heightening colour of Miss Cuthbert, as he watched her retreating eyes, and increasing
confusion at being so obviously singled out from the company to be whistled at; he was
on the point of asking him what he meant by such impertinent behaviour, when he felt
himself tapped on the shoulder by Walwyn, who said in a whisper, "Come, I see I must be
your Cicerone, for else you will be liable to some devilish mistakes; come with me under
the viranda, and I will give you the professions, as well as the names of the company." "What! and leave that fellow to insult Miss Cuthbert by his lawless gaze?" asked
Montgomery. "My dear fellow, if she were an automaton Mr. Copy would regard her just
as intently: he does not examine Miss Cuthbert as a creature of flesh and blood." "She
looks more like one of celestial mould, certainly!" said Montgomery. "Nor that either, my
good friend," said Walwyn; "he is merely thinking how she will look on canvass; he has
not an idea beyond his art, which is that of a mere copyist; he is one of the most stupid
and tedious animals I ever saw; absent beyond description, all his senses are engrossed by
his profession; and he can talk on no other subject." "Why do I see him here, then?" asked Montgomery. "Because he painted that portrait, which is thought a great likeness,"
said Walwyn. "And did he design the Muses and the Graces too?" "No, these were copies
of copies, introduced at the desire of myself and some other of Miss Moreton's friends,
who judged them symbolical and appropriate." Montgomery shook his head. "Those two
you know," said Walwyn:-"The Signora sings, and the Monsieur plays the fiddle, when

Miss Moreton likes to have music; but, to say the truth, this is not the hall of song very
often, for music disturbs Mr. Copy; the Signora Grosera is frequently subject to the headache,
when she is asked to sing; and it interrupts Mr. Germ in his botanical researches;
you observe him sitting there, in green spectacles, looking over his different specimens of
thistles?" "But in such a spacious house as this, why are there not apartments
appropriated for each particular pursuit?" "Because Miss Moreton has fixed on this for
'the Lyceum,' and that she is the undisputed mistress of her own mansion," Montgomery
was answered; Captain Walwyn continued, "the gentleman whom you see there has been
for some time an inmate of this house; I understand that he has been very unfortunate in
his own country (France); but it must be confessed, that he has experienced the entire
reverse here, where his pathetic story of emigration touched the heart of Miss Moreton,
and from the moment that the Chevalier D'Aubert became known to her, he became a
resident at the Villa." "How very imprudent!" said Montgomery: "has not Miss Moreton
one friend who will speak the language of truth, and tell her of the impropriety of her
behaviour?" "Do you recollect that independence of sentiment and action form the
leading traits of her character? Frederic, believe me, that opposition only adds fuel to the
fire, as Mrs. Deborah Moreton, an old maiden aunt, who resides in the village half a mile
distant, finds to her cost every day that she takes a walk here, to rail at all which meets
her eyes and ears!" Montgomery sighed; it was a sigh of the most pensive cast; he
foresaw a thousand dangers, a thousand evils in store for the young and inexperienced
Mary, under a roof where all the rules of propriety were invaded, and where a
promiscuous and depraved throng found easy access. Even his friend Walwyn was by no
means a man with whom a woman of strict virtue and modesty should be on intimate
terms; his manners were lively and pleasant; his person was prepossessing; but, under this
engaging exterior, Montgomery was well aware that he entertained a very indifferent
opinion of the female world, and that his success with the weaker part of it had
contributed to strengthen him in it, and that he sought their society only as they
contributed to his gratification, or were likely to be instrumental to his advancement. That, under a semblance of frank gaiety, he entertained the idea of carrying off the rich
heiress, Montgomery easily perceived; and there was a peculiar poignancy of expression
and acerbity of manner when he mentioned D'Aubert, which evinced that the sentimental
Frenchman was the rival whom he most dreaded. Captain Walwyn was the second son of
a very respectable family; he was generally received as a pleasant companion; his
fondness for the stage rendered him desirable in most of the gay circles, and his purse
often failed in supplying his extravagancies; for his indulgences extended far beyond a
younger brother's allowance, although that was not scantily allotted. The Walwyns
inhabited the manor-house of the parish, where the father of Montgomery had been pastor
for many years. Mr. Montgomery and Mr. Walwyn had been early acquainted, and had
lived in terms of the strictest friendship; their difference of situation had been no barrier
to their intimacy; Mr. Walwyn loved his friend for his superior sanctity and virtue, and
Mr. Montgomery never thought the wealth of Mr. Walwyn entitled him to any portion of
that respect, which he voluntarily yielded to his benevolence and goodness of heart. Two
sons and a daughter were all the family of Mr. Walwyn, whilst a large tribe sprang up
round the parsonage table. Early habits and early associations, rather than any similarity
of character, had continued an intimacy between Captain Walwyn and young

Montgomery. Frederic Montgomery was the eldest of the family; his conduct had hitherto
been exemplary; he was intended for the Church, to which profession his wishes had
always bent; and he had kept his last term in Oxford previous to his ordination, when,
meeting with Captain Walwyn, he was induced by his friend's earnest entreaties, and his
own curiosity, to while away a few days at the Attic Villa. "Whether he measure earth, compute the sea,
"Weigh sun-beams, carve a fly, or split a flea,
"The solemn trifler, with his boasted skill,
"Toils much, and is a solemn trifler still." COWPER'S CHARITY. WHEN Walwyn and Montgomery returned into the room, they perceived that the
Chevalier D'Aubert had seated himself between Miss Moreton and Mary Cuthbert. Mary
understood none of the half English, half French phrases, which were from time to time
addressed to her cousin, accompanied with a sigh, or a look of languishment from the
pensive orbs of the young Frenchman; but she saw that they were received by Miss
Moreton with much satisfaction, who answered him so much in his own strain, and with
an air so expressive of tender interest and feeling, that Mary felt embarrassed at being a
disengaged spectator of the scene; especially as Mr. Copy still kept his eyes on her face,
and had drawn his chair, the last time he resumed his whistle, rather nearer to her. She
was ordered to sit in the seat she occupied, by Miss Moreton, and she had not courage to
desert her post, though she felt very awkward in retaining it. In this dilemma, she
recollected that she had her knitting in her pocket, and observing that the Signora had
fallen asleep, and Monsieur was arranging a new crimson and silver cane string, she
judged it to be no breach of politeness to take it out, which she accordingly did. "What a
picture of Industry!" said Miss Moreton, with something rather sarcastic in her
exclamation. "A picture! where?" said Copy, rubbing his eyes, and starting up from his
seat in a moment. "There," said Miss Moreton, pointing towards Mary. "Why, Mr. Copy,
you are more absent than ever. I thought you had been studying it this half hour!" "In the
character of Penelope," said Copy, muttering to himself, "in the absence of Ulysses-Let
me see, Penelope is generally drawn with blue eyes." Mary Cuthbert's eyes were fixed on
the knitting. Leaning his elbows on his knees, Copy very coolly looked up in her face-
"Yes, yes, I see, her's are blue too." "But Penelope wove, you know, Mr. Copy," said
Walwyn; "this Lady's employment is of a different kind." "Very good attitude too,"
continued Copy; "head, a little too much recumbent-fingers displayed to advantage by
the knitting-Penelope in character-the matron style of drapery, veil pendent from the
left side." "But she did not knit-I tell you she wove, my friend," said Walwyn-Copy
paid no attention. Mary Cuthbert took out her scissars to cut her thread.-"Or the fatal
sister," said he. "Mista, black terrific maid!" said Walwyn, with a most hideous
expression of countenance, looking towards Copy, and laughing: Copy whistled out the
new idea and heard him not. "Join the wayward work to aid. "Tis the woof of victory." said Montgomery quoting from the same Poem. "There are five sorts of spiders," said Mr.
Germ, who had caught the words woof and weave, these had fallen within the compass of

his studies; and eagerly wetting his thumb and finger at his mouth, and turning over the
leaves of an octavo volume which he drew from his pocket, he continued-"first, the
house spider, who hangs her web in neglected apartments; secondly, the garden spider,
who weaves in the open air a little round web, the centre of which is her situation in the
day time; thirdly, the black spider, to be met with in cellars and the cavities of old walls;
and, fourthly, the wandering spider, who has no settled nest like the others; fifthly, the
field spider, which they call the long-legs. "-Aha, aha, Monsieur Germ, aha, me think
you be much like von gentilhomme, called Monsieur Long-legs," said the fidler. "And
perhaps the wandering spider, who has no settled home, may apply to you, Mr. Myrtilla,"
said Germ, coolly resuming his former studies. "The spider's most attenuated thread,
"Is cord, is cable, to man's hold on bliss!" said Walwyn; but he was sorry that he had made the quotation, when he perceived the
sentimental Chevalier strike his hand on his forehead with emphasis, and heave a deep
drawn sigh, which was gently echoed by Miss Moreton. The Chevalier walked to the
viranda; Miss Moreton followed him in great appearance of agitation, and took his hand,
as if beseeching him to compose himself. Mary Cuthbert was heartily glad, when she
could with any propriety, retire for the night; and, though laid on a bed of down, and
surrounded by all the splendid elegancies of life, she gave way to her full heart in a burst
of sorrow. She contrasted all that she had seen at the Villa, to all which she had been
accustomed to see at Woodberry; there her duties had been her delights, and a series of
useful and rational employment had enlivened every hour; there regularity and social
order had presided, and no invasion on propriety or custom had taken place. It was by the
express, the dying injunctions of her father, that she had sought her present asylum;
destitute of friends, low in fortune as he had left his child, it was natural for him to wish
that she should be sheltered by her only remaining relative, when she lived in a state of
affluence, single and independent. By introducing the cousins to each other, he had hoped
to render them mutually useful, and thus to have bestowed a mutual benefit: and he had
frequently given Mary Cuthbert rules of behaviour, on her becoming the guest and
companion of Miss Moreton, in which he had instructed her to comport herself with
sweetness and gentleness of manner, and to make her company useful and agreeable to
her protectress; "never flatter her foibles, or nurse her weaknesses, my dearest Mary;
always consult your own dignity of character," continued the kind parent. "You must
remember that you are to be accountable for your actions at the tribunal of your Heavenly
Parent, and that while you continue to mould your conduct by that law of right which has
been transmitted to you from above, you may rest secure in your own integrity, and the
silent plaudits of a good conscience!" Mary Cuthbert's talents and acquirements were not of the brilliant cast; her
understanding was good, her perception lively and acute; but her natural modesty and
reservedness of disposition, added to her secluded education, and the retirement in which
she had lived at Woodberry, had given to her whole demeanour and behaviour, an air of
timidity and mauvaise haute, which, though it did not diminish her natural and peculiar
attractions in the eyes of those who had discernment and understanding to appreciate

them according to their value, made her appear to the followers of art and fashion as an
awkward bashful girl, calculated neither for ornament or amusement. In the presence of
Miss Moreton and Miss Moreton's circle, Mary had felt the most unaccountable
embarrassment, and a restraint which was wholly foreign to her nature; for, open in her
disposition, she was prompt in expressing her sentiments, although they were tempered
by true modesty and diffidence. Yet at the Attic Villa she seemed to feel that every word
she should have uttered would have been laughed or carped at by her hearers, as being in
utter contradiction to their habits and sentiments; and for her own part, her's were in as
direct opposition to their's. Miss Moreton was very much pleased with her cousin; her
modest behaviour and diffident manners were the passport to her favour; for a rival under
her roof, one whose conversational powers outshone her's, or whose flights of fancy had
been as brilliant; one too possessed of youth and loveliness, could not have been suffered;
for the genius of philanthropy and benevolence upon earth, the arbitress of wit and of
elegance, had hitherto possessed her high situation in absolute power; she had scarcely
known what envy was, as the women who approached her had been her fawning
sycophants, the men her slaves. Mrs. Deborah Moreton, indeed, daily poured plain truths
into the ear of her niece; but opposition and advice from a woman of rough manners, of
coarse voice, and of an unenlightened mind, was received in the most disdainful manner
by Clarissa; she generally on these occasions, adopted a cool and contemptuous silence;
but, to show the notice she took of the advice in her future conduct, if Mrs. Moreton had
endeavoured to dissuade her from any half formed project, from that moment she
determined to put it in execution; and, on the contrary, if Mrs. Moreton recommended her
to adopt any particular mode of behaviour, she contrived to be the exact reverse to the
thing proposed. So proud was she of her fancied superiority; so vain of her own
independence. Mrs. Deborah Moreton was a woman of common stamp; but she
entertained very good and wholesome notions concerning the proper behaviour and the
conduct of women, and they had been grafted in her mind, nearly fifty years before the
age of reason and of sentiment; and had they been tempered with mildness and suavity of
manners, they might have been of great use to her niece; but, unhappily, this good lady's
temper was of a most irritable and hasty kind; ashamed of the repeated and daily
increasing extravagancies of her niece, she no sooner heard of any thing she had done, or
was about to do, than she sallied out in her long waisted sack, and with her ebony crooked
cane, to give vent to her disapprobation; and as this was done in pretty harsh terms; as she
so frequently had seen the consequences which had been produced, it would have been
politic, if she could have put a check upon this effervescence of wrath; but she never
attempted it. And if, over a sixpenny pool with her village friends, any anecdote had been
related of the Antic Villa, (as not very unaptly it was called by the sober set at Marlow,)
the next morning Mrs. Deborah Moreton was sure to be seen walking off; and as she
passed some of the sisterhood, she would put in her sharp nose at their open windows,
and say "You see I am as good as my word; I am going to give her a good round lecture!" We have informed our readers how these lectures usually turned out; but nothing
discomfited the old lady; at her return she greeted her curious friends with, "Well! I have
done my duty, I have told her a piece of my mind; now she may chuse whether she will
hearken to it!" How seldom is the language of truth heard by young women in Miss
Moreton's situation!