Is it in any one thing noble or
praise-worthy? You are silent, you dare not-cannot answer me!" A pause of the Corinna was
here followed by, "In providing bread for ourselves and our children-in honest industry-in
weaving for our employers-hear her, hear, hear, hear," was the prevailing cry, and Corinna was
suffered to proceed. -"In providing bread for yourselves and your children! you say-How? By
the labours of your hands; but what is your labour?-the weaving of a few gaudy ribbons, which
ought to be prohibited in an enlightened country.-Is the manufacturing these tasteless, useless
ornaments, a worthy object for men-men, who have arms to chissel out the hero's form, and
eyes that with Promethean fire can animate their work? Vain, vain do you complain of hard
labour and scanty pay-for what is the intrinsic use of your achievements?-The attenuated
thread of blue! The soft and silky ribbon to catch the eyes of childhood and frivolity!-Shame,
shame on these inglorious occupations! Was it for people such as these, that the fair, the chaste
Godiva, adventured her beauteous form, unclothed, uncovered, through your narrow streets? Was it for ribbon-weavers alone? No! she fondly prophesied that a race of painters, poets,
heroes, should spring up in after times, burning with her patriotism, fraught with her enthusiasm,
and glowing as her own sanguine fancy!-Rally, rally yourselves, ye citizens of Coventry! Escape from the delusion by which you are enthralled-seek for more noble pursuits, more
glorious occupations.-I ask no other boon than to be remembered as the humble being who
pointed your talents to a higher aim than that to which you now direct your labours.-People of
Coventry, farewell!-Adieu!" And, gracefully curtseying, and folding her arms emphatically on
her breast, Miss Moreton meant to have sat down again, but this was not allowed; her carriage
was encircled by the wild mob; they jumped on every part of it, with the cries of "Down, down
with the Frenchman, democrat, jacobin-more wages, more wages-Moreton for ever, huzza,
chair her, chair her, huzza. "- "Hiss, hiss, tear down the carriage," was now continued with the
most riotous excess, and intermingled with the most blasphemous and indecent expressions. Poor Mary sunk into a swoon at the feet of Germ, who seemed insensible of her situation,
but fully aware of the disagreeableness of his own, he looked on all sides, but there appeared no
escape. His appearance being rather extraordinary, he was also taken for a Frenchman, and his
spectacles were readily snatched off, and thrown amongst the rioters; this caused such good
diversion, that his hat and wig succeeded, and how far the populace would have proceeded in
forcing all the party to adopt the costume of Lady Godiva is uncertain, for there was now a new
tide in the affairs of things. It was proposed by one of Miss Moreton's admirers, to take out the horses of the carriage,
and to draw her to the Villa. This was eagerly seconded, as the minds of the mobility once
inflamed, they were ready for any mad exploit, and were a great many of them anticipating a
reward, from the known liberality of Miss Moreton.-Delighted, enchanted at this proof of
public devotion, Miss Moreton curtesyed from side to side, like a hero making his triumphal
entry. The horses were presently taken out; men usurped their places; and the gratified Corinna
of Coventry was drawn along, the idol of the people, while poor Mary Cuthbert was luckily
insensible to all that passed. When arrived at the Attic Villa, Miss Moreton descended, amidst the acclamations and
plaudits of a crowd, made up of all the dregs of population in Coventry.-They followed her into
the elegant corridor of the Villa, and a hogshead of strong beer was soon emptied to her health in
the park, whilst her money was as freely bestowed in return for their praises. The day was too
short for their rejoicings; and night came on whilst the park still rang with their tumultuous mirth
and wild revelling. "E'en the lewd rabble, that were gather'd round
"To see the sight, stood mute when they beheld
her;
"Govern'd their roaring throats, and grumbled
pity;
"I could have hugg'd the greasy rogues: They
pleas'd me." OTWAY. MARY Cuthbert had been conveyed to bed by some of the servants, and when she had recovered
her senses, the horrid recollection of the scene which had deprived her of them, recurred with
such force to her mind, that it required all her resolution to prevent herself from being again
overcome; her whole frame was unhinged, and she was glad to be alone in her chamber, though
it was in vain that she courted sleep, for the noise from without would have effectually precluded
it, even had her reflections been of a tranquillizing nature. The Chevalier D'Aubert was not a little rejoiced at being again returned to the Villa with
a whole skin, as some epithets had reached his ears, which led him to believe that he had been in
a dangerous situation. Now he appeared as the ready Mercury of Miss Moreton; and, in
distributing her rewards to the almost "countless multitude," he came in for no small share of
their favour. Germ was very much hurt at the loss of his summer hat, and the demolition of his green
eyes; he could get no glasses to suit him nearer than London, where his optician resided. "The
Spectacle de la Nature" was no spectacle to him now he had lost those assistances of vision; and
he determined to leave the Attic Villa as soon as possible; besides he had been taken for a
Frenchman-a stigma which he felt very severely; though, knowing Miss Moreton's sentiments,
and how highly the Chevalier stood in her favour, he wisely kept his mortification on this
account to himself. Copy stared, and whistled at Miss Moreton's florid account of the public adulation which
she had received.-He thought of a picture of Jack Cade preaching at Smithfield, which he had
remarked in a collection of paintings that he had recently seen; whilst Miss Moreton finished her
description with turning to the Chevalier, and saying, "My friend, nothing ever equalled it,
except when Corinna was crowned at the Capitol in Rome-it reminded me of that; my mind,
my heart was full; and I then attained a new era of my existence!" Corinna then relapsed into a fit of melancholy, yet extatic musing.-She thought of
Montgomery-of the Lord Nelville, who should have beheld her triumph, who should have
witnessed the acclamations which had followed her steps, who should have participated in her
glory and her fame! Fatigued and tired after the exertions which she had undergone on the preceding day,
Miss Moreton had not quitted her pillow, when her aunt Deborah arrived at the Villa. Mary
Cuthbert had just taken her breakfast in the little parlour; she was ill both in mind and body, and
felt a sensation of satisfaction when she saw Mrs. Moreton enter the room, though this was
succeeded by apprehension, when she observed her ruffled countenance. Sitting down in a chair,
and, as if panting for breath, the old lady began-"My patience, help me, child! is all true that I
have heard? Did my niece raise the riots in Coventry yesterday? Tell me the truth-tell it me
all-tell me every syllable you know of the matter, and that directly; I know not which way I got
along; my blood curdles to think, that ever a niece of mine should so have misbehaved herself.-
I see that you are frightened, child, and well enough you may; but speak out, and tell me all you
know about the matter!" Mary obeyed, and gave a narration of what had passed the foregoing
day, as far as she could remember it.-She extenuated Miss Moreton's conduct as much as she
could; she said she did not hear what the nature of her address to the populace had been, for that,
overcome by the noise, and singularity of the scene, she had lost the powers of perception at the
moment when Miss Moreton began to speak. "And I don't wonder at it-I don't wonder at it at all," said Mrs. Deborah; "but lucky was
it for you, that you were in a fit, for you were saved from hearing your cousin, my niece, disgrace
herself.-Oh! that I should ever have lived to see this day;-the respectable name and family of
the Moretons to be so scandalized!-My niece is become the public cry, and the public odium;-
she is called an incendiary-an enemy to her country, the friend of the French and a secret
emissary of Buonaparte. The whole town of Coventry was a scene of riot and confusion last
night; and the mob were only dispersed by the military this morning. The ringleaders of these
disturbances were taken to prison, where, if the head had been carried along with them, it would
have served her right." "You affright and astonish me, Madam," said the trembling Mary; "surely Miss Moreton
could not foresee such dreadful consequences; I do not think she can have been told of these
alarming events." "She! no; she sleeps securely, like another Helen, or any other of the wretches
that she imitates. "After she had intoxicated all the wretched gang that followed and brought her here, it
seems that they re-assembled at midnight, round the houses of the principal manufacturers in
Coventry, and declared they would not work unless their wages were raised, and that Miss
Moreton would uphold them in their resolution. It was in vain that the respectable manufacturers
would have spoke peace; they would neither hear peace or reason; they assailed their houses with
stones and brickbats; windows were demolished in a moment; and nothing seemed capable of
opposing their licentious and mad-headed folly, till an armed force was called out; and, as I told
you before, the ring-leaders were put under confinement. "And, now, behold the consequences of this wild girl's conduct; not a single loom is at
work this blessed day, in the whole city of Coventry, and at night when the poor woman shall
look round on her supperless babes, and think of her imprisoned husband, it will go hard, but she
will curse the name of Moreton!" "My dearest Madam," said Mary, "I can say nothing to comfort you, except that, seeing
the sad consequences of giving way to such impetuous and romantic feelings, I trust Miss
Moreton will, for the future, adopt a different and more retired mode of conduct." "Of that I have no hopes," said Mrs. Deborah, an expression of bitter sorrow
overspreading her marked features. "A young woman, any woman who could voluntarily set out
to witness the procession of the naked Lady Godiva, must be lost to decency, as well as to the
sense of public opinion!" "There you must give me leave to acquit Miss Moreton, Madam," said Mary eagerly; "I
am sure her being in Coventry at such an unfortunate time was purely accidental, as I heard her
repeatedly inquire the meaning of the throng, and heard the servant inform her." "If there is any circumstance, which can take off from the edge of my feelings upon the
present occasion, it is," said Mrs. Deborah, "the general detestation in which that French Dobbert
is held; I do not think he can shew his face again in this neighbourhood, without endangering his
safety; and I trust that my niece must be quit of him soon, in order to secure herself. Think what
have been my sufferings! but indeed, child, I ought not to say think, for I see by your looks that
you have been a sufferer also; but alas! you cannot form an adequate estimate of my agonies; for
I still love my niece, whilst I abhor and detest her faults. I still cling to her as the dear child of
my only brother, the last branch of the Moreton family; while she repulses my advice-repulses
and disdains me!" Mrs. Deborah now leant back on her chair (the first time that Mary Cuthbert had ever
seen her verge from the perpendicular position since she had known her), and sobbed aloud! Mary wept with the old lady; for she sincerely sympathised in her affliction. Miss
Moreton refused to see her aunt, on a plea of indisposition; but, in reality, she wished not to have
the pleasing visions of fancy broken in upon, by obsolete lectures on prudence and propriety; and
she was busily engaged with the Chevalier in a re-perusal of the celebrated Corinna's public
entry at the Capitol, and making a comparison between it, and her own triumph at Coventry. The Chevalier determined for her, that she had arrived to the sublime height of her
model; and that, in England, it was impossible to have gone further than she had done in the
enthusiasm of genius and sentimentality! Mrs. Deborah Moreton was much hurt at being refused admittance by her niece; but,
telling Mary Cuthbert that she should repeat her visit the next morning, she walked off, alleging
as an excuse for not staying the day at the Villa, that she wanted to make a few visits in her
immediate vicinity, to try to hear what was said of her niece, and to endeavour to extenuate her
conduct, if possible. "Keep up your spirits, my good girl," said she to Mary, on taking her cane,
and going away; "I see that you are almost as much overcome as myself; but we must put the
best face on the business." Mary Cuthbert felt that she was indeed overcome; she was weak both
in frame and spirits; the remainder of the day was passed in solitary abstraction. For the first time
in her life, she found it impossible to employ herself; her heart was sick, and her spirits were in
too irritable a state for any sort of application. Mr. Germ had taken his leave with the dawn of morning, and was gone to London to seek
new spectacles, with which he might again astonish the eyes of the vulgar; in fact this great
philosopher did not like to be stared at for a reptile Frenchman, in a neighbourhood that was so
soon in commotion; and probably this was the latent reason of the Chevalier's detaining Miss
Moreton in the Boudoir the whole of the morning. The quiet and inoffensive Copy had taken advantage of Miss Moreton's engagement
above stairs, to draw a group at a village ale-house a few miles on his road towards town; and
hence the day was passed in uninterrupted solitude by Mary (our Heroine in the Shade! ), who
sought her pillow very early in the evening, her head throbbing from nervous agitation, and her
mental retrospection being of a most unpleasant kind. She had no friend, in whose breast she could repose her fears and her sorrows. Miss
Davenport had left the Cottage for a few weeks; and, an isolated being in the vast world, our
youthful and interesting orphan bathed her pillow with the tears which were wrung from her eyes
by the bitterness of her feelings! She reverted to that recent period, when, embosomed in
domestic privacy and in fond affection, she had never known a care. The sad reverse was too
distressing to be contemplated with tranquillity; yet, aware of the weakness and folly of giving
way to despondency and unavailing retrospections, Mary tried to tranquillize her spirits, and to
put her trust in that Almighty Being who had hitherto preserved her. For a few moments her fond, her female heart, turned towards Montgomery. What would
have been the indignant emotions of his generous breast, had he witnessed the distressing scene
of yesterday? Blushes dyed her cheeks at the idea-she hoped he would never hear of it; and yet
he alone could enter into the real nature of her distressing feelings! She longed for the period of Miss Davenport's return; that kind, that disinterested friend,
would console her by her conversation; would embolden her by her example; and would yield
her her advice with regard to her future conduct, with a final reference of every thing that
regarded herself, to an all-wise, and an all-seeing Being. Mary, at length, sunk into a quiet slumber, from whence she was awoke by loud and
tumultuous shouts-shrieks of distress were mingled with peals of riotous mirth; the crashing of
glass; the pelting of stones; repeated knockings from without, hurried steps from within-"Pull
out the Frenchman,"-"throw out the spy,"-"the French spy,"-"the democrat,"-"we'll tear
down the house," were sentences which Mary plainly distinguished. The assailants levelled their
attacks at her windows; and, at the moment she was getting out of bed, a fragment of glass,
impelled by a large stone, sprung to her face, and stuck into her temple. Terribly frightened, not
daring to stay in the room, and afraid to leave it, the situation of Mary was truly pitiable. In the hurry of the moment she hastily put on her clothes; and then, assuming desperate
resolution, she ran wildly round the corridor gallery to the chamber of Miss Moreton. The door
of it was open, but Miss Moreton was not there. The noise and tumult increased; and poor Mary,
almost sinking with apprehension, and trembling all over, sat down on a chair. She heard the hasty pacing of the domestics in the passages, who seemed to be in as great
consternation as herself. At length the house-maid appeared, "Oh! law's mercy me! Miss
Cuthbert, be you here? I've been in your room a calling, and a calling, and nobody spoke, and I
thought as how you must be quite gone dead, with fright, and I was fear'd to carry a candle for
fear the rioters should see me pass along." "Where is your mistress?" asked Mary, "where is Miss
Moreton?" "Oh! she is got out on top of the balcony to preach to'em again, as she did t'other day
in Coventry, and to try to send 'em off." "What is it all about?" "Oh! they wants the Civilear, Mr.
Dobbert; they say as how he be a French spy, and a send here he. And I believe for the matter of
that, he's no better than he should be; but he's off far enough from 'em all by this time; he sat off
last night by dusk of evening, and Miss Moreton put 'en upon the very best horse she had in the
stable. But Miss Moreton can't make the people believe it for the life of her, though she preaches
ever so; and I do think, if they still believe that he be really here, they will set fire to the house,
and burn us all in it!" Mary shuddered; at this moment the uproar increased with redoubled violence; the great
doors of the corridor were undrawn by Miss Moreton's orders; she gave the rioters leave to
search the house for the fugitive; this was their ostensible motive, but pillage, wild riot, and
devastation ensued. Miss Moreton could not precede or follow twenty furious men eager for
plunder, and already in a state of phrenzical intoxication. Her elegant apartments were rudely
searched; her costly furniture torn and disfigured; an eager booty made of the most portable and
valuable articles, and her ears assailed on all sides by wanton and indecent exclamations! Poor Mary shrieked with affright, when she saw three of the licentious rioters enter the
chamber where she had taken refuge. They held a candle to her face; the picture of affright which
was there displayed to the view, seemed to have some effect, even on their brutish and besotted
faculties; they presently quitted the apartment, and left the unhappy girl in a state of insensibility,
extended on the floor! It was not till day-break that the rioters were dispersed, and Miss Moreton's money had
been plentifully distributed amongst them, ere she could succeed in dismissing her self-invited
guests! The adventures of this night had not been quite in unison with the picturesque visions of
her imagination. In order to ensure the safety of her Platonic and sentimental friend, she had advanced him
a large sum of money to provide for his flight, but she could have formed no idea of the
succeeding events.