'Sir, I am no seducer.' 'No,' cried Adeline: 'I became the mistress of Mr Glenmurray from the
dictates of my reason, not my weakness or his persuasions.' 'Humph!' replied the doctor, 'I should expect to find such reason in
Moorfields: besides, had not Mr Glenmurray's books turned your head, you
would not have thought it pretty and right to become the mistress of any
man: so he is your seducer, after all.' 'So far I plead guilty,' replied Glenmurray; 'but whatever my opinions
are, I have ever been willing to sacrifice them to the welfare of Miss
Mowbray, and have, from the first moment that we were safe from pursuit,
been urgent to marry her.' 'Then why are you not married?' 'Because I would not consent,' said Adeline coldly. 'Mad, certainly mad,' exclaimed the doctor: 'but you, 'faith, you are an
honest fellow after all,' turning to Glenmurray and shaking him by the
hand; 'weak of the head, not bad in the heart; burn your vile books,
and I am your friend for ever.' 'We will discuss that point another time,' replied Glenmurray: 'at
present the most interesting subject to us is the question whether Mrs
Mowbray will forgive her daughter or not?' 'Why, man, if I may judge of Mrs Mowbray by myself, one condition of her
forgiveness will be your marrying her daughter.' 'O blest condition!' cried Glenmurray. 'I should think,' replied Adeline coldly, 'my mother must have had too
much of marriage to wish me to marry; but if she should insist on my
marrying, I will comply, and on no other account.' 'Strange infatuation! To me appears only justice and duty. But your
reasons, girl, your reasons?' 'They are few, but strong. Glenmurray, philanthropically bent on
improving the state of society, puts forth opinions counteracting its
received usages, backed by arguments which are in my opinion
incontrovertible.' 'In your opinion!--Pray, child, how old are you?' 'Nineteen.' 'And at that age you set up for a reformer? Well,--go on.' 'But though it be important to the success of his opinions, and indeed
to the respectability of his character, that he should act according to
his precepts, he, for the sake of preserving to me the notice of persons
whose narrowness of mind I despise, would conform to an institution
which both he and I think unworthy of regard from a rational being.--And
shall not I be as generous as he is? shall I scruple to give up for his
honour and fame the petty advantages which marriage would give me? Never--his honour and fame are too dear to me; but the claims which my
mother has on me are in my eyes so sacred that, for her sake, though not
for my own, I would accept the sacrifice which Glenmurray offers. If,
then, she says that she will never see or pardon me till I am become
a wife, I will follow him to the altar directly; but till then I must
insist on remaining as I am. It is necessary that I should respect the
man I love; and I should not respect Glenmurray were he not capable of
supporting with fortitude the consequences of his opinions; and could
he, for motives less strong than those he avows, cease to act up to what
he believes to be right. For, never can I respect or believe firmly in
the truth of those doctrines, the followers of which shrink from a sort
of martyrdom in support of them.' 'O Mr Glenmurray!' cried the doctor shaking his head, 'what have you
to answer for! What a glorious champion would that creature have
been in the support of truth, when even error in her looks so like to
virtue!--And then the amiable disinterestedness of you both!--What
a powerful thing must true love be, when it can make a speculative
philosopher indifferent to the interests of his system, and ready to act
in direct opposition to it, rather than injure the respectability of the
woman he loves! Well, well, the Lord forgive you, young man, for having
taken it into your head to set up for a great author!' Glenmurray answered by a deep-drawn sigh; and the doctor continued:
'Then there is that girl again, with a heart so fond and true that her
love comes in aid of her integrity, and makes her think no sacrifice
too great, in order to prove her confidence in the wisdom of her
lover,--urging her to disregard all personal inconveniences rather than
let him forfeit, for her sake, his pretensions to independence and
consistency of character! girl, I can't help admiring you, but no more I
could a Malabar widow, who with fond and pious enthusiasm, from an idea
of duty, throws herself on the funeral pile of her husband. But still
I should think you a great fool, notwithstanding, for professing the
opinions that led to such an exertion of duty. And now here are you,
possessed of every quality both of head and heart to bless others and to
bless yourself--owing to your foolish and pernicious opinions;--here you
are, I say blasted in reputation in the prime of your days, and doomed
perhaps to pine through existence in--Pshaw! I can't support the idea!' added he, gulping down a sob as he spoke, and traversing the room in
great emotion. Adeline and Glenmurray were both of them deeply and painfully affected;
and the latter was going to express what he felt, when the doctor
seizing Adeline's hand, affectionately exclaimed, 'Well, my poor child! I will see your mother once more; I will go to London tomorrow--by this
time she is there--and you had better follow me; you will hear of me at
the Old Hummums; and here is a card of address to an hotel near it,
where I would advise you to take up your abode.' So saying he shook Glenmurray by the hand; when, starting back, he
exclaimed 'Why, man! here is a skin like fire, and a pulse like
lightning. My dear fellow, you must take care of yourself.' Adeline burst into tears. 'Indeed, doctor, I am only nervous.' 'Nervous!--What, I suppose you think you understand my profession better
than I do. But don't cry, my child: when your mind is easier, perhaps,
he will do very well; and, as one thing likely to give him immediate
ease, I prescribe a visit to the altar of the next parish church.' So saying he departed; and all other considerations were again swallowed
up in Adeline's mind by the idea of Glenmurray's danger. 'Is it possible that my marrying you would have such a blessed effect on
your health?' cried Adeline after a pause. 'It certainly would make my mind easier than it now is,' replied he. 'If I thought so,' said Adeline: 'but no--regard for my supposed
interest merely makes you say so; and indeed I should not think so well
of you as I now do, if I imagined that you could be made easy by an
action by which you forfeited all pretensions to that consistency of
character so requisite to the true dignity of a philosopher.' A deep sigh from Glenmurray, in answer, proved that he was no
philosopher. In the morning the lovers set off for London, Dr Norberry having
preceded them by a few hours. This blunt but benevolent man had returned
the evening before slowly and pensively to his lodgings, his heart full
of pity for the errors of the well-meaning enthusiasts whom he had left,
and his head full of plans for their assistance, or rather for that of
Adeline. But he entered his own doors again reluctantly--he knew but too
well that no sympathy with his feelings awaited him there. His wife, a
woman of narrow capacity and no talents or accomplishments, had, like
all women of that sort, a great aversion to those of her sex who
united to feminine graces and gentleness, the charms of a cultivated
understanding and pretensions to accomplishments or literature. Of Mrs Mowbray, as we have before observed, she had always been
peculiarly jealous, because Dr Norberry spoke of her knowledge
with wonder, and of her understanding with admiration; not that he
entertained one moment a feeling of preference towards her, inconsistent
with an almost idolatrous love of his wife, whose skill in all the
domestic duties, and whose very pretty face and person, were the daily
themes of his praise. But Mrs Norberry wished to engross all his
panegyrics to herself, and she never failed to expatiate on Mrs
Mowbray's foibles and flightiness as long as the doctor had expatiated
on her charms. Sometimes, indeed, this last subject was sooner exhausted than the one
which she had chosen; but when Adeline grew up, and became as it were
the rival of her daughters in the praises of her husband, she found it
difficult as we have said before, to bring faults in array against
excellencies. Mrs Norberry could with propriety observe, when the doctor, was
exclaiming, 'What a charming essay Mrs Mowbray has just written!' 'Aye,--but I dare say she can't write a market bill.' When he said, 'How well she comprehends the component parts of the
animal system!' She could with great justice reply, 'But she knows nothing of the
component parts of a plum pudding.' But when Adeline became the object of the husband's admiration and the
wife's enmity, Mrs Norberry could not make these pertinent remarks, as
Adeline was as conversant with all branches of housewifery as herself;
and, though as learned in all systems as her mother, was equally learned
in the component parts of puddings and pies. She was therefore at a loss
what to say when Adeline was praised by the doctor; and all she could
observe on the occasion was, that the girl might be clever, but was
certainly very ugly, very affected, and very conceited. It is not to be wondered at, therefore, that Mrs Mowbray's degrading and
unhappy marriage, and Adeline's elopement, should have been sources of
triumph to Mrs Norberry and her daughters; who, though they liked Mrs
Mowbray very well, could not bear Adeline. 'So Dr Norberry, these are your uncommon folks!' --exclaimed Mrs Norberry
on hearing of the marriage and of the subsequent elopement;--'I suppose
you are now well satisfied at not having a genius for your wife, or
geniuses for your daughters?' 'I always was, my dear,' meekly replied the mortified and afflicted
doctor, and dropped the subject as soon as possible; nor had it been
resumed for some time when Adeline accosted them on the beach at
Brighton. But her appearance called forth their dormant enmity; and the
whole way to their lodgings the good doctor heard her guilt expatiated
upon with as much violence as ever: but just as they got home he coldly
and firmly observed, 'I shall certainly call on the poor deluded girl
this evening.' And Mrs Norberry, knowing by the tone and manner in which he spoke, that
this was a point which he would not give up, contented herself with
requiring only that he should go in the dark hour. It was to a wife and daughters such as these that he was returning, with
the benevolent wish of interesting them for the guilty Adeline. 'So, Dr Norberry, you are come back at last!' was his first salutation,
'and what does the creature say for herself?' 'The creature!--Your fellow-creature, my dear, says very little--grief
is not wordy.' 'Grief!--So then she is unhappy, is she?' cries Miss Norberry; 'I am
monstrous glad of it.' The doctor started; and an oath nearly escaped his lips. He did say,
'Why, zounds, Jane!' --but then he added, in a softer tone, 'Why do you
rejoice in a poor girl's affliction?' 'Because I think it is for the good of her soul.' 'Good girl!' replied the father:--'Jane, (seizing her hand,) may your
soul never need such a medicine!' 'It never will,' said her mother proudly: 'she has been differently
brought up.' 'She has been well brought up, you might have added,' observed the
doctor, 'had modesty permitted it. Mrs Mowbray, poor woman, had good
intentions; but she was too flighty. Had Adeline, my children, had such
a mother as yours, she would have been like you.' 'But not half so handsome,' interrupted the mother in a low voice. 'But as our faults and our virtues, my dear, depend so much on the care
and instruction of others, we should look with pity, as well as aversion
on the faults of those less fortunate in instructors than we have been.' 'Certainly;--very true,' said Mrs Norberry, flattered and affected by
this compliment from her husband: 'but you know, James Norberry,' laying
her hand on his, 'I always told you you overrated Mrs Mowbray; and that
she was but a dawdle after all.' 'You always did, my good woman,' replied he, raising her hand to his
lips. 'But you men think yourselves much wiser than we are!' 'We do so,' replied the doctor. The tone was equivocal--Mrs Norberry felt it to be so, and looked up
in his face.--The doctor understood the look: it was one of doubt and
inquiry; and, as it was his interest to sooth her in order to carry his
point, he exclaimed, 'We men are, indeed, too apt to pride ourselves in
our supposed superior wisdom: but I, you will own, my dear, have always
done your sex justice; and you in particular.' 'You have been a good husband indeed, James Norberry,' replied his wife
in a faltering voice; 'and I believe you to be, to every one, a just and
honourable man.' 'And I dare say, dame, I do no more than justice to you, when I think
you will approve and further a plan for Adeline Mowbray's good, which I
am going to propose to you.' Mrs Norberry withdrew her hand; but returning it again:--'To be sure,
my dear,' she cried. 'Any thing you wish; that is, if I see right to--'

'I will explain myself,' continued the doctor gently. 'I have promised this poor girl to endeavour to bring about a
reconciliation between her and her mother; but though Adeline wishes
to receive her pardon on any terms, and even, if it be required, to
renounce her lover, I fear Mrs Mowbray is too much incensed against her,
to see or forgive her.' 'Hard-hearted woman!' cried Mrs Norberry. 'Cruel, indeed!' cried her daughters. 'But a mother ought to be severe, very severe, on such occasions, young
ladies,' hastily added Mrs Norberry: 'but go on, my dear.' 'Now it is but too probable,' continued the doctor, 'that Glenmurray
will not live long, and then this young creature will be left to
struggle unprotected with the difficulties of her situation; and who
knows but that she may, from poverty, and the want of a protector, be
tempted to continue in the paths of vice?' 'Well, Dr Norberry, and what then?--Who or what is to prevent it?--You
know we have three children to provide for; and I am a young woman as
yet.' 'True, Hannah,' giving her a kiss, 'and a very pretty woman too.' 'Well, my dear love, anything we can do with prudence I am ready to do;
I can say no more.' 'You have said enough,' cried the doctor exultingly; 'then hear my plan:
Adeline shall, in the event of Glenmurray's death, which though not
certain seems likely--to be sure, I did not inquire into the nature of
his nocturnal perspirations, his expectoration, and so forth--'

'Dear papa, you are so professional!' affectedly exclaimed his youngest
daughter. 'Well, child, I have done; and to return to my subject--if Glenmurray
lives or dies, I think it advisable that Adeline should go into
retirement to lie-in. And where can she be better than in my little
cottage now empty, within a four-miles ride of our house? If she wants
protection, I can protect her; and if she wants money before her mother
forgives her, you can give it to her.' 'Indeed, papa,' cried both the girls, 'we shall not grudge it.' The doctor started from his chair, and embraced his daughters with joy
mixed with wonder; for he knew they had always disliked Adeline.--True;
but then, she was prosperous, and their superior. Little minds love to
bestow protection; and it was easy to be generous to the fallen Adeline
Mowbray: had her happiness continued, so would their hatred. 'Then it is a settled point, is it not dame?' asked the doctor, chucking
his wife under the chin; when, to his great surprise and consternation,
she threw his hand indignantly from her, and vociferated, 'She shall
never live within a ride of our house, I can assure you, Dr Norberry.' The doctor was petrified into silence, and the girls could only
articulate 'La! mamma?' But what could produce this sudden and violent
change? Nothing but a simple and natural operation of the human mind. Though a very kind husband, and an indulgent father, Dr Norberry was
suspected, though unjustly, of being a very gallant man: and some of Mrs
Norberry's good-natured friends had occasionally hinted to her their
sorrow at hearing such and such reports; reports which were indeed
destitute of foundation; but which served to excite suspicions in the
mind of the tenacious Mrs Norberry. And what more likely to re-awaken
them than the young and frail Adeline Mowbray living in a cottage of her
husband's, protected, supported, and visited by him! The moment this
idea occurred, its influence was unconquerable; and with a voice and
manner of determined hostility she made known her resolves in
consequence of it. After a pause of dismay and astonishment, the doctor cried, 'Dame, what
have you gotten in your head? What, all on a sudden, has had such an
ugly effect on you?' 'Second thoughts are best, doctor; and I now feel that it would be
highly improper for you, with daughters grown up, to receive with such
marked kindness a single young woman at a cottage of yours, who is going
to lie-in.' 'But, my dear, it is a different case, when I do it to keep her out of
the way of further harm.' 'That is more than I know, Dr Norberry,' replied the wife bridling, and
fanning herself. 'Whew!' whistled the doctor; and then addressing his daughters, 'Girls,
you had better go to bed; it grows late.' The young ladies obeyed; but first hung round their mother's neck, as
they bade her good night, and hoped she would not be so cruel to the
poor deluded Adeline. Mrs Norberry angrily shook them off, with a peevish--'Get along, girls.' The doctor cordially kissed, and bade God bless them; while the door
closed and left the loving couple alone. What passed, it were tedious to repeat: suffice that after a long
altercation, continued even after they were retired to rest, the doctor
found his wife, on this subject, incapable of listening to reason, and
that, as a finishing stroke, she exclaimed, 'It does not signify talking,
Dr Norberry, while I have my senses, and can see into a mill-stone a
little, the hussey shall never come near us.' The doctor sighed deeply; turned himself round, not to sleep but to
think, and rose the next morning to go in search of Mrs Mowbray,
dreading the interview which he was afterwards to have with Adeline; for
he did not expect to succeed in his application to her mother, and he
could not now soften his intelligence with a 'but,' as he intended. 'True,' he meant to have said to her, 'your mother will not receive you;
but if you ever want a home or a place of retirement, I have a cottage,
and so forth.' 'Pshaw!' cried the doctor to himself, as these thoughts came across him
on the road, and made him hastily let down the front window of the
post-chaise for air. 'Did your honour speak?' cries the post-boy. 'Not I. But can't you drive faster and be hanged to you?' The boy whipped his horses.--The doctor then found that it was up
hill--down went the glass again:--'Hold, you brute, why do you not see
it is up hill?' For find fault he must; and with his wife he could not,
or dared not, even in fancy. 'Dear me! Why, your honour bade me put it on.' 'Devilishly obedient,' muttered the doctor: 'I wish every one was like
you in that respect.' --And in a state of mind not the pleasantest
possible the doctor drove into town, and to the hotel where Mrs Mowbray
was to be found. Dr Norberry was certainly now not in a humour to sooth any woman whom he
thought in the wrong, except his wife; and, whether from carelessness or
design, he did not, unfortunately for Adeline, manage the self-love of
her unhappy mother. He found Mrs Mowbray with her heart shut up, not softened by sorrow. The hands once stretched forth with kindness to welcome him, were
now stiffly laid one upon the other; and 'How are you, sir?' coldly
articulated, was followed by as cold a 'Pray sit down.' 'Why, how ill you look!' exclaimed the doctor. 'I attend more to my feelings than my looks,' with a deep sigh, answered
Mrs Mowbray. 'Your feelings are as bad as your looks, I dare say.' 'They are worse, sir,' said Mrs Mowbray piqued. 'There was no need of that,' replied the doctor: 'but I am come to
point out to you one way of getting rid of some of your unpleasant
feelings:--see, and forgive your daughter.' Mrs Mowbray started, changed colour, and exclaimed with quickness, 'Is
she in England?' but added instantly, 'I have no daughter:--she, who was
my child, is my most inveterate foe; she has involved me in disgrace and
misery.' 'With a little of your own help she has,' replied the doctor. 'Come,
come, my old friend, you have both of you something to forget and
forgive; and the sooner you set about it the better. Now do write, and
tell Adeline, who is by this time in London, that you forgive her.' 'Never:--after having promised me not to hold converse with that villain
without my consent? Had I no other cause of complaint against her;--had
she not by her coquettish arts seduced the affections of the man I
loved:--never, never would I forgive her having violated the sacred
promise which she gave me.' 'A promise,' interrupted the doctor, 'which she would never have
violated, had not you first violated that sacred compact which you
entered into at her birth.' 'What mean you, sir?' 'I mean, that though a parent does not, at a child's birth, solemnly
make a vow to do all in his or her power to promote the happiness of
that child,--still, as he has given it birth, he has tacitly bound
himself to make it happy. This tacit agreement you broke, when at the
age of forty, you, regardless of your daughter's welfare, played the
fool and married a pennyless profligate, merely because he had a fine
person and a handsome leg.' Mrs Mowbray was too angry and too agitated to interrupt him, and he went
on:

'Well, what was the consequence? The young fellow very naturally
preferred the daughter to the mother; and, as he could not have her by
fair, was resolved to have her by foul means; and so he--'

'I beg, Dr Norberry,' interrupted Mrs Mowbray in a faint voice, 'that
you would spare the disgusting recital.' 'Well, well, I will. Now do consider the dilemma your child was in: she
must either elope, or by her presence keep alive a criminal passion in
her father-in-law, which you sooner or later must discover; and be
besides exposed to fresh insults.--Well, Glenmurray by chance happened
to be on the spot just as she escaped from that villanous fellow's
clutches, and--'

'He is dead, Dr Norberry,' interrupted Mrs Mowbray; 'and you know the
old adage, "Do not speak ill of the dead."' 'And a very silly adage it is. I had rather speak ill of the dead than
the living, for my part: but let me go on.--Well, love taking the name
and habit of prudence and filial piety, (for she thought she consulted
your happiness, and not her own,) bade her fly to and with her lover;
and now there she is, owing to the pretty books which you let her read,
living with him as his mistress, and glorying in it, as if it was a
notable praiseworthy action.' 'And you would have me forgive her?' 'Certainly: a fault which both your precepts and conduct occasioned. Not
but what the girl has been wrong, terribly wrong:--no one ought to do
evil that good may come. You had forbidden her to have any intercourse
with Glenmurray; and she therefore knew that disobeying you would make
you unhappy--that was a certainty. That fellow's persevering in his
attempts, after the fine rebuff which she had given him, was an
uncertainty; and she ought to have run the risk of it, and not committed
a positive fault to avoid a possible evil. But then hers was a fault
which she could not have committed had not you married that--but I
forbear. And as to her not being married to Glenmurray, that is no
fault of his; and with your consent, he will marry your daughter
to-morrow morning. That ever so good, cleanly-hearted a youth should
have poked his nose into the filthy mess of eccentric philosophy!' 'Have you done, doctor?' cried Mrs Mowbray haughtily: 'have you said all
that Miss Mowbray and you have invented to insult me?' 'Your child send me to insult you!--She!--Adeline!--Why, the poor soul
came broken-hearted and post haste from France, when she heard of your
misfortunes, to offer her services to console you.' 'She console me?--she, the first occasion of them?--But for her, I might
still have indulged the charming delusion, even if it were delusion,
that love of me, not of my wealth, induced the man I doted upon to
commit a crime to gain possession of me.'