cried the dean of guild, with great eagerness; "wha told you
that we are to be contested?" Nobody had told me, nor at the moment was I sensible of the force of what
I said; but, seeing the effect it had on Mr M'Lucre, I replied,--

"It does not, perhaps, just now do for me to be more particular, and I
hope what I have said to you will gang no further; but it's a great pity
that ye're no even a bailie this year, far less the provost, otherwise I
would have great confidence." "Then," said the dean of guild, "you have reason to believe that there is
to be a dissolution, and that we are to be contested?" "Mr M'Lucre, dinna speer any questions," was my answer, "but look at that
and say nothing;" so I pulled out of my pocket a letter that had been
franked to me by the earl. The letter was from James Portoport, his
lordship's butler, who had been a waiter with Mrs Pawkie's mother, and he
was inclosing to me a five-pound note to be given to an auld aunty that
was in need. But the dean of guild knew nothing of our correspondence,
nor was it required that he should. However, when he saw my lord's
franking, he said, "Are the boroughs, then, really and truly to be
contested?" "Come into the shop, Mr M'Lucre," said I sedately; "come in, and hear
what I have to say." And he came in, and I shut and barred the half-door, in order that we
might not be suddenly interrupted. "You are a man of experience, Mr M'Lucre," said I, "and have a knowledge
of the world, that a young man, like me, would be a fool to pretend to. But I have shown you enough to convince you that I would not be worthy of
a trust, were I to answer any improper questions. Ye maun, therefore,
gie me some small credit for a little discretion in this matter, while I
put a question to yourself. 'Is there no a possibility of getting you
made the provost at Michaelmas, or, at the very least, a bailie, to the
end that ye might be chosen delegate, it being an unusual thing for
anybody under the degree of a bailie to be chosen thereto?'" "I have been so long in the guildry," was his thoughtful reply, "that I
fear it canna be very well managed without me." "Mr M'Lucre," said I, and I took him cordially by the hand, "a thought
has just entered my head. Couldna we manage this matter between us? It's
true I'm but a novice in public affairs, and with the mystery of the
guildry quite unacquaint--if, however, you could be persuaded to allow
yourself to be made a bailie, I would, subject to your directions,
undertake the office of dean of guild, and all this might be so concerted
between us, that nobody would ken the nature of our paction--for, to be
plain with you, it's no to be hoped that such a young counsellor as
myself can reasonably expect to be raised, so soon as next Michaelmas, to
the magistracy, and there is not another in the council that I would like
to see chosen delegate at the election but yourself." Mr M'Lucre swithered a little at this, fearing to part with the bird he
had in hand; but, in the end, he said, that he thought what was proposed
no out of the way, and that he would have no objection to be a bailie for
the next year, on condition that I would, in the following, let him again
be dean of guild, even though he should be called a Michaelmas mare, for
it did not so well suit him to be a bailie as to be dean of guild, in
which capacity he had been long used. I guessed in this that he had a vista in view of the tacks and leases
that were belyve to fall in, and I said--

"Nothing can be more reasonable, Mr M'Lucre; for the office of dean of
guild must be a very fashious one, to folks like me, no skilled in its
particularities; and I'm sure I'll be right glad and willing to give it
up, when we hae got our present turn served.--But to keep a' things quiet
between us, let us no appear till after the election overly thick;
indeed, for a season, we maun fight, as it were, under different
colours." Thus was the seed sown of a great reformation in the burgh, the sprouting
whereof I purpose to describe in due season. The sough of the dissolution of parliament, during the whole of the
summer, grew stronger and stronger, and Mr M'Lucre and me were seemingly
pulling at opposite ends of the rope. There was nothing that he proposed
in the council but what I set myself against with such bir and vigour,
that sometimes he could scarcely keep his temper, even while he was
laughing in his sleeve to see how the other members of the corporation
were beglammered. At length Michaelmas drew near, when I, to show, as it
were, that no ill blood had been bred on my part, notwithstanding our
bickerings, proposed in the council that Mr M'Lucre should be the new
bailie; and he on his part, to manifest, in return, that there was as
little heart-burning on his, said "he would have no objections; but then
he insisted that I should consent to be dean of guild in his stead." "It's true," said he in the council on that occasion, "that Mr Pawkie is
as yet but a greenhorn in the concerns of the burgh: however, he'll never
learn younger, and if he'll agree to this, I'll gie him all the help and
insight that my experience enables me to afford." At the first, I pretended that really, as was the truth, I had no
knowledge of what were the duties of dean of guild; but after some
fleeching from the other councillors, I consented to have the office, as
it were, forced upon me; so I was made dean of guild, and Mr M'Lucre the
new bailie. By and by, when the harvest in England was over, the parliament was
dissolved, but no candidate started on my lord's interest, as was
expected by Mr M'Lucre, and he began to fret and be dissatisfied that he
had ever consented to allow himself to be hoodwinked out of the guildry. However, just three days before the election, and at the dead hour of the
night, the sound of chariot wheels and of horsemen was heard in our
streets; and this was Mr Galore, the great Indian nabob, that had bought
the Beerland estates, and built the grand place that is called Lucknoo
House, coming from London, with the influence of the crown on his side,
to oppose the old member. He drove straight to Provost Picklan's house,
having, as we afterwards found out, been in a secret correspondence with
him through the medium of Mrs Picklan, who was conjunct in the business
with Miss Nelly, the nabob's maiden sister. Mr M'Lucre was not a little
confounded at this, for he had imagined that I was the agent on behalf of
my lord, who was of the government side, so he wist not what to do, in
the morning when he came to me, till I said to him briskly--

"Ye ken, bailie, that ye're trysted to me, and it's our duty to support
the nabob, who is both able and willing, as I have good reason to think,
to requite our services in a very grateful manner." This was a cordial
to his spirit, and, without more ado, we both of us set to work to get
the bailie made the delegate. In this I had nothing in view but the good
of my country by pleasuring, as it was my duty, his majesty's government,
for I was satisfied with my situation as dean of guild. But the handling
required no small slight of skill. The first thing was, to persuade those that were on the side of the old
member to elect Mr M'Lucre for delegate, he being, as we had concerted,
openly declared for that interest, and the benefit to be gotten thereby
having, by use and wont, been at an established and regular rate. The
next thing was to get some of those that were with me on my lord's side,
kept out of the way on the day of choosing the delegate; for we were the
strongest, and could easily have returned the provost, but I had no clear
notion how it would advantage me to make the provost delegate, as was
proposed. I therefore, on the morning of the business, invited three of
the council to take their breakfast with me, for the ostensible purpose
of going in a body to the council chamber to choose the provost delegate;
but when we were at breakfast, John Snakers, my lad in the shop, by my
suggestion, warily got a bale of broad cloth so tumbled, as it were by
accident, at the door, that it could not be opened; for it bent the key
in such a manner in the lock, and crooket the sneck, that without a smith
there was no egress, and sorrow a smith was to be had. All were out and
around the tolbooth waiting for the upshot of the choosing the delegate. Those that saw me in the mean time, would have thought I had gone
demented. I ramped and I stamped; I banned and I bellowed like
desperation. My companions, no a bit better, flew fluttering to the
windows, like wild birds to the wires of their cage. However, to make a
long tale short, Bailie M'Lucre was, by means of this device, chosen
delegate, seemingly against my side. But oh! he was a slee tod, for no
sooner was he so chosen, than he began to act for his own behoof; and
that very afternoon, while both parties were holding their public dinner
he sent round the bell to tell that the potato crop on his back rig was
to be sold by way of public roup the same day. There wasna one in the
town that had reached the years of discretion, but kent what na sort of
potatoes he was going to sell; and I was so disturbed by this open
corruption, that I went to him, and expressed my great surprise. Hot
words ensued between us; and I told him very plainly that I would have
nothing further to say to him or his political profligacy. However, his
potatoes were sold, and brought upwards of three guineas the peck, the
nabob being the purchaser, who, to show his contentment with the bargain,
made Mrs M'Lucre, and the bailie's three daughters, presents of new gowns
and princods, that were not stuffed with wool. In the end, as a natural consequence, Bailie M'Lucre, as delegate, voted
for the Nabob, and the old member was thereby thrown out. But although
the government candidate in this manner won the day, yet I was so
displeased by the jookerie of the bailie, and the selfish manner by which
he had himself reaped all the advantage of the election in the sale of
his potatoes, that we had no correspondence on public affairs till long
after; so that he never had the face to ask me to give up the guildry,
till I resigned it of my own accord after the renewal of the tacks to
which I have alluded, by the which renewals, a great increase was
effected in the income of the town. Bailie M'Lucre, as I have already intimated, was naturally a greedy body,
and not being content with the profits of his potatoe rig, soon after the
election he set up as an o'er-sea merchant, buying beef and corn by
agency in Ireland, and having the same sent to the Glasgow market. For
some time, this traffic yielded him a surprising advantage; but the
summer does not endure the whole year round, nor was his prosperity
ordained to be of a continuance. One mishap befell him after another;
cargoes of his corn heated in the vessels, because he would not sell at a
losing price, and so entirely perished; and merchants broke, that were in
his debt large sums for his beef and provisions. In short, in the course
of the third year from the time of the election, he was rookit of every
plack he had in the world, and was obligated to take the benefit of the
divor's bill, soon after which he went suddenly away from the town, on
the pretence of going into Edinburgh, on some business of legality with
his wife's brother, with whom he had entered into a plea concerning the
moiety of a steading at the town-head.