Wild tike of the moors, dost
thou think Tam Craik fears thy prancing and thy carrion breath, or ony
o' the bur-throated litter of which thou art the outwale? Nay, an
capering and prancing show ought of a spirit, I can caper and prance
as well as thou. Out on thee, thou bog-thumper, thou base-born
heather-blooter, what do _you_ say? Or what _dare_ you say?" Tam had by this time drawn his sword completely to cow the Englishman,
and put him to silence;--but he saw what Tam did not see, and knew more
than he. "I dare both say and do, and that thou shalt find," said the trooper;
and forthwith he attacked Tam with all his prowess, who, not quite
expecting such a thing gave way, and had very nearly been unhorsed; he,
however, fought stoutly, defending himself, though manifestly at the
disadvantage. The brave friar, at the first clash of the swords, wheeled
about his mule, and drawing out a good sword from under his frock, (for
he wore the sword on the one side and the cross on the other,) he
stretched it forth, pointing it as if to thrust it between them. But,
addressing himself to the Englishman, he cried with a loud voice, "Put
up _thy_ sword again into its place, or verily I will smite thee with
the edge of _my_ sword." The other Englishman, who had never yet opened his mouth, and who had
always kept apart, as if anxious to conceal who he was, now rode briskly
up to the fray; and perceiving the quick approach of his friends,
and judging his party quite secure of victory, he struck up the
friar's sword in apparent derision. But the inveterate laird of the
Peatstacknowe had been watching him all this time, as one colley dog
watches another of which he is afraid, in order to take him at an
advantage, and the moment that his arm was stretched, so that his sword
came in contact with the friar's, Gibby struck him behind, and that with
such violence that the sword ran through his body. The wounded trooper
reined up his steed furiously, in order to turn on his adversary; Gibby
reined his up as quickly to make his escape, but the convulsive force of
the Englishman threw his horse over, and in its fall it tumbled against
the legs of Gibby's horse with such force that it struck them all four
from under him, and both he and his rider fell in a reverse direction,
rolling plump over the wounded warrior and his forlorn encumbered steed,
that was pawing the air at a furious rate. The two horses falling thus
on different sides, their iron-shod hoofs were inter-mixed, and clashing
and rattling away in a tremendous manner, tremendous at least to poor
Gibby, whose leg and thigh being below his charger, he was unable to
extricate himself. "Happ, Davie, happ!" cried he to the steed: "Up you
stupid, awkward floundering thief! Happ, Davie, happ!" Davie could
neither happ nor weynd, but there he lay groaning and kicking above his
master, who was in a most deplorable plight. Charlie perceiving the commencement of the fray, was all this while
galloping furiously toward the combatants. But the battle was of short
duration; for the English trooper, seeing his comrade fall he wist not
how, and the friar and Tam having both their swords pointed at him,
broke furiously through between them and fled towards his companions,
Tam being only enabled to inflict a deep wound on the hinder part of the
horse as he passed by. "I have made him to pass away as the stubble that is driven by the
whirlwind," said the friar; "yea, as the chaff before the great wind, so
is he fled from the arm of the mighty. Brother, I say unto thee, that
thou hadst better arise!" continued he, looking upon the disconsolate
Jordan; and passing by on the other side with great _ang froid_, he rode
up to Delany, the boy Elias, and the poet, the latter of whom had not
been engaged, but, drawing his sword manfully, had stood as a guard to
the other two. Tam Craik pursued his enemy, although apparently not with a fixed design
of overtaking him; and Gibby, being thus left all alone with the two
inverted horses and the incensed moss-trooper, extended his voice to an
amazing pitch, for he knew not what state of health and strength his
opponent retained. This was a horrid consideration; for if he should
disengage himself and get up first, there was an end of him of the
Peatstacknowe. His nasal twine was increased by his dread, and he cried
so vehemently, that his cries grew like the cries of a peacock. Charlie Scott rode up to the main group, who continued to advance at a
quiet pace, for they knew nothing as yet of the approaching danger. He
also called and made signs to Tam Craik to return; and as soon as he
came up to them he pointed out their pursuers, and charged them to ride
for their lives. "We are betrayed," said he; but the horses of our
enemies are jaded, ours are fresh; therefore, brave lads, in our
master's name, spare neither spur, nor horse-flesh. Haud on your way,
an' never look ower your shoulders: you will find Corby an' me twa gude
back friends." The friar bent himself forward over the mane of his mule, and opening
his eyes wide abroad, he put the spurs to his steed, and set off "with
the swiftness of the roe-buck or the hart," as he termed it. The boy pursued hard after him; and the bard, taking hold of Delany's
bridle by both reins below the neck, for fear her steed should stumble
and throw his lovely rider, bade her whip on and fear nothing, and in
this friendly guise they also made good speed. Charlie then galloped
back to see if any life remained in his friend Gibby,--for he only saw
him at a distance go down in the encounter, without being exactly versed
in the circumstances of his overthrow; but he thought he heard one loud
squeak arise from the field after the rest had left it, something like
that sent forth by the small drone of the bagpipe; and, guessing that
the laird was yet alive, he galloped back to see. By the way he met the
deil's Tam, who returned with him, and when they came in view of the
spot where the two prostrate heroes had been left, they saw a very
curious scene, the more curious because it was transacted by our worthy
laird in the presiding belief that he was not seen, for he was too much
concerned in his own affairs to perceive the approach of his friends. The Englishman's horse making an exertion, by pressing his feet against
the ribs of the laird's Davie, by that means pushed himself forward, and
Gibby perceived plainly that his enemy was to be first released. The
struggles that Gibby then made were enormous. "Happ, Davie, happ!" cried
he: "O mother of God, what shall become of me! Happ, Davie, happ, my
man; happ, happ, happ!" and, as a last resource, he reared up his body
and struck at the Englishman's limb that was above his horse, crying out
to Davie to happ, in bitterness of soul. Davie was not long; for the
next moment after the Englishman's horse rose, he got up also, his feet
then getting to the ground; but the stirrup that had been under him was
crushed together, and there his master's foot remained fixed. Gibby was
worse than ever. "Wo, Davie, wo! Tproo, ye thief!" cried he. Davie,
finding the weight at his side, wheeled about, and dragged the
unfortunate laird round across the breast of the trooper Hall, who
seized him by the neck. "Was there ever a man guidit this gate!" cried
Gibby. "Honest man, an ye please, let gae; it wasna me that hurt ye." The man answered him not; but Davie being scared by the struggle sprung
aside, and the Englishman keeping his hold, Gilbert's foot was released
by the loss of his boot. He was not long in making a bold effort to
rise, and though Hall hung by his neck a little, it had been in the last
agony of receding life that he had seized him, and he dropped dead on
the green, having both fists clenched on his breast, in the act of still
holding his rival. When Gibby saw how matters stood, he began to value himself on his
courage. "I's gar ye! I's gar ye!" cried he, lifting up his sword, and
giving the dead man several desperate gashes, and always between every
stroke repeating, "H'm! I's gar ye!" His two friends being now hard
beside him, the sound of their horses' feet made him start; but lifting
his eye, and perceiving who they were, he again repeated his blows, and
continued his threats in a louder key.--"H'm! I's gar ye! I's gar ye,
billy! I's learn you to throttle me!" "Fy, lay on, laird!" cried Tam; "dinna ye see that the man's no half
dead yet?" "I think I hae done for him;" said Gibby: "He brings me a-mind o' a wife
that had to kill her cat thrice ower. I's learn the best o' the
haggies-headed Ha's to meddle wi' me!" "I think he'll do that ane, however, Gibby; if he had e'en the nine
lives o' the wife's cat," said Charlie: "therefore, an ye please, put up
your sword, an' mount your horse. It's no a time now to examine whether
ye hae behaved in a sodger-like manner wi' that bold trooper. If I
wist ye had not, it should be the last hour I should ride in your
company--but mount quick an' ride; for see whar the rest o' the Ha's are
coming across us. Ilk horse an' man do what he can, or dear will be our
raide, an' yours, friend, the dearest of a'." One look filled Gilbert's eye. He mounted Davie, with the one boot off
and the other on, and there was little occasion to bid him ride. Before
they turned the corner of the hill, their pursuers came so close on
them, that they looked very like cutting off their retreat; but a bog,
around which the English were forced to cast a wide circuit, saved our
three heroes, and gave them the start, by fully a half mile, of their
foes, who still came in a straggling way as their horses could keep up. After a hard chace of two Scottish miles they came up with the friar,
whose mule being too heavy loaden had begun to fag. When he saw them
gaining on him so hard, he judged that all was over with him, and
spurred on his jaded beast in vain. "O that my flesh were as my armour
or my clothing," cried he, "that I might put it off at will, and escape
from the face of mine enemies. Lo! I shall be left all alone, and
surrounded and taken and slain." As he divined, so it fell out; the
others were soon by him, and he was left the hindermost. Then they heard
him lamenting to himself in his own sublime eastern stile, that he had
not the wings of the eagle or the dove, that he might bear away to the
mountains and the cliffs of the rocky hills, to elude the dreadful
weapons of death, so often reared over his head, and so often warded by
the arm of heaven. "Poor devil!" said muckle Charlie, the tear standing in his eye; "Od I
canna leave him after a'. Come what will, I for ane shall stand or fa'
wi' him. I whiles think there's mair in that body than we moorland men
wot of,--I canna leave him to be cut in pieces." "O fy, let him tak his chance," said Tam; "let him bide his weird; he
deserves it a'. What signifies the creature? He's just a thing made up
o' hypocritical rant, empty words, and stuffed paunches. Let him bide
the buffet that fa's to his share." "Ay, what signifies sic a corpulation?" said Jordan. "It will be lang or
_he_ bring down man an' horse in an encounter. He brings me in mind o' a
capon that claps his wings, but craws nane. Let him tak his chance." "Na, but callans, troth my heart winna let me," said Charlie: "For his
good deeds, or his ill anes he's answerable to heaven, an' neither to
you nor me. But he's a fellow creature, an' has nane to look to for help
but us at this time. Life's sweet to us a', an' it's unco hard to leave
our master's bedesman just to be sacrificed. Therefore, come what will,
I'll turn an' lend the friar a hand. As for you twa, ride on; the young
couple that are committed to our charge may escape." With that he
wheeled Corby's head about, and rode back to meet the gospel friar. When he met him, the foremost of the riders had advanced within a bow
shot, and was fast gaining ground. The friar still continued to spur on,
and though his mule likewise continued the motion of one that gallops,
the progress that he made was hardly discernible. He had a sort of up
and down hobble that was right laughable to behold in one riding for his
life. When he saw the dauntless Yardbire return to meet him, with his
large seven feet sword drawn, and heaved over his right shoulder, he
lifted up his voice and wept, and he said unto him;--"Blessed be thou,
my son! The blessing of a man ready to perish light upon thee! And now,
lo, I will draw forth my sword and return with thee to the charge, and
thou shalt see what a poor bedesman can do." "It is brawly said, good friar,--but gin ye wad save yoursel' an' me,
ride. An we could but mak the end o' the Thief-gate, they should buy our
twa lives dear. If thou wilt but exert man an' beast, father, you an' I
shall fight, flee, or fa' thegither. But see, we are already overtaken,
and in the enemy's hands." The foremost of the riders was now hard behind them; but, perceiving
Charlie, he reined up his horse and looked back for his comrades. The
friar gave a glance back, and he said, "Lo, thou art a mighty man of
valour, and behold there is but one; do thou fall upon him and smite
him; why should one pursue two?" "I hae heard waur advices frae mair warlike men," said Charlie; "Ride
ye on, father, an' lose nae time. Gude faith! I sal gie this ane his
breakfast." Charlie as he said this put the spurs to Corby, and rode full speed
against the pursuer. The trooper set himself firm in his stirrups and
assumed his defence, for he saw from the prowess of Corby that it was
vain to fly. Just as Charlie's mighty sword was descending on his
casque, a check that he gave his horse in the hurry of the moment made
him rear on end, and Charlie's stroke coming down between his ears,
clove his head almost into two halves. The horse reeled and fell; but
how it fared with his rider, Charlie never knew; for before he got his
horse turned, there were other three of the Halls close at hand. Charlie
fled amain. He was nothing afraid of himself, for he knew Corby could
outstrip them by one half of the way; but his heart bled for the poor
friar, whom he saw he would either be obliged to leave, or fight for him
against such odds as it would be madness to withstand. The friar had,
however gained the height, and having now a long sloping descent all the
way to the Thief-gate-end, he was posting on at an improved pace. Charlie had one sole hope remaining of saving the friar, and that was
the gaining the above-mentioned point before they were overtaken. The
warriors carried no whips in those days, depending altogether on the
ample spur,--therefore Charlie, as a last resource, pulled down a large
branch from a hazel tree, and attacked the hinder parts of the father's
mule with such a torrent of high-sounding strokes, that the animal,
perhaps more sullen than exhausted, seemed to recover new life and
vigour, and fled from the assault like a deer, in the utmost terror and
dismay. Little wonder was it! He heard the sound of every descending
stroke coming on like the gathering tempest; and, clapping his tail
close down between his hips, pricking up his long ears, and looking back
first with the one eye and then with the other, he went at such a rate
that Corby could do little more than keep up with him. "My swiftness is greater than I can bear," cried the friar, pronouncing
the sentence all in syllables for want of breath; "verily I shall fall
among the cliffs of the rocks by the side of the highway." His danger increased with his fears; for the mule perceiving that
exertion availed not, and that there was no escaping from the fierceness
of his pursuer's wrath, began to throw up his heels violently at every
stroke, nevertheless continuing to exert himself between these
evolutions. The friar's riding-gear began to get into disorder, and with
great difficulty he retained his seat; therefore he cried out with a
loud voice, "I pray of thee, my son, to desist, for it is better for me
to perish by an enemy's hand than thine; seest thou not my confusion and
despair--verily I shall be dashed in pieces against the stones." The friar saw nought of Charlie's intent, else he would not have
besought him so earnestly to desist. The Thief-gate-end was now hard at
hand. It is still well known as a long narrow path alongst the verge of
a precipice, and all the bank above it was then a thicket of brushwood
and gorse, so close that the wild beast of the desart could not pass
through it. It was, moreover, shagged with rocks, and bedded with small
stones, and the path itself was so narrow, that two horsemen could
scarcely ride abreast. By such a strenuous manoeuvre on the parts of
Charlie and the mule, the two flyers got into this path, without having
lost any ground of their pursuers. When Charlie saw this, he began to
breathe more freely, and, flinging away his hazel branch, he again
seized his mighty weapon in his right hand. "Let the chields come as close on us now, an they dare," said he.