It had better have happened
to you, Lizzy; you would have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you think she would be
prevailed upon to go back with us? Change of scene might be of service-and perhaps a little relief
from home may be as useful as anything." Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuaded of her sister's ready
acquiescence. "I hope," added Mrs. Gardiner, "that no consideration with regard to this young man will influence
her. We live in so different a part of town, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know,
we go out so little, that it is very improbable that they should meet at all, unless he really comes to
see her." "And that is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of his friend, and Mr. Darcy would no more
suffer him to call on Jane in such a part of London! My dear aunt, how could you think of it? Mr.
Darcy may perhaps have heard of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but he would hardly think a
month's ablution enough to cleanse him from its impurities, were he once to enter it; and depend
upon it, Mr. Bingley never stirs without him." "So much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does not Jane correspond with his
sister? She will not be able to help calling." "She will drop the acquaintance entirely." But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place this point, as well as the still more
interesting one of Bingley's being withheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject
which convinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirely hopeless. It was possible,
and sometimes she thought it probable, that his affection might be reanimated, and the influence of
his friends successfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane's attractions. Miss Bennet accepted her aunt's invitation with pleasure; and the Bingleys were no otherwise in her
thoughts at the same time, than as she hoped by Caroline's not living in the same house with her
brother, she might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger of seeing him. The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the Phillipses, the Lucases, and the
officers, there was not a day without its engagement. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the
entertainment of her brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a family dinner. When the
engagement was for home, some of the officers always made part of it-of which officers Mr.
Wickham was sure to be one; and on these occasions, Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by
Elizabeth's warm commendation, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing them, from what
she saw, to be very seriously in love, their preference of each other was plain enough to make her a
little uneasy; and she resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she left Hertfordshire, and
represent to her the imprudence of encouraging such an attachment. To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure, unconnected with his general
powers. About ten or a dozen years ago, before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in
that very part of Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had, therefore, many acquaintances in
common; and though Wickham had been little there since the death of Darcy's father, it was yet in
his power to give her fresher intelligence of her former friends than she had been in the way of
procuring. Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy by character perfectly well. Here
consequently was an inexhaustible subject of discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley
with the minute description which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her tribute of praise on the
character of its late possessor, she was delighting both him and herself. On being made acquainted
with the present Mr. Darcy's treatment of him, she tried to remember some of that gentleman's
reputed disposition when quite a lad which might agree with it, and was confident at last that she
recollected having heard Mr. Fitzwilliam Darcy formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured boy. Mrs. Gardiner's caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly given on the first favourable
opportunity of speaking to her alone; after honestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on:
"You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely because you are warned against it; and,
therefore, I am not afraid of speaking openly. Seriously, I would have you be on your guard. Do not
involve yourself or endeavour to involve him in an affection which the want of fortune would make
so very imprudent. I have nothing to say against him; he is a most interesting young man; and if he
had the fortune he ought to have, I should think you could not do better. But as it is, you must not let
your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we all expect you to use it. Your father would
depend on your resolution and good conduct, I am sure. You must not disappoint your father." "My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed." "Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise." "Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care of myself, and of Mr. Wickham too. He
shall not be in love with me, if I can prevent it." "Elizabeth, you are not serious now." "I beg your pardon, I will try again. At present I am not in love with Mr. Wickham; no, I certainly am
not. But he is, beyond all comparison, the most agreeable man I ever saw-and if he becomes really
attached to me-I believe it will be better that he should not. I see the imprudence of it. Oh! that abominable Mr. Darcy! My father's opinion of me does me the greatest honour, and I
should be miserable to forfeit it. My father, however, is partial to Mr. Wickham. In short, my dear
aunt, I should be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; but since we see every
day that where there is affection, young people are seldom withheld by immediate want of fortune
from entering into engagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than so many of my
fellow-creatures if I am tempted, or how am I even to know that it would be wisdom to resist? All
that I can promise you, therefore, is not to be in a hurry. I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his
first object. When I am in company with him, I will not be wishing. In short, I will do my best." "Perhaps it will be as well if you discourage his coming here so very often. At least, you should
not remind your mother of inviting him." "As I did the other day," said Elizabeth with a conscious smile: "very true, it will be wise in me to
refrain from that. But do not imagine that he is always here so often. It is on your account that he has
been so frequently invited this week. You know my mother's ideas as to the necessity of constant
company for her friends. But really, and upon my honour, I will try to do what I think to be the
wisest; and now I hope you are satisfied." Her aunt assured her that she was, and Elizabeth having thanked her for the kindness of her hints,
they parted; a wonderful instance of advice being given on such a point, without being resented. Mr. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quitted by the Gardiners and Jane; but
as he took up his abode with the Lucases, his arrival was no great inconvenience to Mrs. Bennet. His
marriage was now fast approaching, and she was at length so far resigned as to think it inevitable,
and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured tone, that she "wished they might be happy." Thursday
was to be the wedding day, and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and when she rose
to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother's ungracious and reluctant good wishes, and
sincerely affected herself, accompanied her out of the room. As they went downstairs together,
Charlotte said:
"I shall depend on hearing from you very often, Eliza." "That you certainly shall." "And I have another favour to ask you. Will you come and see me?" "We shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire." "I am not likely to leave Kent for some time. Promise me, therefore, to come to Hunsford." Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in the visit. "My father and Maria are coming to me in March," added Charlotte, "and I hope you will consent to
be of the party. Indeed, Eliza, you will be as welcome as either of them." The wedding took place; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent from the church door, and
everybody had as much to say, or to hear, on the subject as usual. Elizabeth soon heard from her
friend; and their correspondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever been; that it should be
equally unreserved was impossible. Elizabeth could never address her without feeling that all the
comfort of intimacy was over, and though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for
the sake of what had been, rather than what was. Charlotte's first letters were received with a good
deal of eagerness; there could not but be curiosity to know how she would speak of her new home,
how she would like Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself to be; though,
when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotte expressed herself on every point exactly as
she might have foreseen. She wrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned
nothing which she could not praise. The house, furniture, neighbourhood, and roads, were all to her
taste, and Lady Catherine's behaviour was most friendly and obliging. It was Mr. Collins's picture of
Hunsford and Rosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must wait for her own
visit there to know the rest. Jane had already written a few lines to her sister to announce their safe arrival in London; and when
she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped it would be in her power to say something of the Bingleys. Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatience generally is. Jane had been
a week in town without either seeing or hearing from Caroline. She accounted for it, however, by
supposing that her last letter to her friend from Longbourn had by some accident been lost. "My aunt," she continued, "is going to-morrow into that part of the town, and I shall take the
opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street." She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley. "I did not think Caroline in
spirits," were her words, "but she was very glad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no
notice of my coming to London. I was right, therefore, my last letter had never reached her. I
inquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but so much engaged with Mr. Darcy that they
scarcely ever saw him. I found that Miss Darcy was expected to dinner. I wish I could see her. My visit
was not long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out. I dare say I shall see them soon here." Elizabeth shook her head over this letter. It convinced her that accident only could discover to Mr.
Bingley her sister's being in town. Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She endeavoured to persuade herself that
she did not regret it; but she could no longer be blind to Miss Bingley's inattention. After waiting at
home every morning for a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, the visitor
did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and yet more, the alteration of her manner would
allow Jane to deceive herself no longer. The letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister will
prove what she felt. "My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in her better judgement, at my expense,
when I confess myself to have been entirely deceived in Miss Bingley's regard for me. But, my dear
sister, though the event has proved you right, do not think me obstinate if I still assert that,
considering what her behaviour was, my confidence was as natural as your suspicion. I do not at all
comprehend her reason for wishing to be intimate with me; but if the same circumstances were to
happen again, I am sure I should be deceived again. Caroline did not return my visit till yesterday;
and not a note, not a line, did I receive in the meantime. When she did come, it was very evident that
she had no pleasure in it; she made a slight, formal apology, for not calling before, said not a word of
wishing to see me again, and was in every respect so altered a creature, that when she went away I
was perfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer. I pity, though I cannot help blaming
her. She was very wrong in singling me out as she did; I can safely say that every advance to intimacy
began on her side. But I pity her, because she must feel that she has been acting wrong, and because
I am very sure that anxiety for her brother is the cause of it. I need not explain myself farther; and
though weknow this anxiety to be quite needless, yet if she feels it, it will easily account for her
behaviour to me; and so deservedly dear as he is to his sister, whatever anxiety she must feel on his
behalf is natural and amiable. I cannot but wonder, however, at her having any such fears now,
because, if he had at all cared about me, we must have met, long ago. He knows of my being in town,
I am certain, from something she said herself; and yet it would seem, by her manner of talking, as if
she wanted to persuade herself that he is really partial to Miss Darcy. I cannot understand it. If I were
not afraid of judging harshly, I should be almost tempted to say that there is a strong appearance of
duplicity in all this. But I will endeavour to banish every painful thought, and think only of what will
make me happy-your affection, and the invariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. Let me hear
from you very soon. Miss Bingley said something of his never returning to Netherfield again, of giving
up the house, but not with any certainty. We had better not mention it. I am extremely glad that you
have such pleasant accounts from our friends at Hunsford. Pray go to see them, with Sir William and
Maria. I am sure you will be very comfortable there.-Yours, etc." This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned as she considered that Jane would no
longer be duped, by the sister at least. All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. She would not even wish for a renewal of his attentions. His character sunk on every review of it; and
as a punishment for him, as well as a possible advantage to Jane, she seriously hoped he might really
soon marry Mr. Darcy's sister, as by Wickham's account, she would make him abundantly regret
what he had thrown away. Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promise concerning that gentleman, and
required information; and Elizabeth had such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt
than to herself. His apparent partiality had subsided, his attentions were over, he was the admirer of
some one else. Elizabeth was watchful enough to see it all, but she could see it and write of it
without material pain. Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfied with
believing that she would have been his only choice, had fortune permitted it. The sudden acquisition
of ten thousand pounds was the most remarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now
rendering himself agreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case than in Charlotte's,
did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence. Nothing, on the contrary, could be more
natural; and while able to suppose that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish her, she was ready to
allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and could very sincerely wish him happy. All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and after relating the circumstances, she thus went on:
"I am now convinced, my dear aunt, that I have never been much in love; for had I really experienced
that pure and elevating passion, I should at present detest his very name, and wish him all manner of
evil. But my feelings are not only cordial towards him; they are even impartial towards Miss King. I
cannot find out that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling to think her a very good sort of
girl. There can be no love in all this. My watchfulness has been effectual; and though I certainly
should be a more interesting object to all my acquaintances were I distractedly in love with him, I
cannot say that I regret my comparative insignificance. Importance may sometimes be purchased too
dearly. Kitty and Lydia take his defection much more to heart than I do. They are young in the ways
of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction that handsome young men must have
something to live on as well as the plain." With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwise diversified by little beyond
the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty and sometimes cold, did January and February pass away. March was to take Elizabeth to Hunsford. She had not at first thought very seriously of going thither;
but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the plan and she gradually learned to consider it
herself with greater pleasure as well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her desire of seeing
Charlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. Collins. There was novelty in the scheme, and as,
with such a mother and such uncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little change
was not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would moreover give her a peep at Jane; and, in
short, as the time drew near, she would have been very sorry for any delay. Everything, however,
went on smoothly, and was finally settled according to Charlotte's first sketch. She was to accompany
Sir William and his second daughter. The improvement of spending a night in London was added in
time, and the plan became perfect as plan could be. The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her, and who, when it came to the
point, so little liked her going, that he told her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her
letter. The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was perfectly friendly; on his side even more. His
present pursuit could not make him forget that Elizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve
his attention, the first to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in his manner of bidding her
adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her of what she was to expect in Lady Catherine de
Bourgh, and trusting their opinion of her-their opinion of everybody-would always coincide, there
was a solicitude, an interest which she felt must ever attach her to him with a most sincere regard;
and she parted from him convinced that, whether married or single, he must always be her model of
the amiable and pleasing. Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make her think him less agreeable. Sir
William Lucas, and his daughter Maria, a good-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had
nothing to say that could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as much delight as the
rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth loved absurdities, but she had known Sir William's too long. He could
tell her nothing new of the wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities were worn
out, like his information. It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so early as to be in Gracechurch Street
by noon. As they drove to Mr. Gardiner's door, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their
arrival; when they entered the passage she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth, looking
earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful and lovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of
little boys and girls, whose eagerness for their cousin's appearance would not allow them to wait in
the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seen her for a twelvemonth, prevented their
coming lower. All was joy and kindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle
and shopping, and the evening at one of the theatres. Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first object was her sister; and she was more grieved
than astonished to hear, in reply to her minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to
support her spirits, there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable, however, to hope that they
would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her the particulars also of Miss Bingley's visit in
Gracechurch Street, and repeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane and
herself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up the acquaintance. Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham's desertion, and complimented her on bearing it so
well. "But my dear Elizabeth," she added, "what sort of girl is Miss King? I should be sorry to think our
friend mercenary." "Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs, between the mercenary and the
prudent motive? Where does discretion end, and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid of his
marrying me, because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to get a girl with only ten
thousand pounds, you want to find out that he is mercenary." "If you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall know what to think." "She is a very good kind of girl, I believe. I know no harm of her." "But he paid her not the smallest attention till her grandfather's death made her mistress of this
fortune." "No-why should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain my affections because I had no money,
what occasion could there be for making love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was
equally poor?" "But there seems an indelicacy in directing his attentions towards her so soon after this event." "A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegant decorums which other people
may observe. If she does not object to it, why should we?" "Her not objecting does not justify him. It only shows her being deficient in something herself-sense
or feeling." "Well," cried Elizabeth, "have it as you choose. He shall be mercenary, and she shall be foolish." "No, Lizzy, that is what I do not choose. I should be sorry, you know, to think ill of a young man who
has lived so long in Derbyshire." "Oh! if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live in Derbyshire; and their intimate
friends who live in Hertfordshire are not much better. I am sick of them all. Thank Heaven! I am going
to-morrow where I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who has neither manner nor
sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only ones worth knowing, after all." "Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment." Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had the unexpected happiness of an
invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt in a tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the
summer. "We have not determined how far it shall carry us," said Mrs. Gardiner, "but, perhaps, to the Lakes." No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and her acceptance of the invitation was
most ready and grateful. "Oh, my dear, dear aunt," she rapturously cried, "what delight! what
felicity! You give me fresh life and vigour. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. What are young men
to rocks and mountains? Oh! what hours of transport we shall spend! And when we do return, it shall
not be like other travellers, without being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We will know
where we have gone-we will recollect what we have seen. Lakes, mountains, and rivers shall not be
jumbled together in our imaginations; nor when we attempt to describe any particular scene, will we
begin quarreling about its relative situation. Let ourfirst effusions be less insupportable than those of
the generality of travellers." Every object in the next day's journey was new and interesting to Elizabeth; and her spirits were in a
state of enjoyment; for she had seen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health, and
the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight. When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye was in search of the Parsonage, and
every turning expected to bring it in view. The palings of Rosings Park was their boundary on one
side. Elizabeth smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants. At length the Parsonage was discernible. The garden sloping to the road, the house standing in it, the
green pales, and the laurel hedge, everything declared they were arriving. Mr. Collins and Charlotte
appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate which led by a short gravel walk to
the house, amidst the nods and smiles of the whole party. In a moment they were all out of the
chaise, rejoicing at the sight of each other. Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest
pleasure, and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied with coming when she found herself so
affectionately received. She saw instantly that her cousin's manners were not altered by his
marriage; his formal civility was just what it had been, and he detained her some minutes at the gate
to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all her family. They were then, with no other delay than his
pointing out the neatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as soon as they were in the
parlour, he welcomed them a second time, with ostentatious formality to his humble abode, and
punctually repeated all his wife's offers of refreshment. Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not help in fancying that in displaying
the good proportion of the room, its aspect and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to
her, as if wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him. But though everything seemed
neat and comfortable, she was not able to gratify him by any sigh of repentance, and rather looked
with wonder at her friend that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion. When Mr.
Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably be ashamed, which certainly was not
unseldom, she involuntarily turned her eye on Charlotte. Once or twice she could discern a faint
blush; but in general Charlotte wisely did not hear. After sitting long enough to admire every article
of furniture in the room, from the sideboard to the fender, to give an account of their journey, and of
all that had happened in London, Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in the garden, which was
large and well laid out, and to the cultivation of which he attended himself. To work in this garden
was one of his most respectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenance with
which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise, and owned she encouraged it as much as
possible. Here, leading the way through every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allowing them an
interval to utter the praises he asked for, every view was pointed out with a minuteness which left
beauty entirely behind. He could number the fields in every direction, and could tell how many trees
there were in the most distant clump. But of all the views which his garden, or which the country or
kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with the prospect of Rosings, afforded by an
opening in the trees that bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his house. It was a
handsome modern building, well situated on rising ground. From his garden, Mr. Collins would have led them round his two meadows; but the ladies, not having
shoes to encounter the remains of a white frost, turned back; and while Sir William accompanied
him, Charlotte took her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased, probably, to have
the opportunity of showing it without her husband's help. It was rather small, but well built and
convenient; and everything was fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency of which
Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit. When Mr. Collins could be forgotten, there was really an air of
great comfort throughout, and by Charlotte's evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed he must be
often forgotten. She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country. It was spoken of again while they
were at dinner, when Mr. Collins joining in, observed:
"Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine de Bourgh on the ensuing
Sunday at church, and I need not say you will be delighted with her. She is all affability and
condescension, and I doubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her notice when
service is over. I have scarcely any hesitation in saying she will include you and my sister Maria in
every invitation with which she honours us during your stay here. Her behaviour to my dear
Charlotte is charming. We dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never allowed to walk home. Her ladyship's carriage is regularly ordered for us. I should say, one of her ladyship's carriages, for she
has several." "Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman indeed," added Charlotte, "and a most
attentive neighbour." "Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. She is the sort of woman whom one cannot regard
with too much deference." The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news, and telling again what had already
been written; and when it closed, Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate upon
Charlotte's degree of contentment, to understand her address in guiding, and composure in bearing
with, her husband, and to acknowledge that it was all done very well. She had also to anticipate how
her visit would pass, the quiet tenor of their usual employments, the vexatious interruptions of Mr.
Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with Rosings. A lively imagination soon settled it all. About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready for a walk, a sudden noise
below seemed to speak the whole house in confusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard
somebody running up stairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her. She opened the door and
met Maria in the landing place, who, breathless with agitation, cried out-
"Oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the dining-room, for there is such a sight to be
seen! I will not tell you what it is. Make haste, and come down this moment." Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell her nothing more, and down they ran into the
dining-room, which fronted the lane, in quest of this wonder; It was two ladies stopping in a low
phaeton at the garden gate. "And is this all?" cried Elizabeth. "I expected at least that the pigs were got into the garden, and here
is nothing but Lady Catherine and her daughter." "La! my dear," said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, "it is not Lady Catherine. The old lady is Mrs.
Jenkinson, who lives with them; the other is Miss de Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a little
creature. Who would have thought that she could be so thin and small?" "She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind. Why does she not come in?" "Oh, Charlotte says she hardly ever does. It is the greatest of favours when Miss de Bourgh comes
in." "I like her appearance," said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas. "She looks sickly and cross. Yes, she
will do for him very well. She will make him a very proper wife." Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation with the ladies; and Sir
William, to Elizabeth's high diversion, was stationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the
greatness before him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss de Bourgh looked that way. At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, and the others returned into the
house. Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two girls than he began to congratulate them on their good
fortune, which Charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked to dine at
Rosings the next day. Mr. Collins's triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was complete. The power of displaying the
grandeur of his patroness to his wondering visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards
himself and his wife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunity of doing it should
be given so soon, was such an instance of Lady Catherine's condescension, as he knew not how to
admire enough. "I confess," said he, "that I should not have been at all surprised by her ladyship's asking us on
Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at Rosings. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her
affability, that it would happen. But who could have foreseen such an attention as this? Who could
have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there (an invitation, moreover, including
the whole party) so immediately after your arrival!" "I am the less surprised at what has happened," replied Sir William, "from that knowledge of what
the manners of the great really are, which my situation in life has allowed me to acquire. About the
court, such instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon." Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their visit to Rosings. Mr. Collins
was carefully instructing them in what they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many
servants, and so splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower them. When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to Elizabeth-
"Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel. Lady Catherine is far from
requiring that elegance of dress in us which becomes herself and her daughter. I would advise you
merely to put on whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest-there is no occasion for anything
more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you for being simply dressed. She likes to have the
distinction of rank preserved." While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their different doors, to recommend their
being quick, as Lady Catherine very much objected to be kept waiting for her dinner. Such formidable
accounts of her ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucas who had been little
used to company, and she looked forward to her introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension
as her father had done to his presentation at St. James's. As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a mile across the park. Every park has
its beauty and its prospects; and Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in
such raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but slightly affected by his
enumeration of the windows in front of the house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether
had originally cost Sir Lewis de Bourgh. When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria's alarm was every moment increasing, and even Sir
William did not look perfectly calm. Elizabeth's courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing of
Lady Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or miraculous virtue, and the
mere stateliness of money or rank she thought she could witness without trepidation. From the entrance-hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with a rapturous air, the fine proportion
and the finished ornaments, they followed the servants through an ante-chamber, to the room
where Lady Catherine, her daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting. Her ladyship, with great
condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Collins had settled it with her husband that the
office of introduction should be hers, it was performed in a proper manner, without any of those
apologies and thanks which he would have thought necessary. In spite of having been at St. James's, Sir William was so completely awed by the grandeur
surrounding him, that he had but just courage enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat
without saying a word; and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge of her
chair, not knowing which way to look. Elizabeth found herself quite equal to the scene, and could
observe the three ladies before her composedly.