"You do not mean to separate again?" "Do not deceive yourself," replied Raymond, "the separation at hand is one over which I have no
control; most near at hand is it; the days are already counted. May I trust you? For many days I have
longed to disclose the mysterious presentiments that weigh on me, although I fear that you will
ridicule them. Yet do not, my gentle friend; for, all childish and unwise as they are, they have become
a part of me, and I dare not expect to shake them off. "Yet how can I expect you to sympathize with me? You are of this world; I am not. You hold forth
your hand; it is even as a part of yourself; and you do not yet divide the feeling of identity from the
mortal form that shapes forth Lionel. How then can you understand me? Earth is to me a tomb, the
firmament a vault, shrouding mere corruption. Time is no more, for I have stepped within the
threshold of eternity; each man I meet appears a corse, which will soon be deserted of its animating
spark, on the eve of decay and corruption. Cada piedra un piramide levanta, y cada flor costruye un monumento, cada edificio es un sepulcro
altivo, cada soldado un esqueleto vivo." His accent was mournful,-he sighed deeply. "A few months ago," he continued, "I was thought to be
dying; but life was strong within me. My affections were human; hope and love were the day-stars of
my life. Now- they dream that the brows of the conqueror of the infidel faith are about to be
encircled by triumphant laurel; they talk of honourable reward, of title, power, and wealth-all I ask
of Greece is a grave. Let them raise a mound above my lifeless body, which may stand even when the
dome of St. Sophia has fallen. "Wherefore do I feel thus? At Rodosto I was full of hope; but when first I saw Constantinople, that
feeling, with every other joyful one, departed. The last words of Evadne were the seal upon the
warrant of my death. Yet I do not pretend to account for my mood by any particular event. All I can
say is, that it is so. The plague I am told is in Constantinople, perhaps I have imbibed its effluvia-
perhaps disease is the real cause of my prognostications. It matters little why or wherefore I am
affected, no power can avert the stroke, and the shadow of Fate's uplifted hand already darkens me. "To you, Lionel, I entrust your sister and her child. Never mention to her the fatal name of Evadne. She would doubly sorrow over the strange link that enchains me to her, making my spirit obey her
dying voice, following her, as it is about to do, to the unknown country." I listened to him with wonder; but that his sad demeanour and solemn utterance assured me of the
truth and intensity of his feelings, I should with light derision have attempted to dissipate his fears. Whatever I was about to reply, was interrupted by the powerful emotions of Clara. Raymond had
spoken, thoughtless of her presence, and she, poor child, heard with terror and faith the prophecy of
his death. Her father was moved by her violent grief; he took her in his arms and soothed her, but his
very soothings were solemn and fearful. "Weep not, sweet child," said he, "the coming death of one
you have hardly known. I may die, but in death I can never forget or desert my own Clara. In after
sorrow or joy, believe that you father's spirit is near, to save or sympathize with you. Be proud of me,
and cherish your infant remembrance of me. Thus, sweetest, I shall not appear to die. One thing you
must promise,-not to speak to any one but your uncle, of the conversation you have just overheard. When I am gone, you will console your mother, and tell her that death was only bitter because it
divided me from her; that my last thoughts will be spent on her. But while I live, promise not to
betray me; promise, my child." With faltering accents Clara promised, while she still clung to her father in a transport of sorrow. Soon we returned to shore, and I endeavoured to obviate the impression made on the child's mind,
by treating Raymond's fears lightly. We heard no more of them; for, as he had said, the siege, now
drawing to a conclusion, became paramount in interest, engaging all his time and attention. The empire of the Mahometans in Europe was at its close. The Greek fleet blockading every port of
Stamboul, prevented the arrival of succour from Asia; all egress on the side towards land had
become impracticable, except to such desperate sallies, as reduced the numbers of the enemy
without making any impression on our lines. The garrison was now so much diminished, that it was
evident that the city could easily have been carried by storm; but both humanity and policy dictated
a slower mode of proceeding. We could hardly doubt that, if pursued to the utmost, its palaces, its
temples and store of wealth would be destroyed in the fury of contending triumph and defeat. Already the defenceless citizens had suffered through the barbarity of the Janisaries; and, in time of
storm, tumult and massacre, beauty, infancy and decrepitude, would have alike been sacrificed to
the brutal ferocity of the soldiers. Famine and blockade were certain means of conquest; and on
these we founded our hopes of victory. Each day the soldiers of the garrison assaulted our advanced posts, and impeded the
accomplishment of our works. Fire-boats were launched from the various ports, while our troops
sometimes recoiled from the devoted courage of men who did not seek to live, but to sell their lives
dearly. These contests were aggravated by the season: they took place during summer, when the
southern Asiatic wind came laden with intolerable heat, when the streams were dried up in their
shallow beds, and the vast basin of the sea appeared to glow under the unmitigated rays of the
solsticial sun. Nor did night refresh the earth. Dew was denied; herbage and flowers there were
none; the very trees drooped; and summer assumed the blighted appearance of winter, as it went
forth in silence and flame to abridge the means of sustenance to man. In vain did the eye strive to
find the wreck of some northern cloud in the stainless empyrean, which might bring hope of change
and moisture to the oppressive and windless atmosphere. All was serene, burning, annihilating. We
the besiegers were in the comparison little affected by these evils. The woods around afforded us
shade,-the river secured to us a constant supply of water; nay, detachments were employed in
furnishing the army with ice, which had been laid up on Haemus, and Athos, and the mountains of
Macedonia, while cooling fruits and wholesome food renovated the strength of the labourers, and
made us bear with less impatience the weight of the unrefreshing air. But in the city things wore a
different face. The sun's rays were refracted from the pavement and buildings-the stoppage of the
public fountains-the bad quality of the food, and scarcity even of that, produced a state of
suffering, which was aggravated by the scourge of disease; while the garrison arrogated every
superfluity to themselves, adding by waste and riot to the necessary evils of the time. Still they would
not capitulate. Suddenly the system of warfare was changed. We experienced no more assaults; and by night and
day we continued our labours unimpeded. Stranger still, when the troops advanced near the city, the
walls were vacant, and no cannon was pointed against the intruders. When these circumstances
were reported to Raymond, he caused minute observations to be made as to what was doing within
the walls, and when his scouts returned, reporting only the continued silence and desolation of the
city, he commanded the army to be drawn out before the gates. No one appeared on the walls; the
very portals, though locked and barred, seemed unguarded; above, the many domes and glittering
crescents pierced heaven; while the old walls, survivors of ages, with ivy-crowned tower and weed-
tangled buttress, stood as rocks in an uninhabited waste. From within the city neither shout nor cry,
nor aught except the casual howling of a dog, broke the noon-day stillness. Even our soldiers were
awed to silence; the music paused; the clang of arms was hushed. Each man asked his fellow in
whispers, the meaning of this sudden peace; while Raymond from an height endeavoured, by means
of glasses, to discover and observe the stratagem of the enemy. No form could be discerned on the
terraces of the houses; in the higher parts of the town no moving shadow bespoke the presence of
any living being: the very trees waved not, and mocked the stability of architecture with like
immovability. The tramp of horses, distinctly heard in the silence, was at length discerned. It was a troop sent by
Karazza, the Admiral; they bore dispatches to the Lord General. The contents of these papers were
important. The night before, the watch, on board one of the smaller vessels anchored near the
seraglio wall, was roused by a slight splashing as of muffled oars; the alarm was given: twelve small
boats, each containing three Janizaries, were descried endeavouring to make their way through the
fleet to the opposite shore of Scutari. When they found themselves discovered they discharged their
muskets, and some came to the front to cover the others, whose crews, exerting all their strength,
endeavoured to escape with their light barks from among the dark hulls that environed them. They
were in the end all sunk, and, with the exception of two or three prisoners, the crews drowned. Little
could be got from the survivors; but their cautious answers caused it to be surmised that several
expeditions had preceded this last, and that several Turks of rank and importance had been
conveyed to Asia. The men disdainfully repelled the idea of having deserted the defence of their city;
and one, the youngest among them, in answer to the taunt of a sailor, exclaimed, "Take it, Christian
dogs! take the palaces, the gardens, the mosques, the abode of our fathers-take plague with them;
pestilence is the enemy we fly; if she be your friend, hug her to your bosoms. The curse of Allah is on
Stamboul, share ye her fate." Such was the account sent by Karazza to Raymond: but a tale full of monstrous exaggerations,
though founded on this, was spread by the accompanying troop among our soldiers. A murmur
arose, the city was the prey of pestilence; already had a mighty power subjugated the inhabitants;
Death had become lord of Constantinople. I have heard a picture described, wherein all the inhabitants of earth were drawn out in fear to stand
the encounter of Death. The feeble and decrepid fled; the warriors retreated, though they
threatened even in flight. Wolves and lions, and various monsters of the desert roared against him;
while the grim Unreality hovered shaking his spectral dart, a solitary but invincible assailant. Even so
was it with the army of Greece. I am convinced, that had the myriad troops of Asia come from over
the Propontis, and stood defenders of the Golden City, each and every Greek would have marched
against the overwhelming numbers, and have devoted himself with patriotic fury for his country. But
here no hedge of bayonets opposed itself, no death-dealing artillery, no formidable array of brave
soldiers-the unguarded walls afforded easy entrance-the vacant palaces luxurious dwellings; but
above the dome of St. Sophia the superstitious Greek saw Pestilence, and shrunk in trepidation from
her influence. Raymond was actuated by far other feelings. He descended the hill with a face beaming with
triumph, and pointing with his sword to the gates, commanded his troops to-down with those
barricades-the only obstacles now to completest victory. The soldiers answered his cheerful words
with aghast and awe-struck looks; instinctively they drew back, and Raymond rode in the front of the
lines:-"By my sword I swear," he cried, "that no ambush or stratagem endangers you. The enemy is
already vanquished; the pleasant places, the noble dwellings and spoil of the city are already yours;
force the gate; enter and possess the seats of your ancestors, your own inheritance!" An universal shudder and fearful whispering passed through the lines; not a soldier moved. "Cowards!" exclaimed their general, exasperated, "give me an hatchet! I alone will enter! I will plant
your standard; and when you see it wave from yon highest minaret, you may gain courage, and rally
round it!" One of the officers now came forward: "General," he said, "we neither fear the courage, nor arms,
the open attack, nor secret ambush of the Moslems. We are ready to expose our breasts, exposed
ten thousand times before, to the balls and scymetars of the infidels, and to fall gloriously for Greece. But we will not die in heaps, like dogs poisoned in summer-time, by the pestilential air of that city-
we dare not go against the Plague!" A multitude of men are feeble and inert, without a voice, a leader; give them that, and they regain
the strength belonging to their numbers. Shouts from a thousand voices now rent the air-the cry of
applause became universal. Raymond saw the danger; he was willing to save his troops from the
crime of disobedience; for he knew, that contention once begun between the commander and his
army, each act and word added to the weakness of the former, and bestowed power on the latter. He gave orders for the retreat to be sounded, and the regiments repaired in good order to the camp. I hastened to carry the intelligence of these strange proceedings to Perdita; and we were soon joined
by Raymond. He looked gloomy and perturbed. My sister was struck by my narrative: "How beyond
the imagination of man," she exclaimed, "are the decrees of heaven, wondrous and inexplicable!" "Foolish girl," cried Raymond angrily, "are you like my valiant soldiers, panic-struck? What is there
inexplicable, pray, tell me, in so very natural an occurrence? Does not the plague rage each year in
Stamboul? What wonder, that this year, when as we are told, its virulence is unexampled in Asia, that
it should have occasioned double havoc in that city? What wonder then, in time of siege, want,
extreme heat, and drought, that it should make unaccustomed ravages? Less wonder far is it, that
the garrison, despairing of being able to hold out longer, should take advantage of the negligence of
our fleet to escape at once from siege and capture. It is not pestilence -by the God that lives! it is
not either plague or impending danger that makes us, like birds in harvest-time, terrified by a
scarecrow, abstain from the ready prey-it is base superstition-And thus the aim of the valiant is
made the shuttlecock of fools; the worthy ambition of the high-souled, the plaything of these tamed
hares! But yet Stamboul shall be ours! By my past labours, by torture and imprisonment suffered for
them, by my victories, by my sword, I swear-by my hopes of fame, by my former deserts now
awaiting their reward, I deeply vow, with these hands to plant the cross on yonder mosque!" "Dearest Raymond!" interrupted Perdita, in a supplicating accent. He had been walking to and fro in the marble hall of the seraglio; his very lips were pale with rage,
while, quivering, they shaped his angry words- his eyes shot fire-his gestures seemed restrained
by their very vehemence. "Perdita," he continued, impatiently, "I know what you would say; I know
that you love me, that you are good and gentle; but this is no woman's work-nor can a female heart
guess at the hurricane which tears me!" He seemed half afraid of his own violence, and suddenly quitted the hall: a look from Perdita shewed
me her distress, and I followed him. He was pacing the garden: his passions were in a state of
inconceivable turbulence. "Am I for ever," he cried, "to be the sport of fortune! Must man, the
heaven-climber, be for ever the victim of the crawling reptiles of his species! Were I as you, Lionel,
looking forward to many years of life, to a succession of love-enlightened days, to refined
enjoyments and fresh-springing hopes, I might yield, and breaking my General's staff, seek repose in
the glades of Windsor. But I am about to die!-nay, interrupt me not-soon I shall die. From the
many-peopled earth, from the sympathies of man, from the loved resorts of my youth, from the
kindness of my friends, from the affection of my only beloved Perdita, I am about to be removed. Such is the will of fate! Such the decree of the High Ruler from whom there is no appeal: to whom I
submit. But to lose all-to lose with life and love, glory also! It shall not be! "I, and in a few brief years, all you,-this panic-struck army, and all the population of fair Greece, will
no longer be. But other generations will arise, and ever and for ever will continue, to be made
happier by our present acts, to be glorified by our valour. The prayer of my youth was to be one
among those who render the pages of earth's history splendid; who exalt the race of man, and make
this little globe a dwelling of the mighty. Alas, for Raymond! the prayer of his youth is wasted-the
hopes of his manhood are null! "From my dungeon in yonder city I cried, soon I will be thy lord! When Evadne pronounced my death,
I thought that the title of Victor of Constantinople would be written on my tomb, and I subdued all
mortal fear. I stand before its vanquished walls, and dare not call myself a conqueror. So shall it not
be! Did not Alexander leap from the walls of the city of the Oxydracae, to shew his coward troops the
way to victory, encountering alone the swords of its defenders? Even so will I brave the plague-and
though no man follow, I will plant the Grecian standard on the height of St. Sophia." Reason came unavailing to such high-wrought feelings. In vain I shewed him, that when winter came,
the cold would dissipate the pestilential air, and restore courage to the Greeks. "Talk not of other
season than this!" he cried. "I have lived my last winter, and the date of this year, 2092, will be
carved upon my tomb. Already do I see," he continued, looking up mournfully, "the bourne and
precipitate edge of my existence, over which I plunge into the gloomy mystery of the life to come. I
am prepared, so that I leave behind a trail of light so radiant, that my worst enemies cannot cloud it. I
owe this to Greece, to you, to my surviving Perdita, and to myself, the victim of ambition." We were interrupted by an attendant, who announced, that the staff of Raymond was assembled in
the council-chamber. He requested me in the meantime to ride through the camp, and to observe
and report to him the dispositions of the soldiers; he then left me. I had been excited to the utmost
by the proceedings of the day, and now more than ever by the passionate language of Raymond. Alas! for human reason! He accused the Greeks of superstition: what name did he give to the faith he
lent to the predictions of Evadne? I passed from the palace of Sweet Waters to the plain on which
the encampment lay, and found its inhabitants in commotion. The arrival of several with fresh stories
of marvels, from the fleet; the exaggerations bestowed on what was already known; tales of old
prophecies, of fearful histories of whole regions which had been laid waste during the present year
by pestilence, alarmed and occupied the troops. Discipline was lost; the army disbanded itself. Each
individual, before a part of a great whole moving only in unison with others, now became resolved
into the unit nature had made him, and thought of himself only. They stole off at first by ones and
twos, then in larger companies, until, unimpeded by the officers, whole battalions sought the road
that led to Macedonia. About midnight I returned to the palace and sought Raymond; he was alone, and apparently
composed; such composure, at least, was his as is inspired by a resolve to adhere to a certain line of
conduct. He heard my account of the self-dissolution of the army with calmness, and then said, "You
know, Verney, my fixed determination not to quit this place, until in the light of day Stamboul is
confessedly ours. If the men I have about me shrink from following me, others, more courageous, are
to be found. Go you before break of day, bear these dispatches to Karazza, add to them your own
entreaties that he send me his marines and naval force; if I can get but one regiment to second me,
the rest would follow of course. Let him send me this regiment. I shall expect your return by to-
morrow noon." Methought this was but a poor expedient; but I assured him of my obedience and zeal. I quitted him
to take a few hours rest. With the breaking of morning I was accoutred for my ride. I lingered awhile,
desirous of taking leave of Perdita, and from my window observed the approach of the sun. The
golden splendour arose, and weary nature awoke to suffer yet another day of heat and thirsty decay. No flowers lifted up their dew-laden cups to meet the dawn; the dry grass had withered on the
plains; the burning fields of air were vacant of birds; the cicale alone, children of the sun, began their
shrill and deafening song among the cypresses and olives. I saw Raymond's coal-black charger
brought to the palace gate; a small company of officers arrived soon after; care and fear was painted
on each cheek, and in each eye, unrefreshed by sleep. I found Raymond and Perdita together. He was
watching the rising sun, while with one arm he encircled his beloved's waist; she looked on him, the
sun of her life, with earnest gaze of mingled anxiety and tenderness. Raymond started angrily when
he saw me. "Here still?" he cried. "Is this your promised zeal?" "Pardon me," I said, "but even as you speak, I am gone." "Nay, pardon me," he replied; "I have no right to command or reproach; but my life hangs on your
departure and speedy return. Farewell!" His voice had recovered its bland tone, but a dark cloud still hung on his features. I would have
delayed; I wished to recommend watchfulness to Perdita, but his presence restrained me. I had no
pretence for my hesitation; and on his repeating his farewell, I clasped his outstretched hand; it was
cold and clammy. "Take care of yourself, my dear Lord," I said. "Nay," said Perdita, "that task shall be mine. Return speedily, Lionel." With an air of absence he was
playing with her auburn locks, while she leaned on him; twice I turned back, only to look again on this
matchless pair. At last, with slow and heavy steps, I had paced out of the hall, and sprung upon my
horse. At that moment Clara flew towards me; clasping my knee she cried, "Make haste back, uncle! Dear uncle, I have such fearful dreams; I dare not tell my mother. Do not be long away!" I assured
her of my impatience to return, and then, with a small escort rode along the plain towards the tower
of Marmora. I fulfilled my commission; I saw Karazza. He was somewhat surprised; he would see, he said, what
could be done; but it required time; and Raymond had ordered me to return by noon. It was
impossible to effect any thing in so short a time. I must stay till the next day; or come back, after
having reported the present state of things to the general. My choice was easily made. A
restlessness, a fear of what was about to betide, a doubt as to Raymond's purposes, urged me to
return without delay to his quarters. Quitting the Seven Towers, I rode eastward towards the Sweet
Waters. I took a circuitous path, principally for the sake of going to the top of the mount before
mentioned, which commanded a view of the city. I had my glass with me. The city basked under the
noon-day sun, and the venerable walls formed its picturesque boundary. Immediately before me was
the Top Kapou, the gate near which Mahomet had made the breach by which he entered the city. Trees gigantic and aged grew near; before the gate I discerned a crowd of moving human figures-
with intense curiosity I lifted my glass to my eye. I saw Lord Raymond on his charger; a small
company of officers had gathered about him; and behind was a promiscuous concourse of soldiers
and subalterns, their discipline lost, their arms thrown aside; no music sounded, no banners
streamed. The only flag among them was one which Raymond carried; he pointed with it to the gate
of the city. The circle round him fell back. With angry gestures he leapt from his horse, and seizing a
hatchet that hung from his saddle-bow, went with the apparent intention of battering down the
opposing gate. A few men came to aid him; their numbers increased; under their united blows the
obstacle was vanquished, gate, portcullis, and fence were demolished; and the wide sun-lit way,
leading to the heart of the city, now lay open before them. The men shrank back; they seemed afraid
of what they had already done, and stood as if they expected some Mighty Phantom to stalk in
offended majesty from the opening. Raymond sprung lightly on his horse, grasped the standard, and
with words which I could not hear (but his gestures, being their fit accompaniment, were marked by
passionate energy,) he seemed to adjure their assistance and companionship; even as he spoke, the
crowd receded from him. Indignation now transported him; his words I guessed were fraught with
disdain-then turning from his coward followers, he addressed himself to enter the city alone. His
very horse seemed to back from the fatal entrance; his dog, his faithful dog, lay moaning and
supplicating in his path-in a moment more, he had plunged the rowels into the sides of the stung
animal, who bounded forward, and he, the gateway passed, was galloping up the broad and desart
street. Until this moment my soul had been in my eyes only. I had gazed with wonder, mixed with fear and
enthusiasm. The latter feeling now predominated. I forgot the distance between us: "I will go with
thee, Raymond!" I cried; but, my eye removed from the glass, I could scarce discern the pigmy forms
of the crowd, which about a mile from me surrounded the gate; the form of Raymond was lost. Stung
with impatience, I urged my horse with force of spur and loosened reins down the acclivity, that,
before danger could arrive, I might be at the side of my noble, godlike friend. A number of buildings
and trees intervened, when I had reached the plain, hiding the city from my view. But at that
moment a crash was heard. Thunderlike it reverberated through the sky, while the air was darkened. A moment more and the old walls again met my sight, while over them hovered a murky cloud;
fragments of buildings whirled above, half seen in smoke, while flames burst out beneath, and
continued explosions filled the air with terrific thunders. Flying from the mass of falling ruin which
leapt over the high walls, and shook the ivy towers, a crowd of soldiers made for the road by which I
came; I was surrounded, hemmed in by them, unable to get forward. My impatience rose to its
utmost; I stretched out my hands to the men; I conjured them to turn back and save their General,
the conqueror of Stamboul, the liberator of Greece; tears, aye tears, in warm flow gushed from my
eyes-I would not believe in his destruction; yet every mass that darkened the air seemed to bear
with it a portion of the martyred Raymond. Horrible sights were shaped to me in the turbid cloud
that hovered over the city; and my only relief was derived from the struggles I made to approach the
gate. Yet when I effected my purpose, all I could discern within the precincts of the massive walls was
a city of fire: the open way through which Raymond had ridden was enveloped in smoke and flame. After an interval the explosions ceased, but the flames still shot up from various quarters; the dome
of St. Sophia had disappeared. Strange to say (the result perhaps of the concussion of air occasioned
by the blowing up of the city) huge, white thunder clouds lifted themselves up from the southern
horizon, and gathered over-head; they were the first blots on the blue expanse that I had seen for
months, and amidst this havoc and despair they inspired pleasure. The vault above became
obscured, lightning flashed from the heavy masses, followed instantaneously by crashing thunder;
then the big rain fell. The flames of the city bent beneath it; and the smoke and dust arising from the
ruins was dissipated. I no sooner perceived an abatement of the flames than, hurried on by an irresistible impulse, I
endeavoured to penetrate the town. I could only do this on foot, as the mass of ruin was
impracticable for a horse. I had never entered the city before, and its ways were unknown to me. The
streets were blocked up, the ruins smoking; I climbed up one heap, only to view others in succession;
and nothing told me where the centre of the town might be, or towards what point Raymond might
have directed his course. The rain ceased; the clouds sunk behind the horizon; it was now evening,
and the sun descended swiftly the western sky. I scrambled on, until I came to a street, whose
wooden houses, half-burnt, had been cooled by the rain, and were fortunately uninjured by the
gunpowder. Up this I hurried-until now I had not seen a vestige of man. Yet none of the defaced
human forms which I distinguished, could be Raymond; so I turned my eyes away, while my heart
sickened within me. I came to an open space-a mountain of ruin in the midst, announced that some
large mosque had occupied the space-and here, scattered about, I saw various articles of luxury and
wealth, singed, destroyed-but shewing what they had been in their ruin-jewels, strings of pearls,
embroidered robes, rich furs, glittering tapestries, and oriental ornaments, seemed to have been
collected here in a pile destined for destruction; but the rain had stopped the havoc midway. Hours passed, while in this scene of ruin I sought for Raymond. Insurmountable heaps sometimes
opposed themselves; the still burning fires scorched me. The sun set; the atmosphere grew dim-and
the evening star no longer shone companionless. The glare of flames attested the progress of
destruction, while, during mingled light and obscurity, the piles around me took gigantic proportions
and weird shapes. For a moment I could yield to the creative power of the imagination, and for a
moment was soothed by the sublime fictions it presented to me. The beatings of my human heart
drew me back to blank reality. Where, in this wilderness of death, art thou, O Raymond-ornament
of England, deliverer of Greece, "hero of unwritten story," where in this burning chaos are thy dear
relics strewed? I called aloud for him-through the darkness of night, over the scorching ruins of
fallen Constantinople, his name was heard; no voice replied-echo even was mute. I was overcome by weariness; the solitude depressed my spirits. The sultry air impregnated with
dust, the heat and smoke of burning palaces, palsied my limbs. Hunger suddenly came acutely upon
me. The excitement which had hitherto sustained me was lost; as a building, whose props are
loosened, and whose foundations rock, totters and falls, so when enthusiasm and hope deserted me,
did my strength fail. I sat on the sole remaining step of an edifice, which even in its downfall, was
huge and magnificent; a few broken walls, not dislodged by gunpowder, stood in fantastic groupes,
and a flame glimmered at intervals on the summit of the pile. For a time hunger and sleep
contended, till the constellations reeled before my eyes and then were lost. I strove to rise, but my
heavy lids closed, my limbs over-wearied, claimed repose-I rested my head on the stone, I yielded
to the grateful sensation of utter forgetfulness; and in that scene of desolation, on that night of
despair-I slept. THE stars still shone brightly when I awoke, and Taurus high in the southern heaven shewed that it
was midnight. I awoke from disturbed dreams. Methought I had been invited to Timon's last feast; I
came with keen appetite, the covers were removed, the hot water sent up its unsatisfying steams,
while I fled before the anger of the host, who assumed the form of Raymond; while to my diseased
fancy, the vessels hurled by him after me, were surcharged with fetid vapour, and my friend's shape,
altered by a thousand distortions, expanded into a gigantic phantom, bearing on its brow the sign of
pestilence. The growing shadow rose and rose, filling, and then seeming to endeavour to burst
beyond, the adamantine vault that bent over, sustaining and enclosing the world. The night-mare
became torture; with a strong effort I threw off sleep, and recalled reason to her wonted functions. My first thought was Perdita; to her I must return; her I must support, drawing such food from
despair as might best sustain her wounded heart; recalling her from the wild excesses of grief, by the
austere laws of duty, and the soft tenderness of regret. The position of the stars was my only guide. I turned from the awful ruin of the Golden City, and,
after great exertion, succeeded in extricating myself from its enclosure. I met a company of soldiers
outside the walls; I borrowed a horse from one of them, and hastened to my sister. The appearance
of the plain was changed during this short interval; the encampment was broken up; the relics of the
disbanded army met in small companies here and there; each face was clouded; every gesture spoke
astonishment and dismay. With an heavy heart I entered the palace, and stood fearful to advance, to speak, to look. In the
midst of the hall was Perdita; she sat on the marble pavement, her head fallen on her bosom, her
hair dishevelled, her fingers twined busily one within the other; she was pale as marble, and every
feature was contracted by agony. She perceived me, and looked up enquiringly; her half glance of
hope was misery; the words died before I could articulate them; I felt a ghastly smile wrinkle my lips. She understood my gesture; again her head fell; again her fingers worked restlessly. At last I
recovered speech, but my voice terrified her; the hapless girl had understood my look, and for worlds
she would not that the tale of her heavy misery should have been shaped out and confirmed by hard,
irrevocable words. Nay, she seemed to wish to distract my thoughts from the subject: she rose from
the floor: "Hush!" she said, whisperingly; "after much weeping, Clara sleeps; we must not disturb
her." She seated herself then on the same ottoman where I had left her in the morning resting on the
beating heart of her Raymond; I dared not approach her, but sat at a distant corner, watching her
starting and nervous gestures. At length, in an abrupt manner she asked, "Where is he?" "O, fear not," she continued, "fear not that I should entertain hope! Yet tell me, have you found him? To have him once more in my arms, to see him, however changed, is all I desire. Though
Constantinople be heaped above him as a tomb, yet I must find him-then cover us with the city's
weight, with a mountain piled above-I care not, so that one grave hold Raymond and his Perdita." Then weeping, she clung to me: "Take me to him," she cried, "unkind Lionel, why do you keep me
here? Of myself I cannot find him -but you know where he lies-lead me thither." At first these agonizing plaints filled me with intolerable compassion. But soon I endeavoured to
extract patience for her from the ideas she suggested. I related my adventures of the night, my
endeavours to find our lost one, and my disappointment. Turning her thoughts this way, I gave them
an object which rescued them from insanity. With apparent calmness she discussed with me the
probable spot where he might be found, and planned the means we should use for that purpose. Then hearing of my fatigue and abstinence, she herself brought me food. I seized the favourable
moment, and endeavoured to awaken in her something beyond the killing torpor of grief. As I spoke,
my subject carried me away; deep admiration; grief, the offspring of truest affection, the overflowing
of a heart bursting with sympathy for all that had been great and sublime in the career of my friend,
inspired me as I poured forth the praises of Raymond. "Alas, for us," I cried, "who have lost this latest honour of the world! Beloved Raymond! He is gone to
the nations of the dead; he has become one of those, who render the dark abode of the obscure
grave illustrious by dwelling there. He has journied on the road that leads to it, and joined the mighty
of soul who went before him. When the world was in its infancy death must have been terrible, and
man left his friends and kindred to dwell, a solitary stranger, in an unknown country. But now, he
who dies finds many companions gone before to prepare for his reception. The great of past ages
people it, the exalted hero of our own days is counted among its inhabitants, while life becomes
doubly 'the desart and the solitude.' "What a noble creature was Raymond, the first among the men of our time. By the grandeur of his
conceptions, the graceful daring of his actions, by his wit and beauty, he won and ruled the minds of
all. Of one only fault he might have been accused; but his death has cancelled that. I have heard him
called inconstant of purpose-when he deserted, for the sake of love, the hope of sovereignty, and
when he abdicated the protectorship of England, men blamed his infirmity of purpose. Now his death
has crowned his life, and to the end of time it will be remembered, that he devoted himself, a willing
victim, to the glory of Greece. Such was his choice: he expected to die. He foresaw that he should
leave this cheerful earth, the lightsome sky, and thy love, Perdita; yet he neither hesitated or turned
back, going right onward to his mark of fame. While the earth lasts, his actions will be recorded with
praise. Grecian maidens will in devotion strew flowers on his tomb, and make the air around it
resonant with patriotic hymns, in which his name will find high record." I saw the features of Perdita soften; the sternness of grief yielded to tenderness-I continued:-
"Thus to honour him, is the sacred duty of his survivors. To make his name even as an holy spot of
ground, enclosing it from all hostile attacks by our praise, shedding on it the blossoms of love and
regret, guarding it from decay, and bequeathing it untainted to posterity. Such is the duty of his
friends. A dearer one belongs to you, Perdita, mother of his child. Do you remember in her infancy,
with what transport you beheld Clara, recognizing in her the united being of yourself and Raymond;
joying to view in this living temple a manifestation of your eternal loves. Even such is she still. You say
that you have lost Raymond. O, no!-yet he lives with you and in you there. From him she sprung,
flesh of his flesh, bone of his bone-and not, as heretofore, are you content to trace in her downy
cheek and delicate limbs, an affinity to Raymond, but in her enthusiastic affections, in the sweet
qualities of her mind, you may still find him living, the good, the great, the beloved. Be it your care to
foster this similarity-be it your care to render her worthy of him, so that, when she glory in her
origin, she take not shame for what she is." I could perceive that, when I recalled my sister's thoughts to her duties in life, she did not listen with
the same patience as before. She appeared to suspect a plan of consolation on my part, from which
she, cherishing her new-born grief, revolted. "You talk of the future," she said, "while the present is
all to me. Let me find the earthly dwelling of my beloved; let us rescue that from common dust, so
that in times to come men may point to the sacred tomb, and name it his-then to other thoughts,
and a new course of life, or what else fate, in her cruel tyranny, may have marked out for me." After a short repose I prepared to leave her, that I might endeavour to accomplish her wish. In the
mean time we were joined by Clara, whose pallid cheek and scared look shewed the deep impression
grief had made on her young mind. She seemed to be full of something to which she could not give
words; but, seizing an opportunity afforded by Perdita's absence, she preferred to me an earnest
prayer, that I would take her within view of the gate at which her father had entered Constantinople. She promised to commit no extravagance, to be docile, and immediately to return. I could not refuse;
for Clara was not an ordinary child; her sensibility and intelligence seemed already to have endowed
her with the rights of womanhood. With her therefore, before me on my horse, attended only by the
servant who was to re-conduct her, we rode to the Top Kapou. We found a party of soldiers gathered
round it. They were listening. "They are human cries," said one: "More like the howling of a dog,"
replied another; and again they bent to catch the sound of regular distant moans, which issued from
the precincts of the ruined city. "That, Clara," I said, "is the gate, that the street which yestermorn
your father rode up." Whatever Clara's intention had been in asking to be brought hither, it was
balked by the presence of the soldiers. With earnest gaze she looked on the labyrinth of smoking
piles which had been a city, and then expressed her readiness to return home. At this moment a
melancholy howl struck on our ears; it was repeated; "Hark!" cried Clara, "he is there; that is Florio,
my father's dog." It seemed to me impossible that she could recognise the sound, but she persisted
in her assertion till she gained credit with the crowd about. At least it would be a benevolent action
to rescue the sufferer, whether human or brute, from the desolation of the town; so, sending Clara
back to her home, I again entered Constantinople. Encouraged by the impunity attendant on my
former visit, several soldiers who had made a part of Raymond's body guard, who had loved him, and
sincerely mourned his loss, accompanied me. It is impossible to conjecture the strange enchainment of events which restored the lifeless form of
my friend to our hands. In that part of the town where the fire had most raged the night before, and
which now lay quenched, black and cold, the dying dog of Raymond crouched beside the mutilated
form of its lord.