It struck me that should the person prove to be
his lordship, I might make her look extremely foolish, by letting her
overhear his declarations of attachment to me. 'Conceal yourselves in
this closet,' whispered I to my visitors. 'I have particular reasons.' They looked at each other, and hesitated. 'In, in!' said I; 'for I suspect that this visit is from a villain, and
I wish you to hear what passes.' Both then went into the closet. I opened the door of my chamber, and,
to my great disappointment, the poet appeared at it, with his eyes
rolling, and his mouth ajar. 'What is the matter?' asked I. He gaped still wider, but said nothing. 'Ah,' cried I, 'that is an awkward attempt at expressing horror. If you
have any hideous news to communicate, why do you not rush into the
room, tossing your hands on high, and exclaiming, "Fly, fair lady, all
is lost!"' 'Indeed, Miss,' said he, 'I was never in the way of learning good
breeding. But don't go to the masquerade, Miss, Oh, don't! My mother
overheard old Betterton just now planning with the landlady, to carry
you from it by force. But, Miss, I have a fine sword, above stairs,
three feet and a half long, and I will rub off the rust, and----'

A knock at the street-door interrupted him. I was in a hiding mood. Already the scene promised wonders; and I resolved not to damp its
rising spirit; so made the simple Higginson get underneath the sofa. The next moment my door opened, and Vixen, Montmorenci's terrier, came
bounding towards me. 'Go, dear Vixen,' cried I, snatching her to my bosom; 'carry back to
your master all that nourishes his remembrance. Go, dear Vixen, guard
him by night, and accompany him by day, serve him with zeal, and love
him with fidelity!' I turned round, and perceived--Montmorenci! The poor timid girl bent
her eyes to the ground. 'Yes, dear Vixen,' said he, 'you have now indeed a claim to my regard;
and with the fondest gratitude will I cherish you!' He then flew to me, and poured forth, at my feet, the most passionate
acknowledgments, and tender protestations. I tried to break from him. 'No, loveliest Cherubina!' said he, detaining me. 'Not thus must we
part.' 'We must part for ever!' exclaimed I. 'After that rash soliloquy which
you have just heard, never can I bear you in my sight. Besides, Sir,
you are betrothed, at this moment, to another.' 'I? Ridiculous! But to whom?' 'Our hostess--a most charming woman.' 'Our hostess! Yes, a charming woman indeed. She has roses in her cheek,
and lilies in her skin; but they are white roses, and orange lilies. Our hostess! Beshrew my heart, I would let cobwebs grow on my lips
before I would kiss her.' Another knock came to the door. 'Me miserable!' exclaimed I. 'If this be the person I suspect, we are
both undone--separated for ever!' 'Who? what? where shall I hide?' cried his lordship. 'Yon dark closet,' said I, pointing. 'Fly.' His lordship sprang into the closet, and closed the door. 'I can hear no tidings of your father,' said Stuart, entering the room. 'I have searched every hotel in Town, and I really fear that some
accident----'

'Mercy upon me! who's here?' cried his lordship from the closet. 'As I
hope to be saved, the place is full of people. Let me go; whoever the
devil you are, let me go!' 'Take that--and that--and that:--you poor, pitiful, fortune-hunting
play-actor!' vociferated the landlady, buffetting him about. That unhappy young nobleman bolted from the closet, with his face
running blood, and the landlady fast at his heels. 'Yes, you dog!' exclaimed she; 'I have discovered your treacherousness
at last. As for your love-letters and trinkets, to me, villain--I never
valued 'em a pin's point; but that you should go for to try to ruin
this sweet innocent young creature, that is what distresses me, so it
is.' And she burst out crying. 'Love-letters and trinkets to you!' exclaimed I. 'Surely he was not so
base, Madam.' 'But he was so base, Madam,' said she with a bitter look; 'and if you
fancy that 'tis yourself he loves, why look there; read the letter he
sent me yesterday, just after I had asked him to pay me for six months'
diet and lodging.' I read:

    'Accept, my lovely hostess, the pair of bracelets which accompanies
    this note, and rest assured that I will discharge my bill, in the
    course of another month. 'My motive for having brought Miss Wilkinson into your house, as my
    cousin, was simply to restore her to her friends. Your jealousy,
    though most unfounded, is most flattering. 'Ah, how little do you know your Grundy!--If I pay the silly girl a
    few slight attentions, it is only to cloak that tenderness for you,
    which preys upon my heart, and consumes my vitals;--that
    tenderness, which I yesterday so solemnly vowed to evince (as soon
    as my affairs are arranged) at the altar. 'Your own, own, own,

    'ABRAHAM GRUNDY.' It was as much as my dignity could do to suppress my indignation at
this letter; but the heroine prevailed, and I cast on his lordship my
famous compound expression of pity, contempt, and surprise, which I
tinged with just fascination enough to remind him of what a jewel he
had lost. Meantime he stood wiping his face, and did not utter a word. 'And now,' cried I, 'now for the grand developement. James Higginson,
come forth!' In a moment the poet was seen, creeping, like a huge tortoise, from
under the sofa. 'Mr. Higginson,' said I, 'did not your mother tell you, that this lady
here--this amiable lady,' (and I curtsied low to her, and she curtsied
still lower to me), 'that this first and best of women,' (and again we
exchanged rival curtsies), 'is plotting with a Mr. Betterton to betray
me into his hands at the masquerade?' 'Madam,' answered the poet, with a firm demeanour, 'I do solemnly
certify and asseverate, that so my mother told me.' 'Then your mother told a confounded falsehood!' cried Betterton,
popping out of the closet. Higginson walked up to him, and knocked him down with the greatest
gravity imaginable. The hostess ran at Higginson, and fastened her
fangs in his face. Montmorenci laid hold of the hostess, and off came
her cap. Stuart dropped into a chair with laughter. I too forgot all my
dignity, and clapped my hands, and danced with delight, while they
kicked and scratched each other without mercy. At length Stuart interfered, and separated the combatants. The landlady
retired to repair her dismantled head; and his lordship and Higginson
to wash their wounds. Betterton too was about to take his departure. 'Sir,' said Stuart, 'I must beg leave to detain you for a few moments.' Betterton bowed and returned. 'Your name is Betterton, I believe.' 'It is, Sir.' 'After Mr. Higginson's accusation of you,' said Stuart, 'I feel myself
called upon, as the friend of this lady's father, to insist on your
apologizing for the designs which you have dared to harbour against
her; and to demand an unequivocal renunciation of those views for the
future.' 'You are an honest fellow,' said Betterton, 'and I respect your spirit. Most sincerely, most humbly, Miss Wilkinson, do I solicit your
forgiveness; and I beg you will believe, that nothing but a
misrepresentation of your real character and history tempted me to
treat you with such undeserved insult. I now declare, that you have
nothing further to fear from me.' 'But before I can feel perfectly satisfied,' said Stuart, 'I must
stipulate for the discontinuance of your visits to Miss Wilkinson, as a
proof that you have relinquished all improper projects against her.' 'I had formed that resolution before you spoke,' answered Betterton,
'though many a bitter pang it will cost me. Now then we are all
friends. I may have my faults, but upon my soul, I am a man of
honour;--I am, upon my soul. As for you, Mr. Stuart, without flattery,
you have evinced more discretion and coolness, throughout this affair,
than I have ever seen in so young a man. Sir, you are an honour to the
human race, and I wish you would dine with me this evening at the Crown
and Anchor. Some friends of us meet there to discuss a radical reform. Do, my dear fellow. We want nothing but men of respectability like you;
for our sentiments "are the finest in the world."' 'You will excuse me,' said Stuart, 'though I am told that your wines
are as fine and as foreign as your sentiments.' 'Well, adieu, good people,' said Betterton. 'Think of me with kindness. Faults I may have, but my heart----' (tapping at it with his
forefinger), 'all is right here.' After he had left us, I reprimanded Stuart so severely, for his
officiousness in having interfered about Betterton, that he went away
quite offended; and, I much fear, will never return. If he does not, he
will use me basely, to leave me here in this unprotected state, after
all his anxieties about me--anxieties too, which (I cannot tell why)
have pleased me beyond expression. I confess, I feel a regard for the
man, and should be sorry to have hurt his feelings seriously. Would Sir
Charles Bingley have deserted me so, I ask? No. But Stuart has no
notion of being a plain, useful, unsuccessful lover, like him. Well, I
must say, I hate to see a man more ready to fall out with one, than to
fall in love with one. But Montmorenci--what shall I say of him? How can he possibly exculpate
himself from his treacherous intrigue with the landlady? I confess I am
predisposed to credit any feasible excuse which he can assign, rather
than find myself deceived, outrivalled, and deprived of a lover, not
alone dear to me, but indispensible to the progress of my memoirs. Then, that closet-scene, from which I had a right to expect the true
pathetic, what a bear-garden it became! In short, I feel at this moment
disgusted with the world. I half wish I were at home again. Now too,
that Stuart has reminded me of our early days, I cannot avoid sometimes
picturing to myself the familiar fireside, the walks, frolics,
occupations of our childhood; and well I remember how he used to humour
my whims. Oh, these times are past, and now he opposes me in every
thing. But whither am I wandering? Pardon these vulgar sentiments. They have
escaped my pen. You know that a mere home is my horror. Forgive them. Adieu. Determined to support my dignity, I dined alone in my room, after the
closet-scene; and during this evening, letters of the most
heart-rending nature passed between his lordship and me. To be brief, he has convinced me, that the letter written in his name,
to the landlady, was a FORGERY of her own. The circumventing wretch! I
am of opinion, that it ought to be made a hanging matter. The following is an extract from his and my correspondence. After a
most satisfactory disquisition on the various circumstances tending to
prove the forgery, he writes thus:

                     *      *      *      *      *

'I have begun twenty letters to you, and have torn them all. I write to
you on my knees, and the paper is blistered with my tears; but I have
dried it with my sighs. 'Sun, moon, and stars may rise and set as they will. I know not whether
it be day, or whether it be night. 'When the girl came with your last note, the idea that your eyes had
just been dwelling on her features, on her cap, ribbon, and apron, made
her and them so interesting, so dear to me, that, though her features
are snubbed, her cap tattered, her ribbon bottle-green (which I hate),
and her apron dirty, I should certainly have taken her in my arms, if I
had not been the most bashful of men. 'Though that note stung me to the heart, the words were hosts of angels
to me, and the small paper the interminable regions of bliss. Any thing
from you! 'How my heart beats, and my blood boils in my veins, when by chance our
feet meet under the table. The diapason of my heart-strings vibrates to
the touch. How often I call to mind the sweet reproof you once gave me
at dinner, when I trod on your toe in a transport of passion. '"If you love me, tell me so," said you, smiling; "but do not hurt my
foot." 'Another little incident is always recurring to me. As we parted from
each other, the night before last, you held out your hand and said,
"Good-night, my dear Montmorenci." It was the first time you had ever
called me _dear_. The sound sank deep into my heart. I have repeated
it a hundred times since, and when I went to bed, I said, good night,
my dear Montmorenci. I recollected myself and laughed. The fatal kiss
that I once dared to snatch from you has undone me for ever. The
moisture on your lip was like a suppuration of rubies. O immortal
remembrance of that illusive, frantic, and enchanting moment!' BILLET FROM CHERUBINA. He who could be capable of the letter, could be capable of calling
    it a forgery. BILLET FROM MONTMORENCI. Misery with you, were better than happiness without you. BILLET FROM CHERUBINA. Hatred and certainty were better than love and suspicion. BILLET FROM MONTMORENCI. Love is heaven and heaven is love. BILLET FROM CHERUBINA. If heaven be love, I fear that heaven is not eternal. BILLET FROM MONTMORENCI. If my mind be kept in suspense, my body shall be suspended too. BILLET FROM CHERUBINA. Foolish youth! If my life be dear to thee, attempt not thine own. BILLET FROM MONTMORENCI. It were easier to kill myself than to fly from Cherubina. BILLET FROM CHERUBINA. LIVE. I restore you to favour. BILLET FROM MONTMORENCI. Angelic girl! But how can I live without the means? My landlady
    threatens me with an arrest. Heloise lent money to St. Preux. BILLET FROM CHERUBINA. In enclosing to you half of all I have, I feel, alas! that I am but
    half as liberal of my purse as of my heart. BILLET FROM MONTMORENCI. I promise to pay Lady Cherubina de Willoughby, or order, on demand,
    the sum of twenty-five pounds sterling, value received. MONTMORENCI. In a few minutes after I had received this last billet, his lordship
came in person to perfect the reconciliation. Never was so tender, so
excruciating a scene. We then consulted about the masquerade; and he brought me down his
dress for it. The Montero cap and tarnished regimentals (which he
procured at the theatre) are admirable. Soon after his departure, a letter was brought to me by the maid; who
said, that a tall man, wrapped in a dark cloak, put it into her hand,
and then fled with great swiftness. Conceive my sensations on reading this note, written in an antiquated
hand. _To Lady Cherubina de Willoughby. These, greeting. Most fayre Ladie

    An aunciente and loyall Vassall that erewhyles appertained unto
    yre ryhgte noble Auncestrie, in ye qualitie of Seneschal, hath,
    by chaunce, discovred yer place of hiding, and doth crave ye boon
    that you will not fayle to goe unto ye Masquerade at ye Pantheon;
    where, anon he will joyn you, and unravell divers mysterys
    touching your pedigree. Lette nonne disswaid you from to goe, and eke lette nonne, save a
    Matron, goe with you; els I dare not holde parle with you. Myne honoured Ladie, if you heede not this counsell, you will work
    yourselfe woefull ruth._

Judge if I can sleep a wink after such a mysterious communication. Excellent old man! I mean to make him my steward. Adieu. I believe I mentioned, in a former letter, that my bed-chamber was on
the ground floor, and looking into the yard at the back of the house. Soon after I went to bed, last night, I heard a whispering and rustling
outside of the window, and while I was awaiting with anxiety the
result, sleep surprised me. I awoke earlier, as I thought, than usual, this morning; for not a ray
penetrated my curtainless window. I then tried to compose myself to
sleep again, but in vain; so there I lay turning and tumbling about,
for eight or nine hours, at the very least. At last I became alarmed. What can be the matter? thought I. Is the sun quenched or eclipsed? or
has the globe ceased rolling? or am I struck stone blind? In the midst of my conjectures, a sudden cry of fire! fire! reverberated through the house. I sprang out of bed, and huddled on me
whatever cloaths came to hand. I then groped for my casket of jewels,
and having secured it, rushed into the outer room, where my eyes were
instantly dazzled by the sudden glare of light. However, I had presence of mind enough to snatch up Corporal Trim's
coat, which still remained on a chair; and to slip it on me. For, in
the first place, I had no gown underneath; and in the next, I
recollected, that Harriot Byron, at a moment of distress, went wild
about the country, in masquerade. Hurrying into the hall, I saw the street door wide open, Stuart and
Montmorenci struggling with each other near it, the landlady dragging a
trunk down stairs, and looking like the ghost of a mad housemaid; and
the poet just behind her, with his corpulent mother, bed and all, upon
his back; while she kept exclaiming, that we should all be in heaven in
five minutes, and he crying out, Heaven forbid! Heaven forbid! I darted past Stuart, just as he had got Montmorenci down; thence out
of the house, and had fled twenty paces, before I discovered, that, so
far from being night, it was broad, bright, incontrovertible day! I had no time to reflect on this mystery, as I heard steps pursuing me,
and my name called. I fled the faster, for I dreaded I knew not what. The portentous darkness of my room, the false alarm of fire, all
betokened some diabolical conspiracy against my life; so I rushed along
the street, to the horror and astonishment of all who saw me. For
conceive me drest in a long-skirted, red coat, stiff with tarnished
lace; a satin petticoat, satin shoes, no stockings, and my flaxen hair
streaming like a meteor behind me! Stop her, stop her! was now shouted on all sides. Hundreds seemed in
pursuit. Panting and almost exhausted, I still continued my flight. They gained on me. What should I do? I saw the door of a carriage just
opened, and two ladies, dressed for dinner, stepping into it. I sprang
in after them, crying, save me, save me! The footman endeavoured to
drag me out; the mob gathered round shouting; the horses took fright,
and set off in full gallop; I, meantime, on one knee, with my meek eyes
raised, and my hands folded across my bosom, awaited my fate; while the
ladies gazed on me in dismay, and supported one unbroken scream. At last, the carriage dashed against a post, and was upset. Several
persons ran forward, and, I being uppermost, took me out the first. Again I began running, and again a mob was at my heels. I felt certain
they would tear me in pieces. My head became bewildered; and all the
horrid sights I had ever read of rose in array before me. Bacchantes,
animated with Orphean fury, slinging their serpents in the air, and
uttering dithyrambics, appeared to surround me on every side. On I
flew. Knock it down! cried several voices. A footman was just entering a house. I rushed past him, and into a
parlour, where a large party were sitting at dinner. Save me! exclaimed I, and sank on my knees before them. All
arose:--some, in springing to seize me, fell; and others began dragging
me away. I grasped the table-cloth, in my confusion, and the next
instant, the whole dinner was strewn about the floor. Those who had
fallen down, rose in piteous plight; one bathed in soup, another
crowned with vegetables, and the face of a third all over harico. They held me fast, and questioned me; then called me mad, and turned me
into the street. The mob were still waiting for me there, and they
cheered me as I came out; so seeing a shop at hand, I darted through
it, and ran up stairs, into the drawing-room. There I found a mother in the cruel act of whipping her child. Ever a
victim to thrilling sensibility, I snatched the rod from her hand; she
shrieked and alarmed the house; and again I was turned out of doors. Again, my friend the mob received me with a shout; again I took to
flight; rushed through another shop, was turned out--through another,
was turned out. In short, I threaded a dozen different houses, and
witnessed a dozen different domestic scenes. In this, they were
singing, in that scolding:--here, I caught an old man kissing the maid,
there, I found a young man reading the Bible. Entering another, I heard
ladies laughing and dancing in the drawing-room. I hurried past them to
the garrets, and saw their aged servant dying. Shocked by the sight, I paused at his half-opened door. Not a soul was
in the room with him; and vials and basons strewed the table. 'Is that my daughter?' said he feebly. 'Will no one go for my daughter? To desert me thus, after first breaking my heart! Well then, I will
find her out myself.' He made a sudden effort to rise, but it was fatal. His head and arms
dropped down motionless, and hung out of the bed. He gave a hollow sob,
and expired. Horrorstruck, I rushed into an adjoining garret, and burst into tears. I felt guilty of I knew not what; and the picture of Wilkinson, dying
in the madhouse, and calling on his daughter, shot across me for a
moment. The noise of people searching the rooms below, and ascending the
stairs, put an end to my disagreeable reflections; and I thought but of
escape. Running to the window of the garret, I found that it opened
upon the roof of a neighbouring house; and recollecting that robbers
often escape by similar means, I sprang out of the window, closed it
after me, and ran along a whole row of roofs. At last I came to a house higher than the rest, with a small window,
similar to that by which I had just got out, and happily lying open. On
looking into the garret, I found that nobody was there, so I scrambled
into it, and fastened the window after me. A servant's bed, a chair, a
table, and an immense chest, constituted all the furniture. The chest
had nothing but a little linen in it; and I determined to make it my
place of refuge, in case of an alarm. Having sat a few minutes, to compose my spirits, after the shock they
had just experienced, I resolved on exploring the several apartments;
for I felt a secret presentiment that this house was, some way or
other, connected with my fate--a most natural idea. I first traversed the garrets, but found nothing in them worthy of
horror; so I stole, with cautious steps, down the first flight of
stairs, and found the door of the front room open. Hearing no noise
inside, I ventured to put in my head, and perceived a large table, with
lighted candles on it, and covered over with half-finished dresses of
various descriptions, besides bonnets, feathers, caps, and ribbons in
profusion; whence I concluded that the people of the house were
milliners. Here I sat some time, admiring the dresses, and trying at a mirror how
the caps became me, till I was interrupted by steps on the stairs. I
ran behind a window-curtain; and immediately three young milliners came
into the room. They sat down at the table, and began working. 'I wonder,' said one, 'whether our lodger has returned from dinner.' 'What a sly eye the fellow casts at me,' says another. 'And how he smiles at me,' says the first. 'And how he teases me about my being pretty,' says the second. 'And me too,' says the first; 'and he presses my hand into the
bargain.' 'Presses!' says the second; 'why, he _squeezes_ mine; and just think,
he tries to kiss me too.' 'I know,' says the third, who was the only pretty girl of the three,
'that he never lays a finger on me, nor speaks a word to me, good or
bad--never: and yesterday he lent me the Mysteries of Udolpho with a
very bad grace; and when I told him that I wanted it to copy the
description of the Tuscan girl's dress, as a lady had ordered me to
make up a dress like it, for the masquerade to-night, he handed me the
book, and said, that if I went there myself, the people would take my
face for a mask.' Judge of my horror, when I recollected, that this was, indeed, the
night of the masquerade; and that I was pent behind a curtain, without
even a dress for it! That Tuscan costume, thought I, would just answer. Perhaps I could
purchase it from the milliner. Perhaps---- But in the midst of my
perhaps's, the first and second milliner set off with some Indian
robes, which they had finished for the masquerade, while the pretty one
still remained to complete the Tuscan dress. While I was just resolving to issue from my retreat, and persuade her
to sell me the dress, I heard a step stealing up the stairs; and
presently perceived a young gentleman peeping into the room. He nodded
familiarly to the milliner; and said, in a whisper, that he had seen
her companions depart, and was now come to know how soon she would go,
that he might meet her at their old corner. She replied, that she would
soon be ready; and he then stole back again. I had now no time to lose in accomplishing my plan, so I drew aside the
curtain, and stood, in a commanding attitude before her. The poor girl looked up, started, made a miserable imitation of the
heroic scream, and ran down stairs. I ran after her, as far as the landing-place; and on looking over the
balusters, into the hall, I saw the young man who had just been with
her, listening to her account of the transaction. 'I will call the
watch,' said she, 'and do you keep guard at the door.' She then hastened into the street, and he stood in such a manner, that
it was impossible for me to pass him. 'What is the matter?' cried the mistress of the house, coming out of
the parlour. 'A mad woman that is above stairs,' answered the young man. 'Miss Jane
has just seen her; dressed half like a man, half like a woman, and with
hair down to the ground!'