












RALPH. The bliss of man (could pride that blessing find),
Is not to act or think beyond mankind;
No pow'rs of body or of soul to share,
But what his nature and his state can bear. POPE. CHARLES. Sincere, plain-hearted, hospitable, kind;
Yet, like the must'ring thunder when provok'd. THOMSON. EDWARD. Slave to no sect, he takes no private road,
But looks through nature, up to nature's God. POPE. "IT is very strange," said uncle Ralph, with evident impatience and vexation, as he
threw down on the table with great force a romance of the last century, "that a writer must
use so many words, only to tell us, that a woman got up and sat down again! No, they
must inform us in high-flown, poetic language, that she rose from her mossy couch, and
then thoughtfully reseated herself, and resumed her pensive posture! and then, if the wind
happened to blow her thin clothes about, and made her ribbons flutter and fly, we must be
entertained through half a page with her silken scarf floating in the wind and the rude
zephyr discomposing her light and nymph-like attire!" Uncle Charles, who had been studying the last orders of General Wolfe, and who had
just brushed away a tear from off his veteran cheek, which the last exhortation of that
renowned hero to his soldiers had drawn from his eye, shut the orderly-book, and smiled,
'midst his tears, at the ideas of his brother Ralph; while Edward, busy in reading a
newspaper, laid it down and assented to Ralph's opinion by a half-stifled smile, and the
word-humph! uttered so inwardly, that it sounded not much unlike the grunting of a pig! But, in order to preserve some method, it is necessary to introduce this trio to our
readers, and describe the sort of character which each of them (all originals in their kind)
was possessed of. The eldest brother, Mr. Ralph Marsham, was left in possession of a small paternal
estate, comfortable, because clear and unincumbered; but income-tax, property-tax, and
land-tax, had rendered him less rich than in the days of his youth: and a most valuable
farm being attached to his estate, he resolved to superintend it himself, and indeed to
work on it with the same indefatigable toil which his labourers bestowed upon it, in order
to ensure to themselves the excellent and plentiful cheer, together with the ample wages
which Mr. Marsham allowed them. Gentlemen-farmers are but sorry tillers of land; and the master's watchful eyes, and
even his assistance united, will not avail much, if he is not a thorough judge of that
profession which is universally allowed to be the most happy and independent of any in
the world. But Ralph derived one advantage by his perseverance; he made labour easy and
habitual to him, by boldly inuring himself to it; and continual and heavy losses, blights in
his corn, diseases in his cattle, and the frauds of his serving-men, soon reduced him to
that state which rendered exertion on his own part, and unwearied employment about his
farm, an indispensible obligation. He was endowed with a solidity of understanding, good, honest principles, but was
rather a kind of every-day character; and was chiefly guided both in the pursuits of his
studies, and all his most important actions, by mere matter of fact. Charles, the second brother, had been bred to the profession of arms, and was, at the
commencement of this history, a lieutenant on half-pay. An early introduction into the world's grand theatre had given, to a prepossessing
person, an ease of manners, and a certain address, which marked the gentleman in every
movement, and which the society of the army alone is capable of imparting to the wellborn
officer: the heart of Charles was warm, and might with truth be said, to be seated in
its right place-but his head approached to that temperature which is generally known by
the appellation of hot; which heat often led him astray: his temper and his expressions
were both hasty, and in the latter he thought no epithet too energetic to evince his
indignation against the person who had offended him: but the principles of revenge and
resentment only played upon his lip, they never entered his generous and excellent heart! Like his brother Ralph, he affected to despise all romantic enthusiasm: but this in
Charles was affectation only; a tale of woe, either real or fictitious, always surcharged his
heart, and caused the tender overflow to glisten in his eye. Edward, the youngest, had just attained his forty-second year; he was bred to the
church, and enjoyed a curacy of fifty pounds per annum! He had been for some years a
widower, and was the father of two daughters, the surviving children of five, by an
unportioned, amiable, and by him, ever-lamented wife. As he had a right honourable young rector, who hated the church most cordially,
except by those emoluments it brought him, through a considerable living; and who
rapaciously seized on every perquisite that his poor curate in the country might have
enjoyed, under one more kind and beneficent; Edward, except for the bounty of honest
Ralph, would have found great difficulty in bringing up and educating his two daughters
on so scanty a pittance as he received for his labours in the ecclesiastical vineyard. To those who were not acquainted with Edward's real character, there appeared a
moroseness about him, which was repellant in the extreme: his manners were cynical, and


his sentences in general short and severe: having in his infancy received a most severe
castigation, through the perfidy and duplicity of a schoolfellow, whom the generosity of
his heart forbade him to betray, he had taken such an abhorrence to the vice of lying, that
he thought no punishment too severe for the offence; and no outward terms that language
can bestow, strong enough to express his indignation at so despicable a vice. "I can arm
myself," he would say, "against a murderer, I can bar my doors against a robber; but can I
guard against the wretch who wounds me in secret with his tongue, or steals from me my
friends, by attacking my reputation?" How much is a man of this candid principle to be pitied, and what dreadful
mortifications attend the votary of truth, who is a most profound politician! Such was
Edward Marsham, who was seldom seen without a newspaper in his hand; and oh! what
an inundation of falsehoods has a newsmonger daily to encounter! The elder Mr. Marsham had always remained a bachelor, and had now given up all
prospects of matrimony. One reason, he urged, was, that having always been bred a
gentleman, he could not think of taking as a partner for life an uneducated woman, who
could be nothing but the plain country housewife; who, after the occupations of the day
were over, could entertain him with nothing but the settings of his geese, how many eggs
had been put under the black hen, when the brindled cow would calve; or that next week
would be the great wash, and then he must not invite the friends he had promised
himself; "While she sits," added he, "burning off the end of her cotton, before it goes
through her needle, by one solitary candle, to save expence, while she is darning her own
or her children's stockings!-else I must be tied for life to one of these modern ladies
with a finished education; and how finished? by the figurante, the drill-serjeant, and the
black-eyed cymbal-player*! It is true, my gay wife might perform well on the harp and the
tambourine; but then, either as the Grecian or the Egyptian habit might prevail, I should
see her, in common with every one else, half naked, or laced up in a pair of long stays, the
complete figure of an Egyptian mummy: she could never find her keys or her purse,
because she wears no pockets; and as she was shopping perhaps some whole morning
without purchasing any thing, her ridicule has been left on some counter or other, but
where she knows not, containing, may be, twenty or thirty pounds' worth of cash: then if I
should be blessed with children, she has them christened by names I can scarce
pronounce; and puts a bar to all comfort of her society and conversation, by continually
poring over a set of idle novels and romances: While the woman of real sense and
amiability, possessed of sweetness and cheerfulness of manners, united to a wellcultivated
mind, I am sure will never wed a man like me; and thus, as I have lived, I will
die a bachelor." Such was the reasoning and determination of Ralph, on his state of celibacy; and on
the death of his sister-in-law, he resolved on making his nieces Margaret and Mary his
*The education of a fashionable female is by no means complete, unless finished by the above trio. An
Italian figurante is hired at an immense price, to teach those dances adapted only to the Opera, and which
no gentlewoman can ever exhibit in public. The drill-serjeant teaches them to walk well-and this is not the
worst part of female education, for dancing-masters always walk ill. But the natural graces of an elegant
young female, we think, render unnecessary the voluptuous attitudes taught by the swarthy sons of Asia, in
the performance on the tambourine and cymbals. heirs; his property, when divided between them, would not be great, and he bestowed on
them a plain and useful education. When Edward and Charles became widowers, they united their small property to that
of their brother Ralph; and they, with the two nieces of Mr. Marsham, composed the
family at the spacious farmhouse. "I am not fond of fictitious histories of any kind," said Ralph, continuing his
observations on romances, as he leaned his elbow on the dirty, much-used, marblepapered
cover of the volume he had just thrown down, and which his niece Margaret had
been attentively perusing with very different emotions to those of her uncle. "These
works deal so much in the marvellous; in events utterly impossible ever to have taken
place. "-"I recollect once," said Charles, "being confined one day at an inn, when I was
travelling, by an heavy fall of snow, and expecting, when I asked for a book, I should
have that collection given me which is reckoned amongst "The Miseries of Human Life,"
my landlady brought me up a modern romance; and there I read of a young lady who had
been some years confined in a dungeon, without light, and great part of the time without
food! yet when she came out, her delicate form and astonishing beauty captivated all who
beheld her, and in particular one of her deliverers, who afterwards married her. "-"And
yet, I am sure," said Ralph, "she must, from famine and confinement, have grown as ugly
and as sallow as a witch; and from the damps and chills of her dungeon, as they express
themselves, her pretty limbs must have been either useless, or grown confounded clumsy,
from being swelled with the rheumatism!" "Ay! ay!" said Charles, "I am sure her person must have received considerable
damage, for I well remember that my friend Colonel George Aylesbury, before he was
confined for debt in the apartment of the King's Bench, was as good-looking a soldier as
ever I saw in my life; and now he appears older, by ten years, than he really is, and looks
more like a black-diamond merchant than an officer. *"
"I wish, brother Charles," said Edward, "you would not make use of so much slang
in your conversation, but call things by their right names: pray, is not the word coals as
easy to pronounce as black diamonds?" "Certainly," said Charles, "but you interrupted my remarks on the effect of
confinement on the person: you are fond, my reverend brother, of theatrical amusements;
well! was not the once beautiful Mrs. W. quite spoiled from every appearance of
elegance? could she ever again reassume on the stage the masculine habit, in which she
once looked so well? Her face, it is true, was so lovely, that it required the rudest hand of
adversity to disfigure it; but her fine form (though she was always inclined to the
embonpoint) was totally destroyed; and, had it not been for the generous Turk who
extricated her, the confined walls of the King's Bench would have in time given to her
such a rotundity, that she could never have appeared on the theatre again. *"
"Ah! now you have ascended from the slang to the novel style," said Edward, "with
your rude hand of adversity; but I maintain, that the greatest part of novels ought to be
burned by the common hangman; though there are, no doubt, some of those works of
fiction, which are both moral and entertaining." *Historique. *Historique. "What," cried the two elder brothers, at the same time, "do you, Edward, defend any
thing fictitious? "-"Assuredly," replied Edward, "otherwise, I must condemn the
excellent fables of �sop, Les milles et une nuits, and many of the works of the ancients:
but here," continued he, while he clenched his teeth and crumpled up the newspaper in
his hand, "here is the vehicle of the most daring and most abominable lies that ever
human art and malice can invent." "Reflect, Edward," said Charles, "that the editors of these papers pledge themselves
to fill this paper daily, for the amusement, as well as the information of their subscribers. A man sees, each day, before him this sheet, which he knows must be filled; and if there
is a dearth of home news, and foreign mails are late in their arrival, he must either
conjecture or invent, to please the public." "No," said Edward, "let him leave the places blank; let the paper appear pure as it is,
till stained by man; nor sully his columns by falsehoods, which only serve to encourage
the growth of rebellion, or delude the stanch loyalist into a belief of victories obtained,
which the same paper will next day contradict; and thus the stings of disappointed hope
inflict a double pang to the mind, that had before exulted in the success of his country's
arms, or those of her allies." The fascination of habit is not easily done away; and the arrival of the post-boy, with
letters and the important newspaper, gave a truce to all other thoughts and conversation,
than what the private correspondence of friendship, the bulletins of Buonaparte, the
conjectures of home quidnuncs, together with all the various subterfuges of the press,
gave rise to. When Ralph and Charles had perused their letters, and Edward his few lines from his
right honorable and reverend rector, the two former amused themselves in watching the
versatile turns of the politician's anxious countenance. It exhibited various emotions, but very few of the pleasurable kind: at length, he laid
down the paper; and smoothing the journal of the former day, which, in a rage, he had
before crumpled up, "Now," said he, "I am resolved to keep all these contradictory sheets
of heterogeneous matter; which one day tell me that the French have beaten the Austrians,
and the day following, that the Austrians have beaten the French; that Sir Arthur
Wellesley is surrounded; or that the whole army of Soultz is taken: one day the Spaniards
have taken Corunna; the next they are defeated; the next speaks ill of the Junta: again they
are all we can wish, the Spaniards beat the French, drive them out of their country, and
carry all before them. And now for home news: some little time ago I read that the Lady
Harriet Egmont, after going off with a married man, the father of eight children, and
living with him in open adultery, was restored to her home, and her too indulgent and
much injured husband: whereas, to my certain knowledge, she remained a short time at an
isolated mansion belonging to her brother, and then actually went off with her infatuated
lover to an island which has the peculiar privilege of harbouring crim. con. associates,
insolvent debtors, and all the other et-ceteras, intitled-indiscretions! *"
"My heart bleeds," said Charles, "at the domestic misfortunes of the good old Earl,
Lord Gresham's father! one of his sons so lately in the same awkward predicament, and
his gallant son, Montague, deprived, by the chance of war, of a limb: and then, Lord
Gresham was a character once so highly admired, that it is a thousand pities he should
*Historique. tarnish all his noble qualities by the fascinations of such a woman! who, I am told, has
neither manners nor person to recommend her. *"
"And yet, I doubt not," said Ralph, "but that this affair will furnish a foundation for
the story of some free-minded novel-writer, or, as the new school calls it, liberal-minded! and we shall have it some day brought forward, so clouded with romantic incidents, that
no one will guess who it means; and have for its title, perhaps, "THE FATAL
ATTACHMENT, OR LOVE TRIUMPHANT OVER DUTY!" wherein we shall find
Lady Harriet's face, and even her form, extolled to the skies; or perhaps some
bookseller's voluptuous hireling will be daring enough, for a few guineas, to write a
pamphlet in defence of the conduct of Lady Harriet Egmont!" "No one can defend their conduct in the smallest degree," said Edward; "the
generous conduct of Lord Gresham, in refusing to fight the brother, shews, however, that
virtue is not totally extinct in his once truly noble nature; for, I believe, no one ever
doubted his courage! *"
"You are a man of peace, brother," said Charles, "your profession enjoins you to
teach what your GREAT MASTER, when he came into the world, proclaimed to all
mankind; but I know, if a man had challenged me, I should have acted very differently." After again taking up the newspaper, and laying it down again, "Now, here," said
Edward, "is another lying business! two days ago there was a current report, that the
republican reformist, the old crony and defender of Colonel Despard, had been killed in a
duel! and here, this day, I find it asserted to have been a mere fabrication." "Come, come," said Ralph, "a truce to novels, newspapers, and fables of every kind:
here," continued he, "I will set an example;" and at the same time he threw the volume,
whose enthusiastic expressions had so much displeased him, into the fire. This caused an hearty laugh from Charles, and the risible muscles of the cynical
Edward relaxed a little on the occasion. Ralph did not appear a merry man, but there was a certain humour in his actions, and
sometimes in his expressions, which diverted only, when performed or spoken by
himself; it was requisite to know the man personally, to be at all moved by them; in
another they would have been flat, nor could the record of them afford amusement. Charles, like the famous Will Honeycomb, "laughed easily," and had much
shrewdness and quickness about him: Edward smiled seldom, but was possessed of solid
sense, untainted religion, virtue, and honesty: and though Ralph was the blunt farmer,
Charles tutored but little, except in the field of valour, and Edward often apparently the
snarling philosopher, yet they all inherited those unshaken principles of the mind and
heart, on which sure basis is built the character of the true gentleman. *Historique. MARY. Her form was fresher than the morning rose,
When the dew wets its leaves; unstain'd, and pure
As is the lily or the mountain snow. THOMSON. MARGARET. Each nerve was fever'd, and convuls'd her brow;
Her unsettled eye
Wander'd high, then low,
Alternately,
As if the pow'r of thought had fled. Love and Madness. WHILE the three brothers were viewing the blazing novel, Margaret, the youngest
Miss Marsham, entered the parlour, and looking first at the table where she had left her
book, and next at the grate, from whence a part of the boarded cover had just fallen, she
uttered the exclamation of "O heavens! what sacrilegious hand has destroyed the
recreative amusement of my leisure-hours, and impeded my itineration through the
delightful labyrinths of imagination? *"-"Don't be such a confounded fool, Peggy," said
her uncle Ralph, "I am ashamed to hear you talk such nonsense." "What then," said she,
"to add to my earthly miseries, am I to be called Peggy? My name, sir, is Margaritta; and
to no other name will I, hereafter, give an answer." The Reverend Mr. Marsham looked at his daughter with serious concern, and shook
his head: "But what," continued Margaret, "my ever revered, though too rigid parent, am
I to do? there are seven volumes of that delightful work; and the set is spoiled by the fatal
destruction of one; the whole seven must be paid for." "Ah!" said Edward, looking at his brother, "you should not have been so rash, Ralph;
I have no money to throw in the fire." "Make yourself easy brother," said Ralph, "I have no money neither that I would
wish to throw in the fire; but paying the expence of those books cannot ruin me, and
therefore, as the fault is, so let the expence be mine." "But can you, sir," said Margaret, "can you restore to me those extatic moments of
fond delusion, which that book imparted to my pensive mind? Alas! can you ---" and
with the sentence unfinished, she threw herself back on her chair, and cast up her eyes
with that would-be-languid expression which portended a fainting fit; and which she
would have undoubtedly performed for the amusement of the spectators, had not the glow
which she experienced on her cheek, from anger, and the heat from her late vociferation,
made her conscious that such an exhibition would then have been impracticable. *Verbatim expression of a romantic girl, the daughter of a dignified clergyman. "What is the matter with my sister?" said the sweet voice of a fresh-looking country
girl, who now entered the room, and whose arch eye, glancing towards the fire, soon
beheld the cause of Margaret's violent agitation. "What I hope, my good girl," said her uncle Charles, rising up and giving her his
chair, at the same time drawing one by her for himself, "what I hope will never be the
matter with you: I mean a madness after romances, books which I think your good sense
will not suffer you to peruse." "O yes, I read them sometimes," replied the lively Mary,
"but then I do not make myself like my sister, a slave to them; and since our kind uncle
Ralph indulged us with subscribing to the library, I very seldom get a novel I like; for
Margaret sends for such incredible, such marvellous kind of works, that I shut the books
with disgust, and seldom have patience to read them through: but, indeed my dear girl,"
added she, affectionately kissing the cheek of her sister, "your health would be better if
you did not sit so closely over your favorite studies, which disturb your dreams, and make
you unable some nights to close your eyes: would you, like me, enjoy the fresh morning
air, which you lose in broken slumbers, after your restless nights, you would soon have
done with such idle fancies, which you describe by the title of nervous affections and
hypochondriac malady!" Edward, whose heart towards his children was often at war with his tongue, said,
"Come, come, not quite so much talk: what you say is very just, but you know your
sister's health is naturally delicate." "And what is it that renders it so," said Ralph, "but
the very cause my niece Mary has alleged? I'll tell you what, Peggy, go up stairs, and see
if none of your father's shirts want a wristband or a button; though I believe Mary takes
good care of all our linen; but never mind, if you do not find any thing there to do, I have
three old pair of worsted stockings, which I wear under my gaiters when I ride over my
grounds on a wet morning, darn them for me, if you please, for I know there are two or
three great holes in each pair. Do you hear me, Peggy?" "I am sure," said she, bursting
into tears, "if I am called Peggy again I shall go into a fit!" The Reverend Mr. Marsham took down his hat from the peg on which it hung, drew
the arm of his daughter Margaret through his own, and said, "Come, child, we will take a
walk, the air perhaps will revive your spirits." She appeared desirous to draw away her hand from her father's, shuddered as he
placed it under his arm, and casting up her eyes towards heaven, exclaimed, "Poor
persecuted dove that I am!" As they walked onwards towards the meadows, she perceived a coarse ragged shirt
hanging on a hedge; she advanced towards it, looked at it, and gave a deep sigh. "Ay, my
child," said her father, "many are the forlorn children of poverty! how few are blessed
with a relative like ours! what would have become of you, my poor girls, without your
excellent uncle?" "Oh! that barbarous inhuman man!" said she. "Margaret," said her
father, "you make me seriously angry: what, because he threw your ridiculous book into
the fire, you can be capable of bestowing on your benefactor such an epithet!" "O no, sir,
his whole conduct excruciates all the tender sentiments of the soul; he is so utterly devoid
of heroism, refinement, and all the softer sensations of the mind." "Stuff-nonsense,"
said her father, "quit this ridiculous language, this affectation of hard words, this pedantic
jargon, so disgusting in the general conversation of a young female: but we must return


homewards, it begins to rain; come, run on before, make use of the agility that youth has
given you, and get home as fast as you can." Margaret ran, it is true, but not in obedience to the commands of her father; for,
almost flying to the ragged shirt, she thus addressed it: "Oh! garment of my beloved;
garment that envelopes and embraces the polished and beautiful skin of the fairest of the
sons of men: behold! the heavens themselves dissolve in tears at thy unmerited indigence! Oh! when will the much-wished-for day arrive, that thy noble parents will claim thee as
their own, and acknowledge thee in the face of an admiring world?