Well! I am so happy! In a short time I shall
have a daughter married. Mrs. Wickham! How well it sounds! And she was only sixteen last June. My
dear Jane, I am in such a flutter, that I am sure I can't write; so I will dictate, and you write for me. We will settle with your father about the money afterwards; but the things should be ordered
immediately." She was then proceeding to all the particulars of calico, muslin, and cambric, and would shortly have
dictated some very plentiful orders, had not Jane, though with some difficulty, persuaded her to wait
till her father was at leisure to be consulted. One day's delay, she observed, would be of small
importance; and her mother was too happy to be quite so obstinate as usual. Other schemes, too,
came into her head. "I will go to Meryton," said she, "as soon as I am dressed, and tell the good, good news to my sister
Philips. And as I come back, I can call on Lady Lucas and Mrs. Long. Kitty, run down and order the
carriage. An airing would do me a great deal of good, I am sure. Girls, can I do anything for you in
Meryton? Oh! Here comes Hill! My dear Hill, have you heard the good news? Miss Lydia is going to
be married; and you shall all have a bowl of punch to make merry at her wedding." Mrs. Hill began instantly to express her joy. Elizabeth received her congratulations amongst the rest,
and then, sick of this folly, took refuge in her own room, that she might think with freedom. Poor Lydia's situation must, at best, be bad enough; but that it was no worse, she had need to be
thankful. She felt it so; and though, in looking forward, neither rational happiness nor worldly
prosperity could be justly expected for her sister, in looking back to what they had feared, only two
hours ago, she felt all the advantages of what they had gained. Mr. Bennet had very often wished before this period of his life that, instead of spending his whole
income, he had laid by an annual sum for the better provision of his children, and of his wife, if she
survived him. He now wished it more than ever. Had he done his duty in that respect, Lydia need not
have been indebted to her uncle for whatever of honour or credit could now be purchased for her. The satisfaction of prevailing on one of the most worthless young men in Great Britain to be her
husband might then have rested in its proper place. He was seriously concerned that a cause of so little advantage to anyone should be forwarded at the
sole expense of his brother-in-law, and he was determined, if possible, to find out the extent of his
assistance, and to discharge the obligation as soon as he could. When first Mr. Bennet had married, economy was held to be perfectly useless, for, of course, they
were to have a son. The son was to join in cutting off the entail, as soon as he should be of age, and
the widow and younger children would by that means be provided for. Five daughters successively
entered the world, but yet the son was to come; and Mrs. Bennet, for many years after Lydia's birth,
had been certain that he would. This event had at last been despaired of, but it was then too late to
be saving. Mrs. Bennet had no turn for economy, and her husband's love of independence had alone
prevented their exceeding their income. Five thousand pounds was settled by marriage articles on Mrs. Bennet and the children. But in what
proportions it should be divided amongst the latter depended on the will of the parents. This was
one point, with regard to Lydia, at least, which was now to be settled, and Mr. Bennet could have no
hesitation in acceding to the proposal before him. In terms of grateful acknowledgment for the
kindness of his brother, though expressed most concisely, he then delivered on paper his perfect
approbation of all that was done, and his willingness to fulfil the engagements that had been made
for him. He had never before supposed that, could Wickham be prevailed on to marry his daughter, it
would be done with so little inconvenience to himself as by the present arrangement. He would
scarcely be ten pounds a year the loser by the hundred that was to be paid them; for, what with her
board and pocket allowance, and the continual presents in money which passed to her through her
mother's hands, Lydia's expenses had been very little within that sum. That it would be done with such trifling exertion on his side, too, was another very welcome surprise;
for his wish at present was to have as little trouble in the business as possible. When the first
transports of rage which had produced his activity in seeking her were over, he naturally returned to
all his former indolence. His letter was soon dispatched; for, though dilatory in undertaking business,
he was quick in its execution. He begged to know further particulars of what he was indebted to his
brother, but was too angry with Lydia to send any message to her. The good news spread quickly through the house, and with proportionate speed through the
neighbourhood. It was borne in the latter with decent philosophy. To be sure, it would have been
more for the advantage of conversation had Miss Lydia Bennet come upon the town; or, as the
happiest alternative, been secluded from the world, in some distant farmhouse. But there was much
to be talked of in marrying her; and the good-natured wishes for her well-doing which had
proceeded before from all the spiteful old ladies in Meryton lost but a little of their spirit in this
change of circumstances, because with such an husband her misery was considered certain. It was a fortnight since Mrs. Bennet had been downstairs; but on this happy day she again took her
seat at the head of her table, and in spirits oppressively high. No sentiment of shame gave a damp to
her triumph. The marriage of a daughter, which had been the first object of her wishes since Jane
was sixteen, was now on the point of accomplishment, and her thoughts and her words ran wholly
on those attendants of elegant nuptials, fine muslins, new carriages, and servants. She was busily
searching through the neighbourhood for a proper situation for her daughter, and, without knowing
or considering what their income might be, rejected many as deficient in size and importance. "Haye Park might do," said she, "if the Gouldings could quit it-or the great house at Stoke, if the
drawing-room were larger; but Ashworth is too far off! I could not bear to have her ten miles from
me; and as for Pulvis Lodge, the attics are dreadful." Her husband allowed her to talk on without interruption while the servants remained. But when they
had withdrawn, he said to her: "Mrs. Bennet, before you take any or all of these houses for your son
and daughter, let us come to a right understanding. Into one house in this neighbourhood they shall
never have admittance. I will not encourage the impudence of either, by receiving them at
Longbourn." A long dispute followed this declaration; but Mr. Bennet was firm. It soon led to another; and Mrs.
Bennet found, with amazement and horror, that her husband would not advance a guinea to buy
clothes for his daughter. He protested that she should receive from him no mark of affection
whatever on the occasion. Mrs. Bennet could hardly comprehend it. That his anger could be carried
to such a point of inconceivable resentment as to refuse his daughter a privilege without which her
marriage would scarcely seem valid, exceeded all she could believe possible. She was more alive to
the disgrace which her want of new clothes must reflect on her daughter's nuptials, than to any
sense of shame at her eloping and living with Wickham a fortnight before they took place. Elizabeth was now most heartily sorry that she had, from the distress of the moment, been led to
make Mr. Darcy acquainted with their fears for her sister; for since her marriage would so shortly
give the proper termination to the elopement, they might hope to conceal its unfavourable
beginning from all those who were not immediately on the spot. She had no fear of its spreading farther through his means. There were few people on whose secrecy
she would have more confidently depended; but, at the same time, there was no one whose
knowledge of a sister's frailty would have mortified her so much-not, however, from any fear of
disadvantage from it individually to herself, for, at any rate, there seemed a gulf impassable between
them. Had Lydia's marriage been concluded on the most honourable terms, it was not to be
supposed that Mr. Darcy would connect himself with a family where, to every other objection, would
now be added an alliance and relationship of the nearest kind with a man whom he so justly scorned. From such a connection she could not wonder that he would shrink. The wish of procuring her
regard, which she had assured herself of his feeling in Derbyshire, could not in rational expectation
survive such a blow as this. She was humbled, she was grieved; she repented, though she hardly
knew of what. She became jealous of his esteem, when she could no longer hope to be benefited by
it. She wanted to hear of him, when there seemed the least chance of gaining intelligence. She was
convinced that she could have been happy with him, when it was no longer likely they should meet. What a triumph for him, as she often thought, could he know that the proposals which she had
proudly spurned only four months ago, would now have been most gladly and gratefully received! He
was as generous, she doubted not, as the most generous of his sex; but while he was mortal, there
must be a triumph. She began now to comprehend that he was exactly the man who, in disposition and talents, would
most suit her. His understanding and temper, though unlike her own, would have answered all her
wishes. It was an union that must have been to the advantage of both; by her ease and liveliness, his
mind might have been softened, his manners improved; and from his judgement, information, and
knowledge of the world, she must have received benefit of greater importance. But no such happy marriage could now teach the admiring multitude what connubial felicity really
was. An union of a different tendency, and precluding the possibility of the other, was soon to be
formed in their family. How Wickham and Lydia were to be supported in tolerable independence, she could not imagine. But
how little of permanent happiness could belong to a couple who were only brought together
because their passions were stronger than their virtue, she could easily conjecture. Mr. Gardiner soon wrote again to his brother. To Mr. Bennet's acknowledgments he briefly replied,
with assurance of his eagerness to promote the welfare of any of his family; and concluded with
entreaties that the subject might never be mentioned to him again. The principal purport of his letter
was to inform them that Mr. Wickham had resolved on quitting the militia. "It was greatly my wish that he should do so," he added, "as soon as his marriage was fixed on. And I
think you will agree with me, in considering the removal from that corps as highly advisable, both on
his account and my niece's. It is Mr. Wickham's intention to go into the regulars; and among his
former friends, there are still some who are able and willing to assist him in the army. He has the
promise of an ensigncy in General --'s regiment, now quartered in the North. It is an advantage to
have it so far from this part of the kingdom. He promises fairly; and I hope among different people,
where they may each have a character to preserve, they will both be more prudent. I have written to
Colonel Forster, to inform him of our present arrangements, and to request that he will satisfy the
various creditors of Mr. Wickham in and near Brighton, with assurances of speedy payment, for
which I have pledged myself. And will you give yourself the trouble of carrying similar assurances to
his creditors in Meryton, of whom I shall subjoin a list according to his information? He has given in
all his debts; I hope at least he has not deceived us. Haggerston has our directions, and all will be
completed in a week. They will then join his regiment, unless they are first invited to Longbourn; and
I understand from Mrs. Gardiner, that my niece is very desirous of seeing you all before she leaves
the South. She is well, and begs to be dutifully remembered to you and her mother.-Yours, etc.,
"E. GARDINER." Mr. Bennet and his daughters saw all the advantages of Wickham's removal from the --shire as
clearly as Mr. Gardiner could do. But Mrs. Bennet was not so well pleased with it. Lydia's being
settled in the North, just when she had expected most pleasure and pride in her company, for she
had by no means given up her plan of their residing in Hertfordshire, was a severe disappointment;
and, besides, it was such a pity that Lydia should be taken from a regiment where she was
acquainted with everybody, and had so many favourites. "She is so fond of Mrs. Forster," said she, "it will be quite shocking to send her away! And there are
several of the young men, too, that she likes very much. The officers may not be so pleasant in
General --'s regiment." His daughter's request, for such it might be considered, of being admitted into her family again
before she set off for the North, received at first an absolute negative. But Jane and Elizabeth, who
agreed in wishing, for the sake of their sister's feelings and consequence, that she should be noticed
on her marriage by her parents, urged him so earnestly yet so rationally and so mildly, to receive her
and her husband at Longbourn, as soon as they were married, that he was prevailed on to think as
they thought, and act as they wished. And their mother had the satisfaction of knowing that she
would be able to show her married daughter in the neighbourhood before she was banished to the
North. When Mr. Bennet wrote again to his brother, therefore, he sent his permission for them to
come; and it was settled, that as soon as the ceremony was over, they should proceed to Longbourn. Elizabeth was surprised, however, that Wickham should consent to such a scheme, and had she
consulted only her own inclination, any meeting with him would have been the last object of her
wishes. Their sister's wedding day arrived; and Jane and Elizabeth felt for her probably more than she felt for
herself. The carriage was sent to meet them at --, and they were to return in it by dinner-time. Their arrival was dreaded by the elder Miss Bennets, and Jane more especially, who gave Lydia the
feelings which would have attended herself, had she been the culprit, and was wretched in the
thought of what her sister must endure. They came. The family were assembled in the breakfast room to receive them. Smiles decked the
face of Mrs. Bennet as the carriage drove up to the door; her husband looked impenetrably grave;
her daughters, alarmed, anxious, uneasy. Lydia's voice was heard in the vestibule; the door was thrown open, and she ran into the room. Her
mother stepped forwards, embraced her, and welcomed her with rapture; gave her hand, with an
affectionate smile, to Wickham, who followed his lady; and wished them both joy with an alacrity
which shewed no doubt of their happiness. Their reception from Mr. Bennet, to whom they then turned, was not quite so cordial. His
countenance rather gained in austerity; and he scarcely opened his lips. The easy assurance of the
young couple, indeed, was enough to provoke him. Elizabeth was disgusted, and even Miss Bennet
was shocked. Lydia was Lydia still; untamed, unabashed, wild, noisy, and fearless. She turned from
sister to sister, demanding their congratulations; and when at length they all sat down, looked
eagerly round the room, took notice of some little alteration in it, and observed, with a laugh, that it
was a great while since she had been there. Wickham was not at all more distressed than herself, but his manners were always so pleasing, that
had his character and his marriage been exactly what they ought, his smiles and his easy address,
while he claimed their relationship, would have delighted them all. Elizabeth had not before believed
him quite equal to such assurance; but she sat down, resolving within herself to draw no limits in
future to the impudence of an impudent man. She blushed, and Jane blushed; but the cheeks of the
two who caused their confusion suffered no variation of colour. There was no want of discourse. The bride and her mother could neither of them talk fast enough;
and Wickham, who happened to sit near Elizabeth, began inquiring after his acquaintance in that
neighbourhood, with a good humoured ease which she felt very unable to equal in her replies. They
seemed each of them to have the happiest memories in the world. Nothing of the past was
recollected with pain; and Lydia led voluntarily to subjects which her sisters would not have alluded
to for the world. "Only think of its being three months," she cried, "since I went away; it seems but a fortnight I
declare; and yet there have been things enough happened in the time. Good gracious! when I went
away, I am sure I had no more idea of being married till I came back again! though I thought it would
be very good fun if I was." Her father lifted up his eyes. Jane was distressed. Elizabeth looked expressively at Lydia; but she, who
never heard nor saw anything of which she chose to be insensible, gaily continued, "Oh! mamma, do
the people hereabouts know I am married to-day? I was afraid they might not; and we overtook
William Goulding in his curricle, so I was determined he should know it, and so I let down the side-
glass next to him, and took off my glove, and let my hand just rest upon the window frame, so that
he might see the ring, and then I bowed and smiled like anything." Elizabeth could bear it no longer. She got up, and ran out of the room; and returned no more, till she
heard them passing through the hall to the dining parlour. She then joined them soon enough to see
Lydia, with anxious parade, walk up to her mother's right hand, and hear her say to her eldest sister,
"Ah! Jane, I take your place now, and you must go lower, because I am a married woman." It was not to be supposed that time would give Lydia that embarrassment from which she had been
so wholly free at first. Her ease and good spirits increased. She longed to see Mrs. Phillips, the
Lucases, and all their other neighbours, and to hear herself called "Mrs. Wickham" by each of them;
and in the mean time, she went after dinner to show her ring, and boast of being married, to Mrs.
Hill and the two housemaids. "Well, mamma," said she, when they were all returned to the breakfast room, "and what do you
think of my husband? Is not he a charming man? I am sure my sisters must all envy me. I only hope
they may have half my good luck. They must all go to Brighton. That is the place to get husbands. What a pity it is, mamma, we did not all go." "Very true; and if I had my will, we should. But my dear Lydia, I don't at all like your going such a way
off. Must it be so?" "Oh, lord! yes;-there is nothing in that. I shall like it of all things. You and papa, and my sisters, must
come down and see us. We shall be at Newcastle all the winter, and I dare say there will be some
balls, and I will take care to get good partners for them all." "I should like it beyond anything!" said her mother. "And then when you go away, you may leave one or two of my sisters behind you; and I dare say I
shall get husbands for them before the winter is over." "I thank you for my share of the favour," said Elizabeth; "but I do not particularly like your way of
getting husbands." Their visitors were not to remain above ten days with them. Mr. Wickham had received his
commission before he left London, and he was to join his regiment at the end of a fortnight. No one but Mrs. Bennet regretted that their stay would be so short; and she made the most of the
time by visiting about with her daughter, and having very frequent parties at home. These parties
were acceptable to all; to avoid a family circle was even more desirable to such as did think, than
such as did not. Wickham's affection for Lydia was just what Elizabeth had expected to find it; not equal to Lydia's for
him. She had scarcely needed her present observation to be satisfied, from the reason of things, that
their elopement had been brought on by the strength of her love, rather than by his; and she would
have wondered why, without violently caring for her, he chose to elope with her at all, had she not
felt certain that his flight was rendered necessary by distress of circumstances; and if that were the
case, he was not the young man to resist an opportunity of having a companion. Lydia was exceedingly fond of him. He was her dear Wickham on every occasion; no one was to be
put in competition with him. He did every thing best in the world; and she was sure he would kill
more birds on the first of September, than any body else in the country. One morning, soon after their arrival, as she was sitting with her two elder sisters, she said to
Elizabeth:
"Lizzy, I never gave you an account of my wedding, I believe. You were not by, when I told mamma
and the others all about it. Are not you curious to hear how it was managed?" "No really," replied Elizabeth; "I think there cannot be too little said on the subject." "La! You are so strange! But I must tell you how it went off. We were married, you know, at St.
Clement's, because Wickham's lodgings were in that parish. And it was settled that we should all be
there by eleven o'clock. My uncle and aunt and I were to go together; and the others were to meet
us at the church. Well, Monday morning came, and I was in such a fuss! I was so afraid, you know,
that something would happen to put it off, and then I should have gone quite distracted. And there
was my aunt, all the time I was dressing, preaching and talking away just as if she was reading a
sermon. However, I did not hear above one word in ten, for I was thinking, you may suppose, of my
dear Wickham. I longed to know whether he would be married in his blue coat." "Well, and so we breakfasted at ten as usual; I thought it would never be over; for, by the bye, you
are to understand, that my uncle and aunt were horrid unpleasant all the time I was with them. If
you'll believe me, I did not once put my foot out of doors, though I was there a fortnight. Not one
party, or scheme, or anything. To be sure London was rather thin, but, however, the Little Theatre
was open. Well, and so just as the carriage came to the door, my uncle was called away upon
business to that horrid man Mr. Stone. And then, you know, when once they get together, there is no
end of it. Well, I was so frightened I did not know what to do, for my uncle was to give me away; and
if we were beyond the hour, we could not be married all day. But, luckily, he came back again in ten
minutes' time, and then we all set out. However, I recollected afterwards that if he had been
prevented going, the wedding need not be put off, for Mr. Darcy might have done as well." "Mr. Darcy!" repeated Elizabeth, in utter amazement. "Oh, yes!-he was to come there with Wickham, you know. But gracious me! I quite forgot! I ought
not to have said a word about it. I promised them so faithfully! What will Wickham say? It was to be
such a secret!" "If it was to be secret," said Jane, "say not another word on the subject. You may depend upon my
seeking no further." "Oh! certainly," said Elizabeth, though burning with curiosity; "we will ask you no questions." "Thank you," said Lydia, "for if you did, I should certainly tell you all, and then Wickham would be
angry." On such encouragement to ask, Elizabeth was forced to put it out of her power, by running away. But to live in ignorance on such a point was impossible; or at least it was impossible not to try for
information. Mr. Darcy had been at her sister's wedding. It was exactly a scene, and exactly among
people, where he had apparently least to do, and least temptation to go. Conjectures as to the
meaning of it, rapid and wild, hurried into her brain; but she was satisfied with none. Those that best
pleased her, as placing his conduct in the noblest light, seemed most improbable. She could not bear
such suspense; and hastily seizing a sheet of paper, wrote a short letter to her aunt, to request an
explanation of what Lydia had dropt, if it were compatible with the secrecy which had been
intended. "You may readily comprehend," she added, "what my curiosity must be to know how a person
unconnected with any of us, and (comparatively speaking) a stranger to our family, should have been
amongst you at such a time. Pray write instantly, and let me understand it-unless it is, for very
cogent reasons, to remain in the secrecy which Lydia seems to think necessary; and then I must
endeavour to be satisfied with ignorance." "Not that I shall, though," she added to herself, as she finished the letter; "and my dear aunt, if you
do not tell me in an honourable manner, I shall certainly be reduced to tricks and stratagems to find
it out." Jane's delicate sense of honour would not allow her to speak to Elizabeth privately of what Lydia had
let fall; Elizabeth was glad of it;-till it appeared whether her inquiries would receive any satisfaction,
she had rather be without a confidante. Elizabeth had the satisfaction of receiving an answer to her letter as soon as she possibly could. She
was no sooner in possession of it than, hurrying into the little copse, where she was least likely to be
interrupted, she sat down on one of the benches and prepared to be happy; for the length of the
letter convinced her that it did not contain a denial. "Gracechurch street, Sept. 6. "MY DEAR NIECE,
"I have just received your letter, and shall devote this whole morning to answering it, as I foresee
that a little writing will not comprise what I have to tell you. I must confess myself surprised by your
application; I did not expect it from you. Don't think me angry, however, for I only mean to let you
know that I had not imagined such inquiries to be necessary on yourside. If you do not choose to
understand me, forgive my impertinence. Your uncle is as much surprised as I am-and nothing but
the belief of your being a party concerned would have allowed him to act as he has done. But if you
are really innocent and ignorant, I must be more explicit. "On the very day of my coming home from Longbourn, your uncle had a most unexpected visitor. Mr.
Darcy called, and was shut up with him several hours. It was all over before I arrived; so my curiosity
was not so dreadfully racked as yours seems to have been. He came to tell Mr. Gardiner that he had
found out where your sister and Mr. Wickham were, and that he had seen and talked with them
both; Wickham repeatedly, Lydia once. From what I can collect, he left Derbyshire only one day after
ourselves, and came to town with the resolution of hunting for them. The motive professed was his
conviction of its being owing to himself that Wickham's worthlessness had not been so well known as
to make it impossible for any young woman of character to love or confide in him. He generously
imputed the whole to his mistaken pride, and confessed that he had before thought it beneath him
to lay his private actions open to the world. His character was to speak for itself. He called it,
therefore, his duty to step forward, and endeavour to remedy an evil which had been brought on by
himself. If he had anothermotive, I am sure it would never disgrace him. He had been some days in
town, before he was able to discover them; but he had something to direct his search, which was
more than we had; and the consciousness of this was another reason for his resolving to follow us. "There is a lady, it seems, a Mrs. Younge, who was some time ago governess to Miss Darcy, and was
dismissed from her charge on some cause of disapprobation, though he did not say what. She then
took a large house in Edward-street, and has since maintained herself by letting lodgings. This Mrs.
Younge was, he knew, intimately acquainted with Wickham; and he went to her for intelligence of
him as soon as he got to town. But it was two or three days before he could get from her what he
wanted. She would not betray her trust, I suppose, without bribery and corruption, for she really did
know where her friend was to be found. Wickham indeed had gone to her on their first arrival in
London, and had she been able to receive them into her house, they would have taken up their
abode with her. At length, however, our kind friend procured the wished-for direction. They were in
-- street. He saw Wickham, and afterwards insisted on seeing Lydia. His first object with her, he
acknowledged, had been to persuade her to quit her present disgraceful situation, and return to her
friends as soon as they could be prevailed on to receive her, offering his assistance, as far as it would
go. But he found Lydia absolutely resolved on remaining where she was. She cared for none of her
friends; she wanted no help of his; she would not hear of leaving Wickham. She was sure they should
be married some time or other, and it did not much signify when. Since such were her feelings, it
only remained, he thought, to secure and expedite a marriage, which, in his very first conversation
with Wickham, he easily learnt had never been his design. He confessed himself obliged to leave the
regiment, on account of some debts of honour, which were very pressing; and scrupled not to lay all
the ill-consequences of Lydia's flight on her own folly alone. He meant to resign his commission
immediately; and as to his future situation, he could conjecture very little about it. He must go
somewhere, but he did not know where, and he knew he should have nothing to live on. "Mr. Darcy asked him why he had not married your sister at once. Though Mr. Bennet was not
imagined to be very rich, he would have been able to do something for him, and his situation must
have been benefited by marriage. But he found, in reply to this question, that Wickham still
cherished the hope of more effectually making his fortune by marriage in some other country. Under
such circumstances, however, he was not likely to be proof against the temptation of immediate
relief. "They met several times, for there was much to be discussed. Wickham of course wanted more than
he could get; but at length was reduced to be reasonable. "Every thing being settled between them, Mr. Darcy's next step was to make your uncle acquainted
with it, and he first called in Gracechurch street the evening before I came home. But Mr. Gardiner
could not be seen, and Mr. Darcy found, on further inquiry, that your father was still with him, but
would quit town the next morning. He did not judge your father to be a person whom he could so
properly consult as your uncle, and therefore readily postponed seeing him till after the departure of
the former. He did not leave his name, and till the next day it was only known that a gentleman had
called on business. "On Saturday he came again. Your father was gone, your uncle at home, and, as I said before, they
had a great deal of talk together. "They met again on Sunday, and then I saw him too. It was not all settled before Monday: as soon as
it was, the express was sent off to Longbourn. But our visitor was very obstinate. I fancy, Lizzy, that
obstinacy is the real defect of his character, after all. He has been accused of many faults at different
times, but this is the true one. Nothing was to be done that he did not do himself; though I am sure
(and I do not speak it to be thanked, therefore say nothing about it), your uncle would most readily
have settled the whole. "They battled it together for a long time, which was more than either the gentleman or lady
concerned in it deserved. But at last your uncle was forced to yield, and instead of being allowed to
be of use to his niece, was forced to put up with only having the probable credit of it, which went
sorely against the grain; and I really believe your letter this morning gave him great pleasure,
because it required an explanation that would rob him of his borrowed feathers, and give the praise
where it was due. But, Lizzy, this must go no farther than yourself, or Jane at most. "You know pretty well, I suppose, what has been done for the young people. His debts are to be paid,
amounting, I believe, to considerably more than a thousand pounds, another thousand in addition to
her own settled upon her, and his commission purchased. The reason why all this was to be done by
him alone, was such as I have given above. It was owing to him, to his reserve and want of proper
consideration, that Wickham's character had been so misunderstood, and consequently that he had
been received and noticed as he was. Perhaps there was some truth in this; though I doubt
whether his reserve, or anybody's reserve, can be answerable for the event. But in spite of all this
fine talking, my dear Lizzy, you may rest perfectly assured that your uncle would never have yielded,
if we had not given him credit for another interest in the affair. "When all this was resolved on, he returned again to his friends, who were still staying at Pemberley;
but it was agreed that he should be in London once more when the wedding took place, and all
money matters were then to receive the last finish. "I believe I have now told you every thing. It is a relation which you tell me is to give you great
surprise; I hope at least it will not afford you any displeasure. Lydia came to us; and Wickham had
constant admission to the house. He was exactly what he had been, when I knew him in
Hertfordshire; but I would not tell you how little I was satisfied with her behaviour while she staid
with us, if I had not perceived, by Jane's letter last Wednesday, that her conduct on coming home
was exactly of a piece with it, and therefore what I now tell you can give you no fresh pain. I talked to
her repeatedly in the most serious manner, representing to her all the wickedness of what she had
done, and all the unhappiness she had brought on her family. If she heard me, it was by good luck,
for I am sure she did not listen. I was sometimes quite provoked, but then I recollected my dear
Elizabeth and Jane, and for their sakes had patience with her. "Mr. Darcy was punctual in his return, and as Lydia informed you, attended the wedding.