A great deal of taunting and ill humour prevailed between these
capricious and inexperienced striplings, and sorely was Tudor pressed
to take share of a bed with the prince, but in vain--his feelings
recoiled from it; and the other, being in possession of a secret of
which the English lord was not aware, took that advantage of teazing and
tormenting him almost beyond sufferance. After all, it was decided that
each should sleep with his own page; a decision that did not seem to go
well down at all with the Yorkshire boy, who once ventured to
expostulate with his lord, but was silenced with a look of angry
disdain. He set her on his milk-white steed,
      Himself lap on behind her,
    And they are o'er the Highland hills;
      Her friends they cannot find her. As they rode over hill and dale
      This lady often fainted,
    And cried, "Wo to my cursed moneye,
      That this road to me invented." _Ballad of Rob Roy._

    O cam ye here to fight, young man,
      Or cam ye here to flee? Or cam ye out o' the wally west
      Our bonnie bride to see? _Ballad called Foul Play._

It is by this time needless to inform my readers, that these two young
adventurers were no other than the rival beauties of the two nations,
for whose charms all this bloody coil was carried on at Roxburgh; and
who, without seeing, had hated each other as cordially as any woman is
capable of hating her rival in beauty or favour. So much had the siege
and the perils of Roxburgh become the subject of conversation, that the
ears of the two maidens had long listened to nothing else, and each of
them deemed her honour embarked in the success of her lover. Each of
them had set out with the intent of visiting the camp in disguise; and
having enough of interest to secure protections for feigned names, each
determined to see her rival in the first place, the journey not being
far; and neither of them it is supposed went with any kind intent. Each
of them had a maid dressed in boy's clothes with her, and five stout
troopers, all of whom were utterly ignorant of the secret. The princess
had by chance found out her rival's sex; but the Scottish lady and her
attendant being both taller and of darker complexions than the other
two, no suspicions were entertained against them detrimental to their
enterprise. The princess never closed an eye, but lay meditating on the
course she should take. She was convinced that she had her rival in her
power, and she determined, not over generously, to take advantage of her
good fortune. The time drew nigh that Roxburgh must be lost or won, and
well she knew that, whichever side succeeded, according to the romantic
ideas of that age, the charms of the lady would have all the honour,
while she whose hero lost would be degraded,--considerations which no
woman laying claim to superior and all-powerful charms could withstand. Next morning Dan was aroused at an early hour by his supposed prince,
who said to him, "Brave yeoman, from a long conversation that I have had
last night with these English strangers, I am convinced that they are
despatched on some traitorous mission; and as the warden is in
Northumberland, I propose conveying them straight to Douglas' camp,
there to be tried for their lives. If you will engage to take charge of
them, and deliver them safely to the captain before night, you shall
have a high reward; but if you fail, and suffer any of them to escape,
your neck shall answer for it. How many men can you raise for this
service?" "Our men are maistly up already," said Dan; "but muckle Charlie o'
Yardbire gaed hame last night wi' twa or three kye, like oursels. Gin
Charlie an' his lads come, I sal answer for the English chaps, if they
war twa to ane. I hae mysel an' my three billies, deil a shank mae; but
an Charlie come he's as gude as some three, an' his backman's nae
bean-swaup neither." "Then," said the counterfeit prince, "I shall leave all my attendants to
assist you save my page,--we two must pursue our journey with all
expedition. All that is required of you is to deliver the prisoners safe
to the Douglas. I will despatch a message to him by the way, apprising
him of the circumstances." The Lady Margaret and her page then mounted their palfreys and rode off
without delay; but, instead of taking the road by Gorranberry, as they
had proposed over night, they scoured away at a light gallop down the
side of the Teviot. At the town of Hawick she caused her page, who was
her chief waiting-maid and confidant, likewise in boy's clothes, to cut
out her beautiful fleece of black hair, that glittered like the wing of
the raven, being determined to attend in disguise the issue of the
contest. She then procured a red curled wig, and dressing herself in a
Highland garb, with a plumed bonnet, tartan jacket and trowsers, and
Highland hose and brogues, her appearance was so completely altered,
that even no one who had seen her the day before, in the character of
the prince her brother, could possibly have known her to be the same
person; and leaving her page near the camp to await her private orders,
she rode straight up to head-quarters by herself. Being examined as she passed the outposts, she said she brought a
message to Douglas of the greatest importance, and that it was from the
court; and her address being of such a superior cast, every one
furthered her progress till she came to the captain's tent. Scarcely did
she know him,--care, anxiety, and watching had so worn him down; and her
heart was melted when she saw his appearance. Never, perhaps, could she
have been said to have loved him till that moment; but seeing what he
had suffered for her sake, the great stake he had ventured, and the
almost hopeless uncertainty that appeared in every line of his face,
raised in her heart a feeling unknown to her before; and highly did that
heart exult at the signal advantage that her good fortune had given him
over his rival. Yet she determined on trying the state of his affections
and hopes. Before leaving Hawick, she had written a a letter to him,
inclosing a lock of her hair neatly plaited; but this letter she kept
back in order to sound her lover first without its influence. He asked
her name and her business. She had much business, she said, but not a
word save for his private ear. Douglas was struck with the youth's
courtly manner, and looked at him with a dark searching eye,--"I have no
secrets," said he, "with these my kinsmen: I desire, before them, to
know your name and business." "My name," said the princess pertly, "is Colin Roy M'Alpin,--I care not
who knows my name; but no word further of my message do I disclose save
to yourself." "I must humour this pert stripling," said he, turning to his friends;
"if his errand turns out to be one of a trivial nature, and that does
not require all this ceremony, I shall have him horse-whipped." With that the rest of the gentlemen went away, and left the two by
themselves. Colin, as we must now, for brevity's sake, term the
princess, was at first somewhat abashed before the dark eye of Douglas,
but soon displayed all the effrontery that his assumed character
warranted, if not three times more. "Well now, my saucy little master, Colin Roy M'Alpin, please condescend
so far as to tell me whence you are, and what is your business
here,--this secret business, of such vast importance." "I am from court, my lor'; from the Scottish court, an't please
you, my lor'; but not directly as a body may say,--my lor'; not
directly--here--there--south--west--precipitately, incontrovertibly,
ascertaining the scope and bearing of the progressive advance of the
discomfiture and gradual wreck of your most flagrant and preposterous
undertaking." "The devil confound the impertinent puppy!" "Hold, hold, my lor', I mean your presumptuous and foolhardy enterprise,
first in presuming to the hand of my mistress, the king's daughter,--my
lovely and queenly mistress; and then in foolhardily running your head
against the walls of Roxburgh to attain this, and your wit and manhood
against the superior generalship of a Musgrave." "By the pock-net of St Peter, I will cause every bone in your body to be
basted to powder, you incorrigible pedant and puppy!" said the Douglas;
and seizing him by the collar of the coat, he was about to drag him to
the tent-door and throw him into the air. "Hold, my lor'; please keep off your rough uncourtly hands till I
deliver the credentials of my mistress." "Did you say that you were page to the Princess Margaret? Yes, surely
you are, I have erst seen that face, and heard that same flippant
tongue. Pray, what word or token does my dear and sovereign lady send
me?" "She bade me say, that she does not approve of you at all, my
lor':--that, for her sake, you ought to have taken this castle many days
ago. And she bade me ask you why you don't enter the castle by the gate,
or over the wall, or under the hill, which is only a sand one, and hang
up all the Englishmen by the necks, and send the head of Philip Musgrave
to his saucy dame?--She bade me ask you why you don't, my lor'?" "Women will always be women," said Douglas surlily to himself: "I
thought the princess superior to her sex, but--"

"But! but what, my lor'? Has she not good occasion for displeasure? She
bade me tell you that you don't like her;--that you don't like her half
so well as Musgrave does his mistress,--else why don't you do as much
for her? He took the castle for the sake of his mistress, and for her
sake he keeps it in spite of you. Therefore she bade me tell you, that
you must _go in_ and beat the English, and take the castle from them;
for she will not suffer it that Lady Jane Howard shall triumph over
her." "Tell her in return," said Douglas, "that I will do what man can do; and
when that is done, she shall find that I neither will be slack in
requiring the fulfilment of her engagement, nor in performing my own. If
that womanish tattling be all that you have to say,--begone: the rank of
your employer protects you." "Hold, my lor', she bade me look well, and tell her what you were like,
and if I thought you changed since I waited on you at court. On my
conscience you look very ill. These are hard ungainly features of yours. I'll tell her you look very shabby, and very surly, and that you have
lost all heart. But oh, my lor', I forgot she bade me tell you, that if
you found you were clearly beat, it would be as well to draw off your
men and abandon the siege; and that she would, perhaps, in pity, give
you a moiety of your lands again." "I have no patience with the impertinence of a puppy, even though the
messenger of her I love and esteem above all the world. Get you hence." "Oh, my lor', I have not third done yet. But, stay, here is a letter I
had almost forgot." Douglas opened the letter. Well he knew the hand; there were but few in
Scotland who could write, and none could write like the princess. It
contained a gold ring set with rubies, and a lock of her hair. He kissed
them both; and tried the ring first on the one little finger, and then
on the other, but it would scarcely go over the nail; so he kissed them
again, and put them in his bosom. He then read to himself as follows:

     "MY GOOD LORD,--I enclose you two love-tokens of my troth; let them
     be as beacons to your heart to guide it to deeds of glory and
     renown. For my sake put down these English. Margaret shall ever
     pray for your success. Retain my page Colin near your person. He is
     true-hearted, and his flippancy affected. Whatever you communicate
     to him will be safely transmitted to

         "MARGARET." It may well be supposed how Colin watched the emotions of Douglas while
reading this heroic epistle; and, in the true spirit of the age, they
were abundantly extravagant. He kissed the letter, hugged it in his
bosom, and vowed to six or seven saints to do such deeds for his adored
and divine princess as never were heard or read of. "Now, my good lor," said the page, "you must inform me punctually what
hopes you have of success, and if there is any thing wanting that the
kingdom can afford you." "My ranks are too thin," replied the Douglas; "and I have engaged to
take it with my own vassals. The warden is too proud to join his forces
to mine on that footing, but keeps scouring the borders, on pretence of
preventing supplies, and thus assisting me, but in truth for enriching
himself and his followers. If I could have induced him and his whole
force to have joined the camp, famine would have compelled the enemy to
yield a month agone. But I have now the captain's brother prisoner; and
I have already given him to know, that if he does not deliver up the
castle to me in four days, I will hang the young knight up before his
eyes,--I have sworn to do it, and I swear again to keep my oath." "I will convey all this to my mistress," said Colin. "So then you have
his only brother in your hold? My lor', the victory is your own, and the
princess, my mistress, beside. In a few hours will be placed in your
hands the primal cause and fomentor of this cruel and bloody war, the
Lady Jane Howard." The Douglas started like one aroused from slumber, or a state of
lethargy, by a sudden wound. "What did you say, boy?" said he. "Either I
heard amiss, or you are dreaming. I have offered estates, nay, I have
offered an earldom, to any hardy adventurer who would bring me that
imperious dame; but the project has been abandoned as quite
impracticable." "Rest content, said Colin: "I have secured her, and she will be
delivered into your hands before night. She has safe passports with her
to the Scottish court, but they are in favour of Jasper Tudor, son to
the Earl of Pembroke; so that the discovery of her sex proves her an
impostor, and subjects her to martial law, which I request, for my
mistress' sake, you will execute on her. My lady the princess, with all
her beauty, and high accomplishments, is a very woman; and I know there
is nothing on earth she so much dreads as the triumph of Lady Jane over
her. Besides, it is evident she was bound to the Scottish court either
to poison the princess, or inveigle her into the hands of her enemies. All her attendants are ignorant of her sex, save her page, who is said
to be a blooming English country maiden. The Prince Alexander bade me
charge you never to mention by what means she came into your hands, but
to give it out that she was brought to you by a miracle, by witchcraft,
or by the power of a mighty magician." "It is well thought of, boy,"
said the Douglas, greatly elevated--"I have been obliged to have
recourse to such means already--this will confirm all. The princess your
mistress desired that you should remain with me. You shall be my right
hand page, I will love and favour you; you shall be fed with the bread
and wine, and shall sleep in my tent, and I will trust you with all my
secrets for the welcome tidings you have brought, and for the sake of
the angelic dame that recommends you to me; for she is my beloved, my
adored mistress, and for her will I either conquer or die! My sword is
her's--my life is her's--Nay, my very soul is the right of my beloved!" Poor Colin dropped a tear on hearing this passionate nonsense. Women
love extravagance in such matters, but in those days it had no bounds. It was not long till the prisoners arrived, under the care of muckle
Charlie Scott of Yardbire and Dan Chisholm, with their troopers, guarded
in a very original manner. When Charlie arrived at old Chisholm's house,
and learned that a _prince_ had been there, and had given such charges
about the prisoners, he determined to make sure work; and as he had
always most trust to put in himself, he took the charge of the young
English nobleman and his squire, as he supposed them to be. The page he
took on his huge black horse behind him, lashing him to his body with
strong belts cut from a cow's raw hide. His ancles were moreover
fastened to the straps at the tops of Charlie's great war boots; so that
the English maiden must have had a very uncomfortable ride. But the
other he held on before him, keeping her all the way in his arms,
exactly as a countryman holds up a child in the church to be christened. The Lady Jane Howard had plenty of the spirit of romance about her, but
she neither had the frame nor the energy of mind requisite for carrying
her wild dreams of female heroism into effect. She was an only child--a
spoiled one; having been bred up without perhaps ever being controlled,
till she fell into the hands of these border mosstroopers. Her
displeasure was excessive.--She complained bitterly of her detainment,
and much more of being sent a prisoner to the camp. When she found
herself in muckle Charlie Scott's arms, borne away to be given up to the
man whom of all the world she had most reason to dread, she even forgot
herself so far as to burst into tears. Charlie, with all his inordinate
strength and prowess, had a heart so soft, that, as he said himself, "a
laverock might hae laired in't;" and he farther added, that when he saw
"the bit bonny English callan', that was comed o' sic grand blude, grow
sae desperately wae, an' fa' a blirting and greeting, the deil a bit but
his heart was like to come out at his mouth." This was no lie, for his
comrades beheld him two or three times come across his eyes with his
mailed sleeve--a right uncouth handkerchief: and then he tried to
comfort the youth with the following speech: "Troth, man, but I'm unco
wae for ye, ye're sae young an' sae bonny, an' no' a fit man at a' to
send out i' thir crabbit times. But tak good heart, an' dinna be
dauntit, for it will soon be over w' ye. Ye'll neither hae muckle to
thole nor lang time to dree't, for our captain will hang ye directly. He hangs a' spies an' messengers aff hand; sae it's no worth naebody's
while to greet. Short wark's aye best i' sic cases." "He cannot, he dares not injure a hair of my head," said Lady Jane
passionately. "_Canna!_" said Charlie, "Gude faith, ye ken that's nonsense. He can as
easily hang ye, or do ought else w' ye, as I can wipe my beard. An' as
for the thing that the Douglas _darena_ do, gude faith, ye ken, I never
saw it yet. But I'm sure I wish ye _may_ be safe, for it wad do little
good to me to see your bit pease-weep neck rackit." "It was most unfair, as well as most ungenerous in your prince to detain
me," said she, "as my business required urgency. I had regular signed
warrandice, and went on the kindest intent; besides, I have a great
aversion to be put into the hands of Douglas. How many cows and ewes
would you take to set me at liberty?" "Whisht, whisht, Sir!" said Charlie; "Gudesake haud your tongue! That's
kittle ground.