My brig will be
under sail by that time, and at three in the morning, when the tide
will serve, I shall have the boat waiting for you at the Mussel-crag. Away-away, for Heaven’s sake!”

“O yes! fly, fly!” repeated the wounded man, his words faltering with
convulsive sobs. “Come with me,” said the mendicant, almost dragging him off; “the
Captain’s plan is the best--I’ll carry ye to a place where ye might be
concealed in the meantime, were they to seek ye ‘wi’ sleuth-hounds.”

“Go, go,” again urged Lieutenant Taffril--“to stay here is mere madness.”

“It was worse madness to have come hither,” said Lovel, pressing his
hand--“But farewell!” And he followed Ochiltree into the recesses of the
wood. --The Lord Abbot had a soul
               Subtile and quick, and searching as the fire;
               By magic stairs he went as deep as hell,
               And if in devils’ possession gold be kept,
         He brought some sure from thence--‘tis hid in caves,
                        Known, save to me, to none.--
                                   The Wonder of a Kingdome. Lovel almost mechanically followed the beggar, who led the way with a
hasty and steady pace, through bush and bramble, avoiding the beaten
path, and often turning to listen whether there were any sounds of
pursuit behind them. They sometimes descended into the very bed of the
torrent, sometimes kept a narrow and precarious path, that the sheep
(which, with the sluttish negligence towards property of that sort
universal in Scotland, were allowed to stray in the copse) had made
along the very verge of its overhanging banks. From time to time Lovel
had a glance of the path which he had traversed the day before in
company with Sir Arthur, the Antiquary, and the young ladies. Dejected,
embarrassed, and occupied by a thousand inquietudes, as he then was,
what would he now have given to regain the sense of innocence which
alone can counter-balance a thousand evils! “Yet, then,” such was his
hasty and involuntary reflection, “even then, guiltless and valued by
all around me, I thought myself unhappy. What am I now, with this young
man’s blood upon my hands?--the feeling of pride which urged me to the
deed has now deserted me, as the actual fiend himself is said to do
those whom he has tempted to guilt.” Even his affection for Miss Wardour
sunk for the time before the first pangs of remorse, and he thought
he could have encountered every agony of slighted love to have had
the conscious freedom from blood-guiltiness which he possessed in the
morning. These painful reflections were not interrupted by any conversation on
the part of his guide, who threaded the thicket before him, now holding
back the sprays to make his path easy, now exhorting him to make haste,
now muttering to himself, after the custom of solitary and neglected old
age, words which might have escaped Lovel’s ear even had he listened to
them, or which, apprehended and retained, were too isolated to convey
any connected meaning,--a habit which may be often observed among people
of the old man’s age and calling. At length, as Lovel, exhausted by his late indisposition, the harrowing
feelings by which he was agitated, and the exertion necessary to keep up
with his guide in a path so rugged, began to flag and fall behind, two
or three very precarious steps placed him on the front of a precipice
overhung with brushwood and copse. Here a cave, as narrow in its
entrance as a fox-earth, was indicated by a small fissure in the rock,
screened by the boughs of an aged oak, which, anchored by its thick and
twisted roots in the upper part of the cleft, flung its branches almost
straight outward from the cliff, concealing it effectually from all
observation. It might indeed have escaped the attention even of those
who had stood at its very opening, so uninviting was the portal at which
the beggar entered. But within, the cavern was higher and more roomy,
cut into two separate branches, which, intersecting each other at right
angles, formed an emblem of the cross, and indicated the abode of an
anchoret of former times. There are many caves of the same kind in
different parts of Scotland. I need only instance those of Gorton, near
Rosslyn, in a scene well known to the admirers of romantic nature. The light within the eave was a dusky twilight at the entrance, which
failed altogether in the inner recesses. “Few folks ken o’ this place,”
 said the old man; “to the best o’my knowledge, there’s just twa living
by mysell, and that’s Jingling Jock and the Lang Linker. I have had mony
a thought, that when I fand mysell auld and forfairn, and no able to
enjoy God’s blessed air ony langer, I wad drag mysell here wi’ a pickle
ait-meal; and see, there’s a bit bonny dropping well that popples that
self-same gate simmer and winter;--and I wad e’en streek mysell out here,
and abide my removal, like an auld dog that trails its useless ugsome
carcass into some bush or bracken no to gie living things a scunner wi’
the sight o’t when it’s dead--Ay, and then, when the dogs barked at the
lone farm-stead, the gudewife wad cry, Whisht, stirra, that’ll be auld
Edie,’ and the bits o’ weans wad up, puir things, and toddle to the door
to pu’ in the auld Blue-Gown that mends a’ their bonny-dies--But there
wad be nae mair word o’ Edie, I trow.”

He then led Lovel, who followed him unresistingly, into one of the
interior branches of the cave. “Here,” he said, “is a bit turnpike-stair
that gaes up to the auld kirk abune. Some folks say this place was
howkit out by the monks lang syne to hide their treasure in, and some
said that they used to bring things into the abbey this gate by night,
that they durstna sae weel hae brought in by the main port and in open
day--And some said that ane o’ them turned a saint (or aiblins wad hae
had folk think sae), and settled him down in this Saint Ruth’s cell, as
the auld folks aye ca’d it, and garr’d big the stair, that he might
gang up to the kirk when they were at the divine service. The Laird
o’ Monkbarns wad hae a hantle to say about it, as he has about maist
things, if he ken’d only about the place. But whether it was made for
man’s devices or God’s service, I have seen ower muckle sin done in it
in my day, and far ower muckle have I been partaker of--ay, even here in
this dark cove. Mony a gudewife’s been wondering what for the red cock
didna craw her up in the morning, when he’s been roasting, puir fallow,
in this dark hole--And, ohon! I wish that and the like o’ that had been
the warst o’t! Whiles they wad hae heard the din we were making in the
very bowels o’ the earth, when Sanders Aikwood, that was forester in
thae days, the father o’ Ringan that now is, was gaun daundering about
the wood at e’en, to see after the Laird’s game and whiles he wad hae
seen a glance o’ the light frae the door o’ the cave, flaughtering
against the hazels on the other bank;--and then siccan stories as Sanders
had about the worricows and gyre-carlins that haunted about the auld
wa’s at e’en, and the lights that he had seen, and the cries that he had
heard, when there was nae mortal e’e open but his ain; and eh! as he wad
thrum them ower and ower to the like o’ me ayont the ingle at e’en, and
as I wad gie the auld silly carle grane for grane, and tale for tale,
though I ken’d muckle better about it than ever he did. Ay, ay--they were
daft days thae;--but they were a’ vanity, and waur,--and it’s fitting that
they wha hae led a light and evil life, and abused charity when they
were young, suld aiblins come to lack it when they are auld.”

While Ochiltree was thus recounting the exploits and tricks of his
earlier life, with a tone in which glee and compunction alternately
predominated, his unfortunate auditor had sat down upon the hermit’s
seat, hewn out of the solid rock, and abandoned himself to that
lassitude, both of mind and body, which generally follows a course of
events that have agitated both, The effect of his late indisposition,
which had much weakened his system, contributed to this lethargic
despondency. “The puir bairn!” said auld Edie, “an he sleeps in this
damp hole, he’ll maybe wauken nae mair, or catch some sair disease. It’s
no the same to him as to the like o’ us, that can sleep ony gate an anes
our wames are fu’. Sit up, Maister Lovel, lad! After a’s come and gane,
I dare say the captain-lad will do weel eneugh--and, after a’, ye are no
the first that has had this misfortune. I hae seen mony a man killed,
and helped to kill them mysell, though there was nae quarrel between
us--and if it isna wrang to kill folk we have nae quarrel wi’, just
because they wear another sort of a cockade, and speak a foreign
language, I canna see but a man may have excuse for killing his ain
mortal foe, that comes armed to the fair field to kill him. I dinna say
it’s right--God forbid--or that it isna sinfu’ to take away what ye canna
restore, and that’s the breath of man, whilk is in his nostrils; but I
say it is a sin to be forgiven if it’s repented of. Sinfu’ men are we
a’; but if ye wad believe an auld grey sinner that has seen the evil
o’ his ways, there is as much promise atween the twa boards o’ the
Testament as wad save the warst o’ us, could we but think sae.”

With such scraps of comfort and of divinity as he possessed, the
mendicant thus continued to solicit and compel the attention of Lovel,
until the twilight began to fade into night. “Now,” said Ochiltree, “I
will carry ye to a mair convenient place, where I hae sat mony a time to
hear the howlit crying out of the ivy tod, and to see the moonlight come
through the auld windows o’ the ruins. There can be naebody come
here after this time o’ night; and if they hae made ony search, thae
blackguard shirra’-officers and constables, it will hae been ower lang
syne. Od, they are as great cowards as ither folk, wi’ a’ their warrants
and king’s keys--I hae gien some o’ them a gliff in my day, when they
were coming rather ower near me--But, lauded be grace for it! they canna
stir me now for ony waur than an auld man and a beggar, and my badge
is a gude protection; and then Miss Isabella Wardour is a tower o’
strength, ye ken”--(Lovel sighed)--“Aweel, dinna be cast down--bowls may a’
row right yet--gie the lassie time to ken her mind. She’s the wale o’ the
country for beauty, and a gude friend o’ mine--I gang by the bridewell
as safe as by the kirk on a Sabbath--deil ony o’ them daur hurt a hair o’
auld Edie’s head now; I keep the crown o’ the causey when I gae to the
borough, and rub shouthers wi’ a bailie wi’ as little concern as an he
were a brock.”

 The king’s keys are, in law phrase, the crow-bars and hammers used to
force doors and locks, in execution of the king’s warrant. While the mendicant spoke thus, he was busied in removing a few loose
stones in one angle of the eave, which obscured the entrance of the
staircase of which he had spoken, and led the way into it, followed by
Lovel in passive silence. “The air’s free eneugh,” said the old man; “the monks took care o’ that,
for they werena a lang-breathed generation, I reckon; they hae contrived
queer tirlie-wirlie holes, that gang out to the open air, and keep the
stair as caller as a kail-blade.”

Lovel accordingly found the staircase well aired, and, though narrow, it
was neither ruinous nor long, but speedily admitted them into a narrow
gallery contrived to run within the side wall of the chancel, from which
it received air and light through apertures ingeniously hidden amid the
florid ornaments of the Gothic architecture. “This secret passage ance gaed round great part o’ the biggin,” said the
beggar, “and through the wa’ o’ the place I’ve heard Monkbarns ca’ the
Refractory” , “and so awa to the Prior’s ain
house. It’s like he could use it to listen what the monks were saying at
meal-time,--and then he might come ben here and see that they were busy
skreighing awa wi’ the psalms doun below there; and then, when he saw a’
was right and tight, he might step awa and fetch in a bonnie lass at
the cove yonder--for they were queer hands the monks, unless mony lees is
made on them. But our folk were at great pains lang syne to big up
the passage in some parts, and pu’ it down in others, for fear o’ some
uncanny body getting into it, and finding their way down to the cove: it
wad hae been a fashious job that--by my certie, some o’ our necks wad hae
been ewking.”

They now came to a place where the gallery was enlarged into a small
circle, sufficient to contain a stone seat. A niche, constructed exactly
before it, projected forward into the chancel, and as its sides were
latticed, as it were, with perforated stone-work, it commanded a full
view of the chancel in every direction, and was probably constructed, as
Edie intimated, to be a convenient watch-tower, from which the superior
priest, himself unseen, might watch the behaviour of his monks, and
ascertain, by personal inspection, their punctual attendance upon those
rites of devotion which his rank exempted him from sharing with them. As
this niche made one of a regular series which stretched along the wall
of the chancel, and in no respect differed from the rest when seen from
below, the secret station, screened as it was by the stone figure of
St. Michael and the dragon, and the open tracery around the niche, was
completely hid from observation. The private passage, confined to its
pristine breadth, had originally continued beyond this seat; but the
jealous precautions of the vagabonds who frequented the cave of St. Ruth
had caused them to build it carefully up with hewn stones from the ruin. “We shall be better here,” said Edie, seating himself on the stone
bench, and stretching the lappet of his blue gown upon the spot, when he
motioned Lovel to sit down beside him--“we shall be better here than doun
below; the air’s free and mild, and the savour of the wallflowers, and
siccan shrubs as grow on thae ruined wa’s, is far mair refreshing than
the damp smell doun below yonder. They smell sweetest by night-time thae
flowers, and they’re maist aye seen about rained buildings. Now, Maister
Lovel, can ony o’ you scholars gie a gude reason for that?”

Lovel replied in the negative. “I am thinking,” resumed the beggar, “that they’ll be, like mony folk’s
gude gifts, that often seem maist gracious in adversity--or maybe it’s a
parable, to teach us no to slight them that are in the darkness of sin
and the decay of tribulation, since God sends odours to refresh the
mirkest hour, and flowers and pleasant bushes to clothe the ruined
buildings. And now I wad like a wise man to tell me whether Heaven is
maist pleased wi’ the sight we are looking upon--thae pleasant and quiet
lang streaks o’ moonlight that are lying sae still on the floor o’ this
auld kirk, and glancing through the great pillars and stanchions o’ the
carved windows, and just dancing like on the leaves o’ the dark ivy as
the breath o’ wind shakes it--I wonder whether this is mair pleasing to
Heaven than when it was lighted up wi’ lamps, and candles nae doubt, and
roughies, and wi’ the mirth and the frankincent that they speak of in
the Holy Scripture, and wi’ organs assuredly, and men and women singers,
and sackbuts, and dulcimers, and a’ instruments o’ music--I wonder
if that was acceptable, or whether it is of these grand parafle o’
ceremonies that holy writ says, It is an abomination to me. Links, or torches. I am thinking, Maister Lovel, if twa puir contrite spirits like yours
and mine fand grace to make our petition”--

Here Lovel laid his hand eagerly on the mendicant’s arm, saying,--“Hush! I heard some one speak.”

“I am dull o’ hearing,” answered Edie, in a whisper, “but we’re surely
safe here--where was the sound?”

Lovel pointed to the door of the chancel, which, highly ornamented,
occupied the west end of the building, surmounted by the carved window,
which let in a flood of moonlight over it. “They can be nane o’ our folk,” said Edie in the same low and cautious
tone; “there’s but twa o’ them kens o’ the place, and they’re mony a
mile off, if they are still bound on their weary pilgrimage. I’ll never
think it’s the officers here at this time o’ night. I am nae believer in
auld wives’ stories about ghaists, though this is gey like a place for
them--But mortal, or of the other world, here they come!--twa men and a
light.”

And in very truth, while the mendicant spoke, two human figures darkened
with their shadows the entrance of the chancel--which had before opened
to the moon-lit meadow beyond, and the small lantern which one of them
displayed, glimmered pale in the clear and strong beams of the moon, as
the evening star does among the lights of the departing day. The first
and most obvious idea was, that, despite the asseverations of Edie
Ochiltree, the persons who approached the ruins at an hour so uncommon
must be the officers of justice in quest of Lovel. But no part of their
conduct confirmed the suspicion. A touch and a whisper from the old man
warned Lovel that his best course was to remain quiet, and watch their
motions from their present place of concealment. Should anything appear
to render retreat necessary, they had behind them the private stair-case
and cavern, by means of which they could escape into the wood long
before any danger of close pursuit. They kept themselves, therefore, as
still as possible, and observed with eager and anxious curiosity every
accent and motion of these nocturnal wanderers. After conversing together some time in whispers, the two figures
advanced into the middle of the chancel; and a voice, which Lovel at
once recognised, from its tone and dialect, to be that of Dousterswivel,
pronounced in a louder but still a smothered tone, “Indeed, mine goot
sir, dere cannot be one finer hour nor season for dis great purpose. You shall see, mine goot sir, dat it is all one bibble-babble dat Mr.
Oldenbuck says, and dat he knows no more of what he speaks than one
little child. Mine soul! he expects to get as rich as one Jew for his
poor dirty one hundred pounds, which I care no more about, by mine
honest wort, than I care for an hundred stivers. But to you, my most
munificent and reverend patron, I will show all de secrets dat art can
show--ay, de secret of de great Pymander.”



“That other ane,” whispered Edie, “maun be, according to a’ likelihood,
Sir Arthur Wardour--I ken naebody but himsell wad come here at this time
at e’en wi’ that German blackguard;--ane wad think he’s bewitched him--he
gars him e’en trow that chalk is cheese. Let’s see what they can be
doing.”

This interruption, and the low tone in which Sir Arthur spoke, made
Lovel lose all Sir Arthur’s answer to the adept, excepting the last
three emphatic words, “Very great expense;” to which Dousterswivel at
once replied--“Expenses!--to be sure--dere must be de great expenses. You do not expect to reap before you do sow de seed: de expense is de
seed--de riches and de mine of goot metal, and now de great big chests
of plate, they are de crop--vary goot crop too, on mine wort. Now, Sir
Arthur, you have sowed this night one little seed of ten guineas
like one pinch of snuff, or so big; and if you do not reap de great
harvest--dat is, de great harvest for de little pinch of seed, for it
must be proportions, you must know--then never call one honest man,
Herman Dousterswivel. Now you see, mine patron--for I will not conceal
mine secret from you at all--you see this little plate of silver; you
know de moon measureth de whole zodiack in de space of twenty-eight
day--every shild knows dat. Well, I take a silver plate when she is
in her fifteenth mansion, which mansion is in de head of Libra, and I
engrave upon one side de worts, --dat is,
de Emblems of de Intelligence of de moon--and I make this picture like a
flying serpent with a turkey-cock’s head--vary well. Then upon this side
I make de table of de moon, which is a square of nine, multiplied into
itself, with eighty-one numbers on every side, and diameter nine--dere it
is done very proper. Now I will make dis avail me at de change of every
quarter-moon dat I shall find by de same proportions of expenses I lay
out in de suffumigations, as nine, to de product of nine multiplied
into itself--But I shall find no more to-night as maybe two or dree times
nine, because dere is a thwarting power in de house of ascendency.”

“But, Dousterswivel,” said the simple Baronet, “does not this look like
magic?--I am a true though unworthy son of the Episcopal church, and I
will have nothing to do with the foul fiend.”

“Bah! bah!--not a bit magic in it at all--not a bit--It is all founded on
de planetary influence, and de sympathy and force of numbers. I will
show you much finer dan dis. I do not say dere is not de spirit in it,
because of de suffumigation; but, if you are not afraid, he shall not be
invisible.”

“I have no curiosity to see him at all,” said the Baronet, whose courage
seemed, from a certain quaver in his accent, to have taken a fit of the
ague. “Dat is great pity,” said Dousterswivel; “I should have liked to show
you de spirit dat guard dis treasure like one fierce watchdog--but I know
how to manage him;--you would not care to see him?”

“Not at all,” answered the Baronet, in a tone of feigned indifference;
“I think we have but little time.”

“You shall pardon me, my patron; it is not yet twelve, and twelve
precise is just our planetary hours; and I could show you de spirit
vary well, in de meanwhile, just for pleasure. You see I would draw
a pentagon within a circle, which is no trouble at all, and make my
suffumigation within it, and dere we would be like in one strong castle,
and you would hold de sword while I did say de needful worts. Den you
should see de solid wall open like de gate of ane city, and den--let me
see--ay, you should see first one stag pursued by three black greyhounds,
and they should pull him down as they do at de elector’s great
hunting-match; and den one ugly, little, nasty black negro should appear
and take de stag from them--and paf--all should be gone; den you should
hear horns winded dat all de ruins should ring--mine wort, they should
play fine hunting piece, as goot as him you call’d Fischer with his
oboi; vary well--den comes one herald, as we call Ernhold, winding his
horn--and den come de great Peolphan, called de mighty Hunter of de
North, mounted on hims black steed. But you would not care to see all
this?” 

 Note F. Witchcraft. “Why, I am not afraid,” answered the poor Baronet,--“if--that is--does
anything--any great mischiefs, happen on such occasions?”

“Bah! mischiefs? no!--sometimes if de circle be no quite just, or
de beholder be de frightened coward, and not hold de sword firm and
straight towards him, de Great Hunter will take his advantage, and drag
him exorcist out of de circle and throttle him. Dat does happens.”

“Well then, Dousterswivel, with every confidence in my courage and your
skill, we will dispense with this apparition, and go on to the business
of the night.”

“With all mine heart--it is just one thing to me--and now it is de
time--hold you de sword till I kindle de little what you call chip.”

Dousterswivel accordingly set fire to a little pile of chips, touched
and prepared with some bituminous substance to make them burn fiercely;
and when the flame was at the highest, and lightened, with its
shortlived glare, all the ruins around, the German flung in a handful of
perfumes which produced a strong and pungent odour. The exorcist and his
pupil both were so much affected as to cough and sneeze heartily; and,
as the vapour floated around the pillars of the building, and penetrated
every crevice, it produced the same effect on the beggar and Lovel. “Was that an echo?” said the Baronet, astonished at the sternutation
which resounded from above; “or”--drawing close to the adept, “can it
be the spirit you talked of, ridiculing our attempt upon his hidden
treasures?”

“N--n--no,” muttered the German, who began to partake of his pupil’s
terrors, “I hope not.”

Here a violent of sneezing, which the mendicant was unable to suppress,
and which could not be considered by any means as the dying fall of an
echo, accompanied by a grunting half-smothered cough, confounded the two
treasure-seekers. “Lord have mercy on us!” said the Baronet. “Alle guten Geistern loben den Herrn!” ejaculated the terrified adept. “I was begun to think,” he continued, after a moment’s silence, “that
this would be de bestermost done in de day-light--we was bestermost to go
away just now.”

“You juggling villain!” said the Baronet, in whom these expressions
awakened a suspicion that overcame his terrors, connected as it was
with the sense of desperation arising from the apprehension of impending
ruin--“you juggling mountebank! this is some legerdemain trick of yours
to get off from the performance of your promise, as you have so often
done before. But, before Heaven! I will this night know what I have
trusted to when I suffered you to fool me on to my ruin! Go on,
then--come fairy, come fiend, you shall show me that treasure, or confess
yourself a knave and an impostor, or, by the faith of a desperate and
ruined man, I’ll send you where you shall see spirits enough.”

The treasure-finder, trembling between his terror for the supernatural
beings by whom he supposed himself to be surrounded, and for his life,
which seemed to be at the mercy of a desperate man, could only bring
out, “Mine patron, this is not the allerbestmost usage. Consider, mine
honoured sir, that de spirits”--

Here Edie, who began to enter into the humour of the scene, uttered an
extraordinary howl, being an exaltation and a prolongation of the most
deplorable whine in which he was accustomed to solicit charity. Dousterswivel flung himself on his knees--“Dear Sir Arthurs, let us go,
or let me go!”

“No, you cheating scoundrel!” said the knight, unsheathing the sword
which he had brought for the purposes of the exorcism, “that shift shall
not serve you--Monkbarns warned me long since of your juggling pranks--I
will see this treasure before you leave this place, or I will have you
confess yourself an impostor, or, by Heaven, I’ll run this sword through
you, though all the spirits of the dead should rise around us!”

“For de lofe of Heaven be patient, mine honoured patron, and you shall
hafe all de treasure as I knows of--yes, you shall indeed--But do not
speak about de spirits--it makes dem angry.”

Edie Ochiltree here prepared himself to throw in another groan, but was
restrained by Lovel, who began to take a more serious interest, as
he observed the earnest and almost desperate demeanour of Sir Arthur. Dousterswivel, having at once before his eyes the fear of the foul
fiend, and the violence of Sir Arthur, played his part of a conjuror
extremely ill, hesitating to assume the degree of confidence necessary
to deceive the latter, lest it should give offence to the invisible
cause of his alarm. However, after rolling his eyes, muttering and
sputtering German exorcisms, with contortions of his face and person,
rather flowing from the impulse of terror than of meditated fraud, he at
length proceeded to a corner of the building where a flat stone lay upon
the ground, bearing upon its surface the effigy of an armed warrior in a
recumbent posture carved in bas-relief. He muttered to Sir Arthur, “Mine
patrons, it is here--Got save us all!”

Sir Arthur, who, after the first moment of his superstitious fear
was over, seemed to have bent up all his faculties to the pitch of
resolution necessary to carry on the adventure, lent the adept his
assistance to turn over the stone, which, by means of a lever that
the adept had provided, their joint force with difficulty effected. No
supernatural light burst forth from below to indicate the subterranean
treasury, nor was there any apparition of spirits, earthly or infernal. But when Dousterswivel had, with great trepidation, struck a few strokes
with a mattock, and as hastily thrown out a shovelful or two of earth
(for they came provided with the tools necessary for digging), something
was heard to ring like the sound of a falling piece of metal, and
Dousterswivel, hastily catching up the substance which produced it, and
which his shovel had thrown out along with the earth, exclaimed, “On
mine dear wort, mine patrons, dis is all--it is indeed; I mean all we can
do to-night;”--and he gazed round him with a cowering and fearful glance,
as if to see from what corner the avenger of his imposture was to start
forth. “Let me see it,” said Sir Arthur; and then repeated, still more sternly,
“I will be satisfied--I will judge by mine own eyes.” He accordingly
held the object to the light of the lantern. It was a small case, or
casket,--for Lovel could not at the distance exactly discern its shape,
which, from the Baronet’s exclamation as he opened it, he concluded was
filled with coin. “Ay,” said the Baronet, “this is being indeed in good
luck! and if it omens proportional success upon a larger venture, the
venture shall be made. That six hundred of Goldieword’s, added to the
other incumbent claims, must have been ruin indeed. If you think we
can parry it by repeating this experiment--suppose when the moon next
changes,--I will hazard the necessary advance, come by it how I may.”

“Oh, mine good patrons, do not speak about all dat,” said Dousterswivel,
“as just now, but help me to put de shtone to de rights, and let
us begone our own ways.” And accordingly, so soon as the stone was
replaced, he hurried Sir Arthur, who was now resigned once more to his
guidance, away from a spot, where the German’s guilty conscience and
superstitious fears represented goblins as lurking behind each pillar
with the purpose of punishing his treachery. “Saw onybody e’er the like o’ that!” said Edie, when they had
disappeared like shadows through the gate by which they had entered--“saw
ony creature living e’er the like o’ that!--But what can we do for that
puir doited deevil of a knight-baronet? Od, he showed muckle mair spunk,
too, than I thought had been in him--I thought he wad hae sent cauld iron
through the vagabond--Sir Arthur wasna half sae bauld at Bessie’s-apron
yon night--but then, his blood was up even now, and that makes an unco
difference. I hae seen mony a man wad hae felled another an anger him,
that wadna muckle hae liked a clink against Crummies-horn yon time. But
what’s to be done?”

“I suppose,” said Lovel, “his faith in this fellow is entirely restored
by this deception, which, unquestionably, he had arranged beforehand.”

“What! the siller?--Ay, ay--trust him for that--they that hide ken best
where to find. He wants to wile him out o’ his last guinea, and then
escape to his ain country, the land-louper. I wad likeit weel just
to hae come in at the clipping-time, and gien him a lounder wi’ my
pike-staff; he wad hae taen it for a bennison frae some o’ the auld dead
abbots. But it’s best no to be rash; sticking disna gang by strength,
but by the guiding o’ the gally. I’se be upsides wi’ him ae day.”

“What if you should inform Mr. Oldbuck?” said Lovel. “Ou, I dinna ken--Monkbarns and Sir Arthur are like, and yet they’re no
like neither. Monkbarns has whiles influence wi’ him, and whiles Sir
Arthur cares as little about him as about the like o’ me. Monkbarns is
no that ower wise himsell, in some things;--he wad believe a bodle to
be an auld Roman coin, as he ca’s it, or a ditch to be a camp, upon ony
leasing that idle folk made about it. I hae garr’d him trow mony a
queer tale mysell, gude forgie me. But wi’ a’ that, he has unco little
sympathy wi’ ither folks; and he’s snell and dure eneugh in casting up
their nonsense to them, as if he had nane o’ his ain. He’ll listen the
hale day, an yell tell him about tales o’ Wallace, and Blind Harry, and
Davie Lindsay; but ye maunna speak to him about ghaists or fairies, or
spirits walking the earth, or the like o’ that;--he had amaist flung auld
Caxon out o’ the window (and he might just as weel hae flung awa
his best wig after him), for threeping he had seen a ghaist at the
humlock-knowe. Now, if he was taking it up in this way, he wad set up
the tother’s birse, and maybe do mair ill nor gude--he’s done that
twice or thrice about thae mine-warks; ye wad thought Sir Arthur had a
pleasure in gaun on wi’ them the deeper, the mair he was warned against
it by Monkbarns.”

“What say you then,” said Lovel, “to letting Miss Wardour know the
circumstance?”

“Ou, puir thing, how could she stop her father doing his pleasure?--and,
besides, what wad it help? There’s a sough in the country about that
six hundred pounds, and there’s a writer chield in Edinburgh has been
driving the spur-rowels o’ the law up to the head into Sir Arthur’s
sides to gar him pay it, and if he canna, he maun gang to jail or flee
the country. He’s like a desperate man, and just catches at this chance
as a’ he has left, to escape utter perdition; so what signifies plaguing
the puir lassie about what canna be helped? And besides, to say
the truth, I wadna like to tell the secret o’ this place. It’s unco
convenient, ye see yoursell, to hae a hiding-hole o’ ane’s ain; and
though I be out o’ the line o’ needing ane e’en now, and trust in the
power o’ grace that I’ll neer do onything to need ane again, yet naebody
kens what temptation ane may be gien ower to--and, to be brief, I downa
bide the thought of anybody kennin about the place;--they say, keep a
thing seven year, an’ yell aye find a use for’t--and maybe I may need the
cove, either for mysell, or for some ither body.”

This argument, in which Edie Ochiltree, notwithstanding his scraps of
morality and of divinity, seemed to take, perhaps from old habit, a
personal interest, could not be handsomely controverted by Lovel, who
was at that moment reaping the benefit of the secret of which the old
man appeared to be so jealous. This incident, however, was of great service to Lovel, as diverting
his mind from the unhappy occurrence of the evening, and considerably
rousing the energies which had been stupefied by the first view of his
calamity. He reflected that it by no means necessarily followed that a
dangerous wound must be a fatal one--that he had been hurried from
the spot even before the surgeon had expressed any opinion of Captain
M’Intyre’s situation--and that he had duties on earth to perform, even
should the very worst be true, which, if they could not restore his
peace of mind or sense of innocence, would furnish a motive for
enduring existence, and at the same time render it a course of active
benevolence.--Such were Lovel’s feelings, when the hour arrived when,
according to Edie’s calculation--who, by some train or process of his own
in observing the heavenly bodies, stood independent of the assistance
of a watch or time-keeper--it was fitting they should leave their
hiding-place, and betake themselves to the seashore, in order to meet
Lieutenant Taffril’s boat according to appointment. They retreated by the same passage which had admitted them to the
prior’s secret seat of observation, and when they issued from the
grotto into the wood, the birds which began to chirp, and even to sing,
announced that the dawn was advanced. This was confirmed by the light
and amber clouds that appeared over the sea, as soon as their exit
from the copse permitted them to view the horizon.--Morning, said to be
friendly to the muses, has probably obtained this character from its
effect upon the fancy and feelings of mankind. Even to those who, like
Lovel, have spent a sleepless and anxious night, the breeze of the dawn
brings strength and quickening both of mind and body. It was, therefore,
with renewed health and vigour that Lovel, guided by the trusty
mendicant, brushed away the dew as he traversed the downs which divided
the Den of St. Ruth, as the woods surrounding the ruins were popularly
called, from the sea-shore. The first level beam of the sun, as his brilliant disk began to emerge
from the ocean, shot full upon the little gun-brig which was lying-to
in the offing--close to the shore the boat was already waiting, Taffril
himself, with his naval cloak wrapped about him, seated in the stern. He
jumped ashore when he saw the mendicant and Lovel approach, and,
shaking the latter heartily by the hand, begged him not to be cast down. “M’Intyre’s wound,” he said, “was doubtful, but far from desperate.”
 His attention had got Lovel’s baggage privately sent on board the
brig; “and,” he said, “he trusted that, if Lovel chose to stay with the
vessel, the penalty of a short cruise would be the only disagreeable
consequence of his rencontre. As for himself, his time and motions
were a good deal at his own disposal, he said, excepting the necessary
obligation of remaining on his station.”

“We will talk of our farther motions,” said Lovel, “as we go on board.”

Then turning to Edie, he endeavoured to put money into his hand. “I
think,” said Edie, as he tendered it back again, “the hale folk here
have either gane daft, or they hae made a vow to rain my trade, as they
say ower muckle water drowns the miller. I hae had mair gowd offered me
within this twa or three weeks than I ever saw in my life afore. Keep
the siller, lad--yell hae need o’t, I’se warrant ye, and I hae nane my
claes is nae great things, and I get a blue gown every year, and as mony
siller groats as the king, God bless him, is years auld--you and I serve
the same master, ye ken, Captain Taffril; there’s rigging provided
for--and my meat and drink I get for the asking in my rounds, or, at an
orra time, I can gang a day without it, for I make it a rule never to
pay for nane;--so that a’ the siller I need is just to buy tobacco and
sneeshin, and maybe a dram at a time in a cauld day, though I am nae
dram-drinker to be a gaberlunzie;--sae take back your gowd, and just gie
me a lily-white shilling.”

Upon these whims, which he imagined intimately connected with the honour
of his vagabond profession, Edie was flint and adamant, not to be moved
by rhetoric or entreaty; and therefore Lovel was under the necessity of
again pocketing his intended bounty, and taking a friendly leave of the
mendicant by shaking him by the hand, and assuring him of his cordial
gratitude for the very important services which he had rendered him,
recommending, at the same time, secrecy as to what they had that night
witnessed.--“Ye needna doubt that,” said Ochiltree; “I never tell’d tales
out o’ yon cove in my life, though mony a queer thing I hae seen in’t.”

The boat now put off. The old man remained looking after it as it made
rapidly towards the brig under the impulse of six stout rowers, and
Lovel beheld him again wave his blue bonnet as a token of farewell ere
he turned from his fixed posture, and began to move slowly along the
sands as if resuming his customary perambulations. Wiser Raymondus, in his closet pent,
                 Laughs at such danger and adventurement
              When half his lands are spent in golden smoke,
              And now his second hopeful glasse is broke,
                 But yet, if haply his third furnace hold,
                Devoteth all his pots and pans to gold. The author cannot remember where these lines are to be found: perhaps
in Bishop Hall’s Satires. About a week after the adventures commemorated in our last CHAPTER, Mr.
Oldbuck, descending to his breakfast-parlour, found that his womankind
were not upon duty, his toast not made, and the silver jug, which was
wont to receive his libations of mum, not duly aired for its reception. “This confounded hot-brained boy!” he said to himself; “now that he
begins to get out of danger, I can tolerate this life no longer. All
goes to sixes and sevens--an universal saturnalia seems to be proclaimed
in my peaceful and orderly family. I ask for my sister--no answer. I
call, I shout--I invoke my inmates by more names than the Romans gave
to their deities--at length Jenny, whose shrill voice I have heard this
half-hour lilting in the Tartarean regions of the kitchen, condescends
to hear me and reply, but without coming up stairs, so the conversation
must be continued at the top of my lungs. “--Here he again began to
hollow aloud--“Jenny, where’s Miss Oldbuck?”

“Miss Grizzy’s in the captain’s room.”

“Umph!--I thought so--and where’s my niece?”

“Miss Mary’s making the captain’s tea.”

“Umph! I supposed as much again--and where’s Caxon?”

“Awa to the town about the captain’s fowling-gun, and his setting-dog.”

“And who the devil’s to dress my periwig, you silly jade?--when you knew
that Miss Wardour and Sir Arthur were coming here early after breakfast,
how could you let Caxon go on such a Tomfool’s errand?”

“Me! what could I hinder him?--your honour wadna hae us contradict the
captain e’en now, and him maybe deeing?”

“Dying!” said the alarmed Antiquary,--“eh! what? has he been worse?”

“Na, he’s no nae waur that I ken of.” 

 It is, I believe, a piece of free-masonry, or a point of conscience,
among the Scottish lower orders, never to admit that a patient is doing
better. The closest approach to recovery which they can be brought to
allow, is, that the pairty inquired after is “Nae waur.”

“Then he must be better--and what good is a dog and a gun to do here, but
the one to destroy all my furniture, steal from my larder, and perhaps
worry the cat, and the other to shoot somebody through the head. He
has had gunning and pistolling enough to serve him one while, I should
think.”

Here Miss Oldbuck entered the parlour, at the door of which Oldbuck was
carrying on this conversation, he bellowing downward to Jenny, and she
again screaming upward in reply. “Dear brother,” said the old lady, “ye’ll cry yoursell as hoarse as
a corbie--is that the way to skreigh when there’s a sick person in the
house?”

“Upon my word, the sick person’s like to have all the house to himself,--
I have gone without my breakfast, and am like to go without my wig; and
I must not, I suppose, presume to say I feel either hunger or cold, for
fear of disturbing the sick gentleman who lies six rooms off, and who
feels himself well enough to send for his dog and gun, though he knows
I detest such implements ever since our elder brother, poor Williewald,
marched out of the world on a pair of damp feet, caught in the
Kittlefitting-moss. But that signifies nothing; I suppose I shall be
expected by and by to lend a hand to carry Squire Hector out upon his
litter, while he indulges his sportsmanlike propensities by shooting my
pigeons, or my turkeys--I think any of the ferae naturae are safe from
him for one while.”

Miss M’Intyre now entered, and began to her usual morning’s task of
arranging her uncle’s breakfast, with the alertness of one who is too
late in setting about a task, and is anxious to make up for lost time. But this did not avail her. “Take care, you silly womankind--that mum’s
too near the fire--the bottle will burst; and I suppose you intend to
reduce the toast to a cinder as a burnt-offering for Juno, or what do
you call her--the female dog there, with some such Pantheon kind of
a name, that your wise brother has, in his first moments of mature
reflection, ordered up as a fitting inmate of my house (I thank him),
and meet company to aid the rest of the womankind of my household in
their daily conversation and intercourse with him.”

“Dear uncle, don’t be angry about the poor spaniel; she’s been tied up
at my brother’s lodgings at Fairport, and she’s broke her chain twice,
and came running down here to him; and you would not have us beat the
faithful beast away from the door?--it moans as if it had some sense
of poor Hector’s misfortune, and will hardly stir from the door of his
room.”

“Why,” said his uncle, “they said Caxon had gone to Fairport after his
dog and gun.”

“O dear sir, no,” answered Miss M’Intyre, “it was to fetch some
dressings that were wanted, and Hector only wished him to bring out his
gun, as he was going to Fairport at any rate.”

“Well, then, it is not altogether so foolish a business, considering
what a mess of womankind have been about it--Dressings, quotha?--and who
is to dress my wig?--But I suppose Jenny will undertake”--continued the
old bachelor, looking at himself in the glass--“to make it somewhat
decent. And now let us set to breakfast--with what appetite we may. Well
may I say to Hector, as Sir Isaac Newton did to his dog Diamond, when
the animal (I detest dogs) flung down the taper among calculations which
had occupied the philosopher for twenty years, and consumed the whole
mass of materials--Diamond, Diamond, thou little knowest the mischief
thou hast done!”

“I assure you, sir,” replied his niece, “my brother is quite sensible
of the rashness of his own behaviour, and allows that Mr. Lovel behaved
very handsomely.”

“And much good that will do, when he has frightened the lad out of the
country! I tell thee, Mary, Hector’s understanding, and far more that
of feminity, is inadequate to comprehend the extent of the loss which he
has occasioned to the present age and to posterity--aureum quidem opus--a
poem on such a subject, with notes illustrative of all that is clear,
and all that is dark, and all that is neither dark nor clear, but hovers
in dusky twilight in the region of Caledonian antiquities. I would have
made the Celtic panegyrists look about them. Fingal, as they conceitedly
term Fin-Mac-Coul, should have disappeared before my search, rolling
himself in his cloud like the spirit of Loda. Such an opportunity can
hardly again occur to an ancient and grey-haired man; and to see it lost
by the madcap spleen of a hot-headed boy! But I submit--Heaven’s will be
done!”

Thus continued the Antiquary to maunder, as his sister expressed it,
during the whole time of breakfast, while, despite of sugar and honey,
and all the comforts of a Scottish morning tea-table, his reflections
rendered the meal bitter to all who heard them. But they knew the
nature of the man. “Monkbarns’s bark,” said Miss Griselda Oldbuck, in
confidential intercourse with Miss Rebecca Blattergowl, “is muckle waur
than his bite.”

In fact, Mr. Oldbuck had suffered in mind extremely while his nephew was
in actual danger, and now felt himself at liberty, upon his returning
health, to indulge in complaints respecting the trouble he had been
put to, and the interruption of his antiquarian labours. Listened to,
therefore, in respectful silence, by his niece and sister, he unloaded
his discontent in such grumblings as we have rehearsed, venting many
a sarcasm against womankind, soldiers, dogs, and guns, all which
implements of noise, discord, and tumult, as he called them, he
professed to hold in utter abomination. This expectoration of spleen was suddenly interrupted by the noise of a
carriage without, when, shaking off all sullenness at the sound, Oldbuck
ran nimbly up stairs and down stairs, for both operations were necessary
ere he could receive Miss Wardour and her father at the door of his
mansion. A cordial greeting passed on both sides. And Sir Arthur, referring
to his previous inquiries by letter and message, requested to be
particularly informed of Captain M’Intyre’s health. “Better than he deserves,” was the answer--“better than he deserves, for
disturbing us with his vixen brawls, and breaking God’s peace and the
King’s.”

“The young gentleman,” Sir Arthur said, “had been imprudent; but he
understood they were indebted to him for the detection of a suspicious
character in the young man Lovel.”

“No more suspicious than his own,” answered the Antiquary, eager in
his favourites defence;--“the young gentleman was a little foolish and
headstrong, and refused to answer Hector’s impertinent interrogatories--
that is all. Lovel, Sir Arthur, knows how to choose his confidants
better--Ay, Miss Wardour, you may look at me--but it is very true;--it
was in my bosom that he deposited the secret cause of his residence
at Fairport; and no stone should have been left unturned on my part to
assist him in the pursuit to which he had dedicated himself.”

On hearing this magnanimous declaration on the part of the old
Antiquary, Miss Wardour changed colour more than once, and could
hardly trust her own ears. For of all confidants to be selected as the
depositary of love affairs,--and such she naturally supposed must have
been the subject of communication,--next to Edie Ochiltree, Oldbuck
seemed the most uncouth and extraordinary; nor could she sufficiently
admire or fret at the extraordinary combination of circumstances which
thus threw a secret of such a delicate nature into the possession of
persons so unfitted to be entrusted with it. She had next to fear the
mode of Oldbuck’s entering upon the affair with her father, for such,
she doubted not, was his intention. She well knew that the honest
gentleman, however vehement in his prejudices, had no great sympathy
with those of others, and she had to fear a most unpleasant explosion
upon an e’claircissement taking place between them. It was therefore
with great anxiety that she heard her father request a private
interview, and observed Oldbuck readily arise and show the way to his
library. She remained behind, attempting to converse with the ladies of
Monkbarns, but with the distracted feelings of Macbeth, when compelled
to disguise his evil conscience by listening and replying to the
observations of the attendant thanes upon the storm of the preceding
night, while his whole soul is upon the stretch to listen for the alarm
of murder, which he knows must be instantly raised by those who have
entered the sleeping apartment of Duncan. But the conversation of the
two virtuosi turned on a subject very different from that which Miss
Wardour apprehended. “Mr. Oldbuck,” said Sir Arthur, when they had, after a due exchange of
ceremonies, fairly seated themselves in the sanctum sanctorum of the
Antiquary,--“you, who know so much of my family matters, may probably be
surprised at the question I am about to put to you.”

“Why, Sir Arthur, if it relates to money, I am very sorry, but”--

“It does relate to money matters, Mr. Oldbuck.”

“Really, then, Sir Arthur,” continued the Antiquary, “in the present
state of the money-market--and stocks being so low”--

“You mistake my meaning, Mr. Oldbuck,” said the Baronet; “I wished to
ask your advice about laying out a large sum of money to advantage.”

“The devil!” exclaimed the Antiquary; and, sensible that his involuntary
ejaculation of wonder was not over and above civil, he proceeded to
qualify it by expressing his joy that Sir Arthur should have a sum of
money to lay out when the commodity was so scarce. “And as for the mode
of employing it,” said he, pausing, “the funds are low at present, as I
said before, and there are good bargains of land to be had. But had you
not better begin by clearing off encumbrances, Sir Arthur?--There is the
sum in the personal bond--and the three notes of hand,” continued
he, taking out of the right-hand drawer of his cabinet a certain red
memorandum-book, of which Sir Arthur, from the experience of former
frequent appeals to it, abhorred the very sight--“with the interest
thereon, amounting altogether to--let me see”--

“To about a thousand pounds,” said Sir Arthur, hastily; “you told me the
amount the other day.”

“But there’s another term’s interest due since that, Sir Arthur, and it
amounts (errors excepted) to eleven hundred and thirteen pounds, seven
shillings, five pennies, and three-fourths of a penny sterling--But look
over the summation yourself.”

“I daresay you are quite right, my dear sir,” said the Baronet, putting
away the book with his hand, as one rejects the old-fashioned civility
that presses food upon you after you have eaten till you nauseate--
“perfectly right, I dare say; and in the course of three days or less
you shall have the full value--that is, if you choose to accept it in
bullion.”

“Bullion! I suppose you mean lead. What the deuce!