The pain was very violent, and Lady Drelincourt urged him to stop at Blandford. He had wished to reach Salisbury, where he meant to conclude the day’s journey, as it was his customary and favorite resting place; but in compliance with her entreaties, an outrider was dispatched to the former place; when they arrived there, his lordship’s ancle was much swelled, a son of Esculapius was sent for, and in a few minutes one arrived, who by the assistance of a good house, with chemicals, and galenicals, inscribed neatly in golden letters over the door, had the most business, and as some would think, consequently the

best medical abilities in the place. The messenger who had been dispatched for him, had informed him, that he was sent for to a lord. This intelligence acted as an electrical shock upon his nerves. “A Lord!” he exclaimed, jumping up, and leaving the ensanguined stream to flow from the arm of a half-price patient, who had called on him; “A Lord! I never heard of one being arrived, I wish I had known, I would have been a little better dressed, but I will wait on his lordship directly,” hurrying out of the room as he spoke; he was however recalled by the feeble voice of the sick man, whom he had left, and who asked with the utmost simplicity, if he were to wait there till Mr. Pestle returned from calling on the lord? “Yes, do if you please,” replied the man of business, but recollecting himself he added, “I will just tie up your arm before I go,” and by this wonderful instance of memory, and presence of mind, he probably deprived the honest countryman of the glory, of dying a death, similar to that of the illustrious Seneca. Fortunately no other obstacle intervened, except meeting a few patients in his way, all of whom Mr. Pestle informed, that he would have the pleasure of seeing them, as soon as he had just looked in on the Earl of Drelincourt, who had been waiting for him a considerable time at the Crown. As he ascended the stairs, Mr. Pestle had ample employment in pulling up his cravat, arranging his frill, and letting a white handkerchief peep from his pocket; by the time that all this was done, the door was thrown open, and he was introduced into the presence of the peer. After a bow to every individual, which resembled in lowness and humility, that movement called in the East Indies a salam, or that which a devout persian makes to the rising sun; Mr. Pestle approached, and surveyed the part affected with the nice eye of medical criticism. “My lord, your lordship’s accident might have been much more serious, than you will, I hope, now find it. In the course of my practice, I have seen very lingering, tedious, and difficult cases, induced by cases apparently as trifling. Your lordship has had a narrow escape from a luxation of the tibia, but happily,” continued he, “it is so defended by the ligamentum superius anterium, and the ligamentum posticum, superius, that I believe no worse consequences will arise to your lordship, than a violent sprain of the ligamentum deltoides, I will however, send your lordship an embrocation for the part affected, and an ointment to remove the discolouration of the cuticle, and,” feeling the Earl’s pulse, “I think a composing draught for this evening, and another in the morning, may be of service to your lordship. “What,” said the Earl with a smile, “do you think me so violently fluttered by my accident, or so much alarmed for its consequences?” “By no means my lord,” answered Mr. Pestle, “I merely mentioned draughts, because we generally; that is, it is customary to send them, but certainly I will not, if they be not agreeable to your lordship.” The Earl smiled again, and politely replied, “Yes, I beg you will send them, Mr. Pestle, a custom is seldom general without good reasons, and I like to conform to established rules.” Mr. Pestle then departed, with the same profusion of bows, as he had exhibited on his entrance, and had the satisfaction of telling all his patients, that he had been the whole of the morning, with the Earl of Drelincourt, who was a mighty pleasant man. His lady and daughters also were charming women and vastly handsome. During the examination of his lordship’s ancle, Edmund had retired to refresh himself by some slight duties of the toilet, and his valet whilst combing his hair, informed him with that air of mystery, which never fails to rouse curiosity, that Dawson was at the

Inn. “Dawson!” exclaimed Edmund, “what is he doing here when his master is in London?” “Lord Courtney is here too, I believe sir,” said the valet with a smile, that spoke what he durst not otherwise express, “not that Dawson told me so sir, he denied it, but I heard him ordering horses to be brought out, as soon as dinner was taken up for my lord; and I was surprised that he should order them, when it was so nearly dark.” “And I am more than surprised,” Edmund involuntarily exclaimed, he however checked himself from saying more, but he returned to the Earl with so disturbed a countenance, that he was immediately asked if he were indisposed; he replied that he did not feel quite well at that moment, nor did he deviate much from the exact veracity, which he always endeavoured to observe, for he was really agitated, and resolved to satisfy himself, whether Lord Courtney were actually preparing to leave the inn at that late hour, notwithstanding the arrival of the family. They were scarcely seated at the dinner-table, before Edmund heard the sound of horses’ feet, and he again drew attention by changing colour; he complained of a violent pain in his head, and requesting to be excused from continuing at the table, he left the room with a beating heart, and went into another; from the windows of which, he plainly discerned a carriage, and four horses, the useful Dawson was putting in some parcels, and a few minutes after, he distinguished beyond a doubt, the features of Lord Courtney, whom he was shocked to see, accompanied by a lady, in whose slender form arrayed in sable garbs, he instantly recognized Mary Macdonald; a female servant followed her, the door was closed, the postillions cracked their whips, and the carriage, followed by Dawson, was quickly out of hearing. Edmund’s heart was formed of nature’s best and most susceptible materials, and his eyes filled with tears, as he mentally exclaimed, “Lost unfortunate Mary! unhappy Henry! one day thou wilt remember with agony, that thou hast basely betrayed the trust of a fond father, of a dying friend! Oh may’st thou yet repent ere thou committest a crime, which when committed, no repentance can expiate.” Not one spark of resentment did Edmund feel at the distrust, which Henry had shewn of him, no, he was rather proud that their friendship had not been a partnership in vice. He rejoiced also that Lord Drelincourt was spared the pang of knowing his son’s dereliction from the principles which had been so carefully instilled into him; and he sought to console himself by the hope that Henry might not yet be dead to conviction, and that the disinterested advice of friendship, might be received with the penitence of returning virtue. The next day Lord Drelincourt was able to pursue his journey, whether by the assistance of nature, or of Mr. Pestle’s draughts, we will not determine, but he certainly did reach town, in safety with all his family. Now see a splendid city rise to view,
With carts, aud cars, and coaches, roaring all, Wide-pour’d abroad, behold the giddy crew,
See how they dash along from wall to wall! At every door, hark! how they thundering call,
Good Lord! what can this giddy rout excite? Why on each other with fell tooth to fall,
A neighbour’s fortune, fame, or peace to blight,
And make new tiresome parties for the coming night. THOMSON. THE delights of London, arrayed in the facinating garb of novelty, could not fail to interest the mind of Edmund, though they never, for a moment, drew his attention from the explanation which he wished to have with Henry; who, as if suspecting his designs, industriously shunned the communication so anxiously sought. Edmund was not however discouraged, but resolved to watch a favourable opportunity, and disguised his wishes, in order to throw Henry off his guard till one should occur. Lady Drelincourt’s nights were always crowded, for every one wished to appear at her assemblies; and the first brought all the fashionables who had arrived in town. Amongst the number were, the Earl of Carisbrooke, Lady Laura Delany, Miss Clayton, and Sir John, who had come to town on business, after an absence of twenty years; and of course discovered wonderful alterations since he had last visited it. The Dunderton family also were of the party, for they had left their cards immediately on Lord Drelincourt’s arrival, and much sooner than he wished; he by no means approving of his ward’s intimacy with Miss Dunderton, as it encreased to a degree of familiarity, of which folly or enmity is too frequently the consequence. The Earl of Carisbrooke kindly rallied Edmund on his desertion, saying, that Lady Laura was quite offended by it: “I was more reasonable,” added he, “and told her, that I did not expect you to devote much of your time to a gouty old man, and a solitary lady, when you had so many fair claimants on your attention at the Castle.” Edmund apologized with much grace to the Earl, but he shrunk from the idea of doing it to her ladyship; for though he had never loved her, yet she had certainly first inspired him with a wish to please; and an attachment, even of that slight kind, cannot be remembered by one new to the world, without aukward sensations. The lady however advanced, and with the delightful ease of modern manners, tapped him with her fan, and beckoned him to a seat near her on a sofa, which had fortunately been deserted by two old ladies for the whist table. The hero obeyed the summons with a beating heart, and pressed her hand to supply the place of words; whilst Lady Laura, encouraged by his confusion, and of course imagining that it sprung from the tenderest emotions, laid aside her first intention of behaving with coldness and hauteur, and adopted the same mode of conduct, that she had

often successfully practised in the summer-house, whither she so considerately always invited her guests, to recover the fatigue of walking a quarter of a mile. “You do not know,” said she, in the tenderest tones that she could possibly assume, “how you hurt me by so suddenly forsaking Carisbrooke; my father was really quite offended with the inconsistency of your conduct, but I always endeavoured to excuse it to him: tell me now, in return for my good-nature, to what it really might be owing?” This home question greatly embarrassed Edmund, who was not prepared either to expect or to answer it; he however extricated himself tolerably well, by saying, that “Whatever had occasioned his apparent negligence, her ladyship must be too conscious of her own attractions, not to know that it must have been as painful to himself, as it could possibly appear disrespectful to others.” Lady Laura might not believe this exactly, for she was too conversant in the language of gallantry, to expect that sincerity should form one of its characteristics; but she appeared perfectly satisfied, and began once more to play off the artillery of tender glances, broken sentences, and affected confusion; though not with the success by which they had been before distinguished; for Edmund’s eyes wandered from her’s to follow the pretty figure, and pleasing countenance of his Emma, as she passed from room to room, paying attention to all, and gaining it from every one, by the graces of her unaffected deportment. Lady Laura saw that she was not attended to, and like a skilful general, made a good retreat, resolving to rally her forces at a more favourable opportunity; telling Edmund therefore, that she should expect to see him the next day in Grosvenor Square, she left the sofa, and took her place at a table where all the softer emotions were lost in the anxieties of rouge et noir. Hard is the fortune that the sex attends,
Women, like princes, find few real friends;
All who approach them their own ends pursue, Lovers and ministers are seldom true:
Hence oft from reason heedless beauty strays, And the most trusted guide the most betrays; Hence by fond dreams of fancied power amus’d, When most they tyrannize they’re most abus’d. LORD LYTTLETON. EDMUND was too polite to fail in an appointment with a lady, and after having had the pleasure of a tête à tête with Lady Laura, the day being very fine, he sauntered on horseback towards Hammersmith, and would probably soon have returned, as the morning was far advanced, had not his curiosity been attracted by a gentleman a little way before him, who he thought must be Lord Courtney; he followed him till his conjectures were reduced to certainty, and quickening his pace he soon overtook him. Lord Courtney did not appear highly delighted with the rencontre, or much inclined to loquacity; his replies were short and unsatisfactory, his behaviour cold and absent; but Edmund was determined not to be offended, or to leave him till he had gained his confidence. Henry was too volatile to preserve long an assumed gravity, too good- natured to long affect a coldness that he could not feel; and after riding nearly half an hour in silence, he began to converse with his usual frankness. “My dear fellow, “ said he, “now acknowledge plainly, that you think me a rude, reserved, unpleasant sort of a being; I am sure you must, though you may be more good- natured than I deserve, and not willing to tell me so.” “Indeed,” replied Edmund, “I could not tell you so, without doing my thoughts injustice: part of your own accusation I will agree to, for I know you have been reserved to me of late, but far from thinking that friendship cannot exist without an entire communication, I am of opinion rather that its very essence consists in the liberty of occasional concealment, without giving birth to suspicion or displeasure.” “You are a generous fellow,” answered Courtney, “and I am unworthy of so kind a friend. My concealments have arisen from a consciousness, that your virtue would disapprove my conduct, which justly incurs my own reproaches, and they embitter all the sweets that passion taught me to expect; but which, I am convinced cannot be tasted, if vice be necessary to obtain the possession of them.” He paused, and appeared much affected; after a few minutes he proceeded, “Promise, Edmund, that you will not despise—alas! I may say hate me, if I, at last, place entire confidence in you; from selfish motives I own, on my part, for I am tempted to do it by the hope of finding, in your consolation and advice, relief from recollections and remorse, intolerable to be borne alone.” Edmund earnestly requested his confidence, without informing him, that it could disclose little more than he already knew; but they had arrived at Brompton, and Henry alighting at the door of a small neat house, requested him to do the same. They

entered without knocking, and went into a parlour, which was furnished in a style of plain elegance, and contained a grand piano-forte, a book-case filled with the best English authors, an embroidering frame, drawing implements, and many other useful decorations. Whilst Edmund cast his eyes round the apartment, Henry continued silent and embarrassed: in a few minutes the door was opened, and the unfortunate Mary entered. She started on seeing Edmund, but it was the simple movement of surprise, for no other emotion appeared: the blush of shame suffused not her cheek, though modesty still seemed to reign on it; her manners were easy, unaffected and interesting as they had ever been, she behaved to Edmund with the warm politeness due to Henry’s friend, and to Henry himself, every word, ever look, bespoke the most delicate and undisguised affection.” Strange inconsistency!” exclaimed Edmund mentally, “shall vice wear the aspect of virtue? does innocence associate with guilt? can happiness shine in eyes which ought to be dimmed with repentant tears? ah! could Macdonald see his daughter thus, what would not be his sufferings!” The unconscious object of Edmund’s reverie, awoke him from it by asking him in the most engaging terms, to stay and take his dinner with Lord Courtney and her; he started on hearing her so openly join her name to Henry’s, and refused her invitation with an impressive look, in which there was more of sorrow, than of anger. Lord Courtney appeared displeased, and enquired what were his objections? Edmund could not give his real ones, he could not allege that the painful reflections excited by his company, were such, as to preclude the possibility of either receiving, or giving pleasure, whilst remaining in it; but he excused himself, on the score, of not having seen any of the family, before he left Berkeley Square. Henry assured him that it was of no consequence, adding, “My father’s dinner hour is fixed, as the law of the medes and the persians, ‘which altereth not;’ and if not one of the family were ready at the appointed time, you would yet see the dishes smoaking on the table, and the servants standing around it, ‘punctual as lovers to the moment sworn,’ you will therefore keep no one waiting, and in the evening we will return together, and the same apology will serve for both.” Edmund still hesitated, there was yet another reason, which he had been ashamed to give, and he now stammered out, something of an engagement to attend Lady Laura Delany, to the Opera; “Bravo,” exclaimed Courtney, I admire your choice of company, nor do I wonder at your unwillingness to comply with Miss Macdonald’s request, when you are required to protect the timid and interesting Lady Laura.” There was a bitter irony in the tone of these words, which offended even the gentle Edmund, and his fine eyes flashed reproachful fire on Lord Courtney, whose conscious looks could not bear their glance; Edmund repeated his apologies to Mary, and rose to take his leave, Courtney rose likewise, “You are not going,” said Mary in a tone of entreaty; he took her hand saying, “I must go, excuse me to-day, for I have indispensable engagements.” “Do not ask me to excuse you,” said Mary, for you must well know, that I could not excuse myself were I capable of wishing to detain you contrary to your inclinations.” Offended pride struggled with tenderness in her bosom, the first flushed her cheek, the last trembled in her eye. Henry felt the appeal forcibly, but he felt also, that he had offended Edmund, and he could not bear the thought of seeing him depart in anger. Edmund saw that Henry had already repented his petulance, and this instantly disarmed his quick resentment. “Suffer me,” said he, with the smile of benevolence, which speaks immediately to the heart; “suffer me to have the privilege of changing my mind, a privilege always granted to

your sex,” addressing himself to Mary, “and every day exerted by you,” turning to Henry; “neither can therefore deny it to me, and I hope that Miss Macdonald will permit us to dine together here, as probably her hour is sufficiently early to allow me time, on my return, to change the deshabille, for which I must apologize to her." This proposal was immediately accepted with unfeigned pleasure. Mary’s eyes sparkled with renovated cheerfulness; the gloom on Courtney’s countenance was dispersed, and even Edmund’s regrets were hushed, by the propriety of conduct which he saw strictly observed, and the pleasing and rational conversation which was sustained. The repast was served with an air of comfort, and elegant neatness. The dishes, few in number, were in the first season and admirably dressed. They were waited on only by one servant, in a plain suit; and the plate, liquors, and desert, were all in the style of an excellently regulated household. Mary did the honors of the table, with the most enchanting grace and simplicity: coffee was brought soon after, and the time was filled up with music, in which she was only a learner, but had already made sufficient progress to accompany her voice with much taste and pathos, in the most admired airs of her native country. At an early hour the gentlemen departed, and Henry desired Edmund to breakfast with him the next morning, when he would candidly relate his errors, and endeavour to profit by advice, “at present,” said he, “I dare not think of any thing penseroso, for I ought to be very civil to Lady Harriett, and you know she is so exceedingly penetrating, that I must spare her sensibility.” Edmund, notwithstanding he used the utmost expedition in adorning himself; yet failed in gallantry so much as to be half an hour beyond his appointment, for which he was reproached by Lady Laura, who told him she “could not forget that he was once more punctual.” He blushed at the remembrance, and rejoiced that he had been spared another tête à tête with her ladyship, whose society in losing novelty, had lost the only charm that it had ever possessed, and whose artificial manners suffered greatly from the comparison which he daily made between them, and Lady Emma’s ease and native modesty. Perceiving that her swain was in no very pliable humour, the lady ordered her carriage, and endeavoured to banish the frowns from her countenance, by reflecting that she should, at least have the satisfaction of exhibiting his fine figure in her box, and that by talking to him on different topics, with an air of deep interest, she might inspire the females with envy, and perhaps stimulate the attention of Lord John Talbot, a fashionable young man, whom report gave to her ladyship as a lover, and her conduct to him, plainly evinced that if he were not so, it was from no want of encouragement. With these consolatory hopes she suffered Edmund to hand her into the carriage, and they proceeded to the opera-house, after stopping to take up a little, lean, wrinkled female, who submitted to act as a foil to youth and gaiety, in order to insure a place at a table, or in public, where her own means were not all-powerful. It happened that Lady Drelincourt and her family were likewise at the opera; and, as their box was opposite to Lady Laura’s, they of course had a full view of each other. This gave no great pleasure to Lady Laura, who suspected that she had a rival in the family, but could not determine exactly on any particular lady. Her suspicions were confirmed by the inattention of her beau, from the moment of their entrance; she spoke, but received no answer, she looked at him, but his eyes were fixed on some individual of the opposite party, with a tender expression, so unlike the fashionable stare of

indifference, that she immediately felt herself forsaken; a discovery not likely to be borne with patience, and she exclaimed in no very pleasing accents, “Really, if you mean to be equally entertaining all the evening, you will draw my attention entirely from this beautiful ballet.” Edmund’s ears caught the last words of her speech, and he replied, without moving his eyes, “Beautiful indeed! and interesting as beautiful!” Her ladyship burst into a loud laugh, and asked him where he had dined? this question rather roused him, and looking round, he remarked with surprise, the altered expression of her countenance. Ill-nature and malice deformed her features, he lip was drawn up with a contemptuous sneer, and he sought to refresh his eyes by again fixing them on the simply elegant form of Lady Emma. Lady Laura exerted all her self-command, she saw that her empire tottered, and that her only chance of victory was to appear unconscious of defeat. She therefore addressed her conversation to her chaprone, who unfortunately was very deaf, not that this in general was considered as any defect in her, on the contrary, she was often pronounced a very agreeable companion, when she had neither heard nor spoken one word during the conversation; and her society was sometimes sought with an avidity, which however might still have been exceeded, had she fortunately been blind as well as deaf. A ballet was performing, “very pretty indeed,” said Lady Laura to her companion, with her eyes fixed on the box that so successfully rivetted Edmund’s attention; “charmingly pretty indeed, do you not think so, Mrs. Arundale?” Mrs. Arundale judiciously never gave her opinion until it was asked, and then good naturedly accommodated it to that of the enquirer. She now followed the direction of her ladyship’s eyes, and very naturally replied, “They are indeed, my lady, very handsome.” “They,” re- echoed Lady Laura, “what do you mean?” “Which do I mean? indeed they are all handsome, but I think the young lady in pink the prettiest, though the one entirely in white is very pleasing, but rather pale.” “I was speaking of the dancing madam,” said Lady Laura, very coolly, then added in a lower tone, “It is very entertaining to come to a public place with the deaf and dumb.” This ungentle hint recalled Edmund’s attention, and he resolved not to gratify himself again at the expense of politeness. Perhaps he had less merit in this sacrifice, as he had already had the pleasure of a curtsey, and timid smile from Lady Emma, which was certainly food enough for a lover to live upon for the remainder of the evening. His returning cares restored Lady Laura’s smiles, though she could not do away the effect which her ill-humour had produced; or throw any expression into her countenance, sweet enough to efface the remembrance of the angry passions before imprinted on it. Towards the latter end of the piece, Lord John Talbot came into the box, and Lady Laura’s eyes sparkled with vanity and hope, as he negligently looked round, saying, “How are you this evening? how do you exist all this immense time; these people would weary the patience of an anti-deluvian.” “Oh! you gothic creature,” said Lady Laura, “surely you can never be tired of this charming harmony. Do you allow this attack on music, Signior?” Oh!” interrupted Lord John, “Signior Rodalvi is used to something more like music than this infernal noise; but we have nothing good in England, except decent horseflesh, for every thing else it is a beggarly nation.” Edmund was astonished, “What,” thought be, “is this an Englishman? do the natives of this country then go abroad to despise all other nations, and return to abuse their own, although it is so highly favored,

as to render even their warmest prejudices in its favor excusable?” Lord John had now thrown himself into a chair, as if he wished to take a nap; and bringing his head so nearly in contact with her ladyship’s shoulder, as to make it seem a pillow, they presented an interesting picture of the agreeable negligence of one sex, and the condescending tolerance of the other, according to the newest fashions. Had Edmund followed his own opinions of propriety and impropriety, and his inclinations to chastise the latter, he would have ordered the peer to leave the box, and insult decorum elsewhere; but he saw plainly, that the familarity which disgusted him, was by no means so displeasing to its object, who listened with great complacency to the nothings yawned, rather than whispered into her ear. In about a quarter of an hour Lord John arose, and taking leave of the company with the same careless nod, by which he had saluted them on his entrance, he swung out of the box, notwithstanding the very pressing invitation which he received from Lady Laura to stay, and the hints that she threw out, of returning home before the piece was ended. She would now gladly have turned her attention again to Edmund; but, unfortunately at that moment, some ill-natured or misinformed person, circulated a report of fire having broken out among the machinery; which, added to a powerful smell of smoke, created such terror that the house was soon in confusion, notwithstanding some of the principal performers appeared on the stage, to assure the audience that the cause of their alarm, merely arose from some preparations for a part of the spectacle. Edmund however felt only half satisfied with this apology, and was so pale with apprehension, that Lady Laura began to form a contemptible opinion of his courage, and endeavoured to laugh him out of his fears, assuring him, that a piece would never be heard through, if flying reports of that nature were attended to; adding, that if there were even reason for alarm, she should always commend remaining quiet, as there was much more danger in going with the crowd, than could result from waiting till it should be dispersed. Edmund perfectly agreed with her ladyship, as to the propriety of her plans, but added, that he thought Lady Drelincourt appeared alarmed; he would therefore beg leave to go to the opposite side for a few moments, just to escort the ladies to their carriage if they required assistance, and would then have the pleasure of returning. Lady Laura coldly begged him not to confine himself; adding, “I cannot but admire the perfection of your ocular powers; I am sure the other side of the house might be in flames, and I unable to perceive it.” She had forgotten that her eyes, however deficient, could, a few minutes before, distinguish Lord John opposite to her, notwithstanding the immense distance and that he, though very fashionably blind, could not affect to misunderstand her pointed obeisance, and encouraging looks. Edmund flew to the box which contained one inestimably dear to him, and who rose higher every day in his estimation; for he every day became convinced that in her he should possess a jewel, richer than all the tribe of gay fashionable females, who flutter round the blaze of dissipation, till they are burnt in its flames. He found Lady Drelincourt much alarmed, and her daughters on that account, were anxious to return home. Henry actually devoted his attention to his mother, and resigned the care of Lady Harriett to Mr. Dunderton, who had just arrived at a time when he could make himself useful, and who received his charge with a profusion of soft speeches. Edmund protected Lady Emma; her sisters had a crowd of beaux, and they were safely guarded to the carriage. “Have you room for me,” said Edmund.” “We should not

have it for any other fifth,” said Lady Rosamond, “but for you, we would submit to be crowded.” The gentlemen loudly complained of this avowed partiality. Edmund stepped into the carriage, and never once thought of Lady Laura, till the arrival of Lord Courtney, after the piece was ended, reminded him of his excessive rudeness. “Ah! what shall I do?” exclaimed he, starting up, “what is to be done? ladies assist me, I implore you give me your advice.” “When we know your reasons for requiring it,” said Lady Drelincourt, “you shall have the very best that we can offer.” “Now indeed, my dear lady, it is no jest,” continued he, “I have left, that is, I have forgotten” he stopped, and Henry helped him out, by saying, “You have forgotten what you were going to tell us; but, my dear fellow, do now recollect what you have left at the opera? is it your heart or your toothpick-case.” “No,” replied Edmund, “I have left Lady Laura.” The grave inquietude with which he spoke, diverted the company, and Henry consoled him by an assurance that she would not be lost for want of protection. It was however agreed that he ought to return, in order to make enquiries after the deserted fair one. Henry was deferring all apology till the next day, saying, “Lord John Talbot should have stayed with her, who does he think will take the trouble of escorting his mistress? I am sure he will not find me so condescending, though perhaps when she is his wife I may do it, just for the eclat of the thing.” Lady Drelincourt gently reproved him for levity of his speech, adding that she was well assured his words were at variance with his sentiments; he was beginning to hold a mock argument with her, but Edmund could not forbear expressing his surprize, on hearing that Lord John, was an accepted lover of Lady Laura; Henry laughed at the astonishment which he betrayed, asking him if he had expected that one admirer would content her? Emma coloured, and an emotion resembling jealousy passed across her heart, but it was dispelled by Edmund’s replying, “I own that had I known it sooner, I should have looked for more attention from his lordship, and less from her ladyship, during the short time I saw them together.” “My dear fellow,” returned Henry, “would’st thou enslave us again in the trammels of our forefathers; just when we are congratulating ourselves on having shaken them off? no, no, they are as the ‘tales of other time,’ and the remembrance of them may be ‘pleasant, but yet mournful,’ for they will ‘return no more.” A servant was now dispatched to Lady Laura, and returned with the information, that she had retired to rest much indisposed. “Well,” said Henry, “I congratulate you however, on not having her death to answer for; her indisposition will not be very lingering, I dare say; she will be visible to-morrow, and you will be admitted to the happiness of pleading for your pardon in the magic boudoir.” The family now separated for the night, and Lady Harriett followed Emma into her dressing room, to enquire with a mysterious air, “If she did not think that Edmund must be attached to Lady Laura, from the emotion which he had discovered, on hearing that she was going to marry Lord John Talbot?” Lady Emma replied, that she really believed he had no attachment whatever, to the lady in question, and that his emotion, as Lady Harriett emphatically termed it, was only surprise, suddenly excited by hearing of an arrangement, with which he was unacquainted. “Very possibly that might be the case,” answered Lady Harriett, “only he must have some attachment more than we know of, he is so sparing in his attentions at home: I am sure he does not speak to me, for a day together, but you are indeed a favourite.” “I,” exclaimed Emma, “why should you think so? does he address his conversation oftener to me than to any one else?” “No, perhaps not much oftener, but always with more interest, and he smiles when

he hears your voice, and when you do not see him, he looks at you; and he plays the tunes which he has heard you admire, and when he takes a pencil into his hand, he copies your sketches, apparently without thinking of what he is doing.” Emma blushed, and began to think Lady Harriett in a more rational humour, than she had ever known her. “Now acknowledge, my dear Emma,” continued her sentimental companion, “that there is something infinitely soothing to the mind of susceptibility, in the idea of being beloved.” She paused for a reply, which Emma gave briefly, saying, “Certainly any one is unworthy of being beloved, who is incapable of appreciating the sincere attachment of a worthy object.” “Yes,” said Lady Harriett, “and an object may be worthy, though doomed to be unfortunate, as my sweet friend Eliza Dunderton says, and indeed her brother is a proof of her assertion; he is not so lively, so very much the rage as Lord Courtney, or as handsome as Count Rodalvi, but he is interesting, and truly amiable.” Then throwing herself into what she conceived a charming attitude, with a tragedy air, which showed how rapidly she improved in the society, and from the counsels of her Eliza, she exclaimed in a pathetic tone,
“Ill fated youth, my heart must feel thy woes,
But my seal’d lips their source shall ne’er disclose.”
Then with a well acted confusion she hastily bade goodnight, and retired, to the great joy of Emma, who could only account for her romantic absurdity, by supposing that she had lost her reason, or was talking in her sleep. Friendship! thou greatest happiness below, The world would be a desart but for thee,
And man himself a nobler kind of brute. Wherefore did heav’n our god-like reason give To make the charms of conversation sweet,
To open and unbosom all our woes,
For life’s sure medicine is a faithful friend. TRACEY. THE next morning Edmund breakfasted by appointment with Henry, whose spirits were again fled, and his countenance expressed the effects of a sleepless night and an uneasy mind. As soon as they were alone, Edmund remarked with concern, his friend’s altered looks, requested him to have some medical advice. “Alas! Rodalvi,” said he, “there is not an article in the materia-medica which would afford me relief; unless it have lately gained some, capable of ministering to a mind deseased; there lies my ill, there I ought to minister to myself, and from that I shrink like a base coward.” He started up, and walked about in great agitation, Edmund besought him to be tranquil; “Tranquil!” he exclaimed, “no, no, it is not for me to be tranquil! you, Edmund, are happy, you have never forfeited your own esteem; and thousands in my situation would not be unhappy, wretched that I am, I abhor vice, yet cannot summon resolution to practise the virtue, that I know and admire.” After a long pause, in which he endeavoured to recover sufficient calmness to resume his discourse, he continued, “I am ashamed to confess, how early I formed the design of seducing the innocent girl, whom you saw yesterday; it commenced even from the moment in which I first beheld her.