His life was swallowed
up in the existence of his beloved; and his heart beat only in unison with the pulsations that vivified
hers. This was the secret law of his life-he loved and was beloved. The universe was to him a
dwelling, to inhabit with his chosen one; and not either a scheme of society or an enchainment of
events, that could impart to him either happiness or misery. What, though life and the system of
social intercourse were a wilderness, a tiger-haunted jungle! Through the midst of its errors, in the
depths of its savage recesses, there was a disentangled and flowery pathway, through which they
might journey in safety and delight. Their track would be like the passage of the Red Sea, which they
might traverse with unwet feet, though a wall of destruction were impending on either side. Alas! why must I record the hapless delusion of this matchless specimen of humanity? What is there
in our nature that is for ever urging us on towards pain and misery? We are not formed for
enjoyment; and, however we may be attuned to the reception of pleasureable emotion,
disappointment is the never-failing pilot of our life's bark, and ruthlessly carries us on to the shoals. Who was better framed than this highly-gifted youth to love and be beloved, and to reap unalienable
joy from an unblamed passion? If his heart had slept but a few years longer, he might have been
saved; but it awoke in its infancy; it had power, but no knowledge; and it was ruined, even as a too
early-blowing bud is nipt by the killing frost. I did not accuse Evadne of hypocrisy or a wish to deceive her lover; but the first letter that I saw of
hers convinced me that she did not love him; it was written with elegance, and, foreigner as she was,
with great command of language. The hand-writing itself was exquisitely beautiful; there was
something in her very paper and its folds, which even I, who did not love, and was withal unskilled in
such matters, could discern as being tasteful. There was much kindness, gratitude, and sweetness in
her expression, but no love. Evadne was two years older than Adrian; and who, at eighteen, ever
loved one so much their junior? I compared her placid epistles with the burning ones of Adrian. His
soul seemed to distil itself into the words he wrote; and they breathed on the paper, bearing with
them a portion of the life of love, which was his life. The very writing used to exhaust him; and he
would weep over them, merely from the excess of emotion they awakened in his heart. Adrian's soul was painted in his countenance, and concealment or deceit were at the antipodes to
the dreadless frankness of his nature. Evadne made it her earnest request that the tale of their loves
should not be revealed to his mother; and after for a while contesting the point, he yielded it to her. A vain concession; his demeanour quickly betrayed his secret to the quick eyes of the ex-queen. With
the same wary prudence that characterized her whole conduct, she concealed her discovery, but
hastened to remove her son from the sphere of the attractive Greek. He was sent to Cumberland;
but the plan of correspondence between the lovers, arranged by Evadne, was effectually hidden
from her. Thus the absence of Adrian, concerted for the purpose of separating, united them in firmer
bonds than ever. To me he discoursed ceaselessly of his beloved Ionian. Her country, its ancient
annals, its late memorable struggles, were all made to partake in her glory and excellence. He
submitted to be away from her, because she commanded this submission; but for her influence, he
would have declared his attachment before all England, and resisted, with unshaken constancy, his
mother's opposition. Evadne's feminine prudence perceived how useless any assertion of his resolves
would be, till added years gave weight to his power. Perhaps there was besides a lurking dislike to
bind herself in the face of the world to one whom she did not love-not love, at least, with that
passionate enthusiasm which her heart told her she might one day feel towards another. He obeyed
her injunctions, and passed a year in exile in Cumberland. HAPPY, thrice happy, were the months, and weeks, and hours of that year. Friendship, hand in hand
with admiration, tenderness and respect, built a bower of delight in my heart, late rough as an
untrod wild in America, as the homeless wind or herbless sea. Insatiate thirst for knowledge, and
boundless affection for Adrian, combined to keep both my heart and understanding occupied, and I
was consequently happy. What happiness is so true and unclouded, as the overflowing and talkative
delight of young people. In our boat, upon my native lake, beside the streams and the pale bordering
poplars-in valley and over hill, my crook thrown aside, a nobler flock to tend than silly sheep, even a
flock of new-born ideas, I read or listened to Adrian; and his discourse, whether it concerned his love
or his theories for the improvement of man, alike entranced me. Sometimes my lawless mood would
return, my love of peril, my resistance to authority; but this was in his absence; under the mild sway
of his dear eyes, I was obedient and good as a boy of five years old, who does his mother's bidding. After a residence of about a year at Ulswater, Adrian visited London, and came back full of plans for
our benefit. You must begin life, he said: you are seventeen, and longer delay would render the
necessary apprenticeship more and more irksome. He foresaw that his own life would be one of
struggle, and I must partake his labours with him. The better to fit me for this task, we must now
separate. He found my name a good passport to preferment, and he had procured for me the
situation of private secretary to the Ambassador at Vienna, where I should enter on my career under
the best auspices. In two years, I should return to my country, with a name well known and a
reputation already founded. And Perdita?-Perdita was to become the pupil, friend and younger sister of Evadne. With his usual
thoughtfulness, he had provided for her independence in this situation. How refuse the offers of this
generous friend?-I did not wish to refuse them; but in my heart of hearts, I made a vow to devote
life, knowledge, and power, all of which, in as much as they were of any value, he had bestowed on
me-all, all my capacities and hopes, to him alone I would devote. Thus I promised myself, as I journied towards my destination with roused and ardent expectation:
expectation of the fulfilment of all that in boyhood we promise ourselves of power and enjoyment in
maturity. Methought the time was now arrived, when, childish occupations laid aside, I should enter
into life. Even in the Elysian fields, Virgil describes the souls of the happy as eager to drink of the
wave which was to restore them to this mortal coil. The young are seldom in Elysium, for their
desires, outstripping possibility, leave them as poor as a moneyless debtor. We are told by the wisest
philosophers of the dangers of the world, the deceits of men, and the treason of our own hearts: but
not the less fearlessly does each put off his frail bark from the port, spread the sail, and strain his oar,
to attain the multitudinous streams of the sea of life. How few in youth's prime, moor their vessels
on the "golden sands," and collect the painted shells that strew them. But all at close of day, with
riven planks and rent canvas make for shore, and are either wrecked ere they reach it, or find some
wave-beaten haven, some desart strand, whereon to cast themselves and die unmourned. A truce to philosophy!-Life is before me, and I rush into possession. Hope, glory, love, and
blameless ambition are my guides, and my soul knows no dread. What has been, though sweet, is
gone; the present is good only because it is about to change, and the to come is all my own. Do I fear,
that my heart palpitates? high aspirations cause the flow of my blood; my eyes seem to penetrate
the cloudy midnight of time, and to discern within the depths of its darkness, the fruition of all my
soul desires. Now pause!-During my journey I might dream, and with buoyant wings reach the summit of life's
high edifice. Now that I am arrived at its base, my pinions are furled, the mighty stairs are before me,
and step by step I must ascend the wondrous fane-
Speak!-What door is opened? Behold me in a new capacity. A diplomatist: one among the pleasure-seeking society of a gay city; a
youth of promise; favourite of the Ambassador. All was strange and admirable to the shepherd of
Cumberland. With breathless amaze I entered on the gay scene, whose actors were
-the lilies glorious as Solomon, Who toil not, neither do they spin. Soon, too soon, I entered the giddy whirl; forgetting my studious hours, and the companionship of
Adrian. Passionate desire of sympathy, and ardent pursuit for a wished-for object still characterized
me. The sight of beauty entranced me, and attractive manners in man or woman won my entire
confidence. I called it rapture, when a smile made my heart beat; and I felt the life's blood tingle in
my frame, when I approached the idol which for awhile I worshipped. The mere flow of animal spirits
was Paradise, and at night's close I only desired a renewal of the intoxicating delusion. The dazzling
light of ornamented rooms; lovely forms arrayed in splendid dresses; the motions of a dance, the
voluptuous tones of exquisite music, cradled my senses in one delightful dream. And is not this in its kind happiness? I appeal to moralists and sages. I ask if in the calm of their
measured reveries, if in the deep meditations which fill their hours, they feel the extasy of a youthful
tyro in the school of pleasure? Can the calm beams of their heaven-seeking eyes equal the flashes of
mingling passion which blind his, or does the influence of cold philosophy steep their soul in a joy
equal to his, engaged
In this dear work of youthful revelry. But in truth, neither the lonely meditations of the hermit, nor the tumultuous raptures of the
reveller, are capable of satisfying man's heart. From the one we gather unquiet speculation, from the
other satiety. The mind flags beneath the weight of thought, and droops in the heartless intercourse
of those whose sole aim is amusement. There is no fruition in their vacant kindness, and sharp rocks
lurk beneath the smiling ripples of these shallow waters. Thus I felt, when disappointment, weariness, and solitude drove me back upon my heart, to gather
thence the joy of which it had become barren. My flagging spirits asked for something to speak to
the affections; and not finding it, I drooped. Thus, notwithstanding the thoughtless delight that
waited on its commencement, the impression I have of my life at Vienna is melancholy. Goethe has
said, that in youth we cannot be happy unless we love. I did not love; but I was devoured by a
restless wish to be something to others. I became the victim of ingratitude and cold coquetry-then I
desponded, and imagined that my discontent gave me a right to hate the world. I receded to
solitude; I had recourse to my books, and my desire again to enjoy the society of Adrian became a
burning thirst. Emulation, that in its excess almost assumed the venomous properties of envy, gave a sting to these
feelings. At this period the name and exploits of one of my countrymen filled the world with
admiration. Relations of what he had done, conjectures concerning his future actions, were the
never-failing topics of the hour. I was not angry on my own account, but I felt as if the praises which
this idol received were leaves torn from laurels destined for Adrian. But I must enter into some
account of this darling of fame-this favourite of the wonder-loving world. Lord Raymond was the sole remnant of a noble but impoverished family. From early youth he had
considered his pedigree with complacency, and bitterly lamented his want of wealth. His first wish
was aggrandisement; and the means that led towards this end were secondary considerations. Haughty, yet trembling to every demonstration of respect; ambitious, but too proud to shew his
ambition; willing to achieve honour, yet a votary of pleasure,- he entered upon life. He was met on
the threshold by some insult, real or imaginary; some repulse, where he least expected it; some
disappointment, hard for his pride to bear. He writhed beneath an injury he was unable to revenge;
and he quitted England with a vow not to return, till the good time should arrive, when she might
feel the power of him she now despised. He became an adventurer in the Greek wars. His reckless courage and comprehensive genius brought
him into notice. He became the darling hero of this rising people. His foreign birth, and he refused to
throw off his allegiance to his native country, alone prevented him from filling the first offices in the
state. But, though others might rank higher in title and ceremony, Lord Raymond held a station
above and beyond all this. He led the Greek armies to victory; their triumphs were all his own. When
he appeared, whole towns poured forth their population to meet him; new songs were adapted to
their national airs, whose themes were his glory, valour, and munificence. A truce was concluded
between the Greeks and Turks. At the same time, Lord Raymond, by some unlooked-for chance,
became the possessor of an immense fortune in England, whither he returned, crowned with glory,
to receive the meed of honour and distinction before denied to his pretensions. His proud heart
rebelled against this change. In what was the despised Raymond not the same? If the acquisition of
power in the shape of wealth caused this alteration, that power should they feel as an iron yoke. Power therefore was the aim of all his endeavours; aggrandizement the mark at which he for ever
shot. In open ambition or close intrigue, his end was the same-to attain the first station in his own
country. This account filled me with curiosity. The events that in succession followed his return to England,
gave me keener feelings. Among his other advantages, Lord Raymond was supremely handsome;
every one admired him; of women he was the idol. He was courteous, honey-tongued-an adept in
fascinating arts. What could not this man achieve in the busy English world? Change succeeded to
change; the entire history did not reach me; for Adrian had ceased to write, and Perdita was a laconic
correspondent. The rumour went that Adrian had become-how write the fatal word-mad: that
Lord Raymond was the favourite of the ex-queen, her daughter's destined husband. Nay, more, that
this aspiring noble revived the claim of the house of Windsor to the crown, and that, on the event of
Adrian's incurable disorder and his marriage with the sister, the brow of the ambitious Raymond
might be encircled with the magic ring of regality. Such a tale filled the trumpet of many voiced fame; such a tale rendered my longer stay at Vienna,
away from the friend of my youth, intolerable. Now I must fulfil my vow; now range myself at his
side, and be his ally and support till death. Farewell to courtly pleasure; to politic intrigue; to the
maze of passion and folly! All hail, England! Native England, receive thy child! thou art the scene of
all my hopes, the mighty theatre on which is acted the only drama that can, heart and soul, bear me
along with it in its development. A voice most irresistible, a power omnipotent, drew me thither. After an absence of two years I landed on its shores, not daring to make any inquiries, fearful of
every remark. My first visit would be to my sister, who inhabited a little cottage, a part of Adrian's
gift, on the borders of Windsor Forest. From her I should learn the truth concerning our protector; I
should hear why she had withdrawn from the protection of the Princess Evadne, and be instructed as
to the influence which this overtopping and towering Raymond exercised over the fortunes of my
friend. I had never before been in the neighbourhood of Windsor; the fertility and beauty of the country
around now struck me with admiration, which encreased as I approached the antique wood. The
ruins of majestic oaks which had grown, flourished, and decayed during the progress of centuries,
marked where the limits of the forest once reached, while the shattered palings and neglected
underwood shewed that this part was deserted for the younger plantations, which owed their birth
to the beginning of the nineteenth century, and now stood in the pride of maturity. Perdita's humble
dwelling was situated on the skirts of the most ancient portion; before it was stretched Bishopgate
Heath, which towards the east appeared interminable, and was bounded to the west by Chapel
Wood and the grove of Virginia Water. Behind, the cottage was shadowed by the venerable fathers
of the forest, under which the deer came to graze, and which for the most part hollow and decayed,
formed fantastic groups that contrasted with the regular beauty of the younger trees. These, the
offspring of a later period, stood erect and seemed ready to advance fearlessly into coming time;
while those out worn stragglers, blasted and broke, clung to each other, their weak boughs sighing as
the wind buffetted them-a weather-beaten crew. A light railing surrounded the garden of the cottage, which, low-roofed, seemed to submit to the
majesty of nature, and cower amidst the venerable remains of forgotten time. Flowers, the children
of the spring, adorned her garden and casements; in the midst of lowliness there was an air of
elegance which spoke the graceful taste of the inmate. With a beating heart I entered the enclosure;
as I stood at the entrance, I heard her voice, melodious as it had ever been, which before I saw her
assured me of her welfare. A moment more and Perdita appeared; she stood before me in the fresh bloom of youthful
womanhood, different from and yet the same as the mountain girl I had left. Her eyes could not be
deeper than they were in childhood, nor her countenance more expressive; but the expression was
changed and improved; intelligence sat on her brow; when she smiled her face was embellished by
the softest sensibility, and her low, modulated voice seemed tuned by love. Her person was formed
in the most feminine proportions; she was not tall, but her mountain life had given freedom to her
motions, so that her light step scarce made her foot-fall heard as she tript across the hall to meet me. When we had parted, I had clasped her to my bosom with unrestrained warmth; we met again, and
new feelings were awakened; when each beheld the other, childhood passed, as full grown actors on
this changeful scene. The pause was but for a moment; the flood of association and natural feeling
which had been checked, again rushed in full tide upon our hearts, and with tenderest emotion we
were swiftly locked in each other's embrace. This burst of passionate feeling over, with calmed thoughts we sat together, talking of the past and
present. I alluded to the coldness of her letters; but the few minutes we had spent together
sufficiently explained the origin of this. New feelings had arisen within her, which she was unable to
express in writing to one whom she had only known in childhood; but we saw each other again, and
our intimacy was renewed as if nothing had intervened to check it. I detailed the incidents of my
sojourn abroad, and then questioned her as to the changes that had taken place at home, the causes
of Adrian's absence, and her secluded life. The tears that suffused my sister's eyes when I mentioned our friend, and her heightened colour
seemed to vouch for the truth of the reports that had reached me. But their import was too terrible
for me to give instant credit to my suspicion. Was there indeed anarchy in the sublime universe of
Adrian's thoughts, did madness scatter the well-appointed legions, and was he no longer the lord of
his own soul? Beloved friend, this ill world was no clime for your gentle spirit; you delivered up its
governance to false humanity, which stript it of its leaves ere winter-time, and laid bare its quivering
life to the evil ministration of roughest winds. Have those gentle eyes, those "channels of the soul"
lost their meaning, or do they only in their glare disclose the horrible tale of its aberrations? Does
that voice no longer "discourse excellent music?" Horrible, most horrible! I veil my eyes in terror of
the change, and gushing tears bear witness to my sympathy for this unimaginable ruin. In obedience to my request Perdita detailed the melancholy circumstances that led to this event. The frank and unsuspicious mind of Adrian, gifted as it was by every natural grace, endowed with
transcendant powers of intellect, unblemished by the shadow of defect (unless his dreadless
independence of thought was to be construed into one), was devoted, even as a victim to sacrifice,
to his love for Evadne. He entrusted to her keeping the treasures of his soul, his aspirations after
excellence, and his plans for the improvement of mankind. As manhood dawned upon him, his
schemes and theories, far from being changed by personal and prudential motives, acquired new
strength from the powers he felt arise within him; and his love for Evadne became deep-rooted, as
he each day became more certain that the path he pursued was full of difficulty, and that he must
seek his reward, not in the applause or gratitude of his fellow creatures, hardly in the success of his
plans, but in the approbation of his own heart, and in her love and sympathy, which was to lighten
every toil and recompence every sacrifice. In solitude, and through many wanderings afar from the haunts of men, he matured his views for the
reform of the English government, and the improvement of the people. It would have been well if he
had concealed his sentiments, until he had come into possession of the power which would secure
their practical development. But he was impatient of the years that must intervene, he was frank of
heart and fearless. He gave not only a brief denial to his mother's schemes, but published his
intention of using his influence to diminish the power of the aristocracy, to effect a greater
equalization of wealth and privilege, and to introduce a perfect system of republican government
into England. At first his mother treated his theories as the wild ravings of inexperience. But they
were so systematically arranged, and his arguments so well supported, that though still in
appearance incredulous, she began to fear him. She tried to reason with him, and finding him
inflexible, learned to hate him. Strange to say, this feeling was infectious. His enthusiasm for good which did not exist; his contempt
for the sacredness of authority; his ardour and imprudence were all at the antipodes of the usual
routine of life; the worldly feared him; the young and inexperienced did not understand the lofty
severity of his moral views, and disliked him as a being different from themselves. Evadne entered
but coldly into his systems. She thought he did well to assert his own will, but she wished that will to
have been more intelligible to the multitude. She had none of the spirit of a martyr, and did not
incline to share the shame and defeat of a fallen patriot. She was aware of the purity of his motives,
the generosity of his disposition, his true and ardent attachment to her; and she entertained a great
affection for him. He repaid this spirit of kindness with the fondest gratitude, and made her the
treasure-house of all his hopes. At this time Lord Raymond returned from Greece. No two persons could be more opposite than
Adrian and he. With all the incongruities of his character, Raymond was emphatically a man of the
world. His passions were violent; as these often obtained the mastery over him, he could not always
square his conduct to the obvious line of self-interest, but self-gratification at least was the
paramount object with him. He looked on the structure of society as but a part of the machinery
which supported the web on which his life was traced. The earth was spread out as an highway for
him; the heavens built up as a canopy for him. Adrian felt that he made a part of a great whole. He owned affinity not only with mankind, but all
nature was akin to him; the mountains and sky were his friends; the winds of heaven and the
offspring of earth his playmates; while he the focus only of this mighty mirror, felt his life mingle with
the universe of existence. His soul was sympathy, and dedicated to the worship of beauty and
excellence. Adrian and Raymond now came into contact, and a spirit of aversion rose between them. Adrian despised the narrow views of the politician, and Raymond held in supreme contempt the
benevolent visions of the philanthropist. With the coming of Raymond was formed the storm that laid waste at one fell blow the gardens of
delight and sheltered paths which Adrian fancied that he had secured to himself, as a refuge from
defeat and contumely. Raymond, the deliverer of Greece, the graceful soldier, who bore in his mien a
tinge of all that, peculiar to her native clime, Evadne cherished as most dear- Raymond was loved
by Evadne. Overpowered by her new sensations, she did not pause to examine them, or to regulate
her conduct by any sentiments except the tyrannical one which suddenly usurped the empire of her
heart. She yielded to its influence, and the too natural consequence in a mind unattuned to soft
emotions was, that the attentions of Adrian became distasteful to her. She grew capricious; her
gentle conduct towards him was exchanged for asperity and repulsive coldness. When she perceived
the wild or pathetic appeal of his expressive countenance, she would relent, and for a while resume
her ancient kindness. But these fluctuations shook to its depths the soul of the sensitive youth; he no
longer deemed the world subject to him, because he possessed Evadne's love; he felt in every nerve
that the dire storms of the mental universe were about to attack his fragile being, which quivered at
the expectation of its advent. Perdita, who then resided with Evadne, saw the torture that Adrian endured. She loved him as a kind
elder brother; a relation to guide, protect, and instruct her, without the too frequent tyranny of
parental authority. She adored his virtues, and with mixed contempt and indignation she saw Evadne
pile drear sorrow on his head, for the sake of one who hardly marked her. In his solitary despair
Adrian would often seek my sister, and in covered terms express his misery, while fortitude and
agony divided the throne of his mind. Soon, alas! was one to conquer. Anger made no part of his
emotion. With whom should he be angry? Not with Raymond, who was unconscious of the misery he
occasioned; not with Evadne, for her his soul wept tears of blood-poor, mistaken girl, slave not
tyrant was she, and amidst his own anguish he grieved for her future destiny. Once a writing of his
fell into Perdita's hands; it was blotted with tears-well might any blot it with the like-
"Life"-it began thus-"is not the thing romance writers describe it; going through the measures of a
dance, and after various evolutions arriving at a conclusion, when the dancers may sit down and
repose. While there is life there is action and change. We go on, each thought linked to the one
which was its parent, each act to a previous act. No joy or sorrow dies barren of progeny, which for
ever generated and generating, weaves the chain that make our life:
Un dia llama a otro dia y ass i llama, y encadena llanto a llanto, y pena a pena. Truly disappointment is the guardian deity of human life; she sits at the threshold of unborn time,
and marshals the events as they come forth. Once my heart sat lightly in my bosom; all the beauty of
the world was doubly beautiful, irradiated by the sun-light shed from my own soul. O wherefore are
love and ruin for ever joined in this our mortal dream? So that when we make our hearts a lair for
that gently seeming beast, its companion enters with it, and pitilessly lays waste what might have
been an home and a shelter." By degrees his health was shaken by his misery, and then his intellect yielded to the same tyranny. His manners grew wild; he was sometimes ferocious, sometimes absorbed in speechless melancholy. Suddenly Evadne quitted London for Paris; he followed, and overtook her when the vessel was about
to sail; none knew what passed between them, but Perdita had never seen him since; he lived in
seclusion, no one knew where, attended by such persons as his mother selected for that purpose. THE next day Lord Raymond called at Perdita's cottage, on his way to Windsor Castle. My sister's
heightened colour and sparkling eyes half revealed her secret to me. He was perfectly self-possessed;
he accosted us both with courtesy, seemed immediately to enter into our feelings, and to make one
with us. I scanned his physiognomy, which varied as he spoke, yet was beautiful in every change. The
usual expression of his eyes was soft, though at times he could make them even glare with ferocity;
his complexion was colourless; and every trait spoke predominate self-will; his smile was pleasing,
though disdain too often curled his lips-lips which to female eyes were the very throne of beauty
and love. His voice, usually gentle, often startled you by a sharp discordant note, which shewed that
his usual low tone was rather the work of study than nature. Thus full of contradictions, unbending
yet haughty, gentle yet fierce, tender and again neglectful, he by some strange art found easy
entrance to the admiration and affection of women; now caressing and now tyrannizing over them
according to his mood, but in every change a despot. At the present time Raymond evidently wished to appear amiable. Wit, hilarity, and deep
observation were mingled in his talk, rendering every sentence that he uttered as a flash of light. He
soon conquered my latent distaste; I endeavoured to watch him and Perdita, and to keep in mind
every thing I had heard to his disadvantage. But all appeared so ingenuous, and all was so fascinating,
that I forgot everything except the pleasure his society afforded me. Under the idea of initiating me
in the scene of English politics and society, of which I was soon to become a part, he narrated a
number of anecdotes, and sketched many characters; his discourse, rich and varied, flowed on,
pervading all my senses with pleasure. But for one thing he would have been completely triumphant. He alluded to Adrian, and spoke of him with that disparagement that the worldly wise always attach
to enthusiasm. He perceived the cloud gathering, and tried to dissipate it; but the strength of my
feelings would not permit me to pass thus lightly over this sacred subject; so I said emphatically,
"Permit me to remark, that I am devotedly attached to the Earl of Windsor; he is my best friend and
benefactor. I reverence his goodness, I accord with his opinions, and bitterly lament his present, and I
trust temporary, illness. That illness, from its peculiarity, makes it painful to me beyond words to
hear him mentioned, unless in terms of respect and affection." Raymond replied; but there was nothing conciliatory in his reply. I saw that in his heart he despised
those dedicated to any but worldly idols. "Every man," he said, "dreams about something, love,
honour, and pleasure; you dream of friendship, and devote yourself to a maniac; well, if that be your
vocation, doubtless you are in the right to follow it. "-
Some reflection seemed to sting him, and the spasm of pain that for a moment convulsed his
countenance, checked my indignation. "Happy are dreamers," he continued, "so that they be not
awakened! Would I could dream! but 'broad and garish day' is the element in which I live; the
dazzling glare of reality inverts the scene for me. Even the ghost of friendship has departed, and
love"--He broke off; nor could I guess whether the disdain that curled his lip was directed against
the passion, or against himself for being its slave. This account may be taken as a sample of my intercourse with Lord Raymond. I became intimate with
him, and each day afforded me occasion to admire more and more his powerful and versatile talents,
that together with his eloquence, which was graceful and witty, and his wealth now immense, caused
him to be feared, loved, and hated beyond any other man in England. My descent, which claimed interest, if not respect, my former connection with Adrian, the favour of
the ambassador, whose secretary I had been, and now my intimacy with Lord Raymond, gave me
easy access to the fashionable and political circles of England. To my inexperience we at first
appeared on the eve of a civil war; each party was violent, acrimonious, and unyielding. Parliament
was divided by three factions, aristocrats, democrats, and royalists. After Adrian's declared
predeliction to the republican form of government, the latter party had nearly died away, chiefless,
guideless; but, when Lord Raymond came forward as its leader, it revived with redoubled force. Some were royalists from prejudice and ancient affection, and there were many moderately inclined
who feared alike the capricious tyranny of the popular party, and the unbending despotism of the
aristocrats. More than a third of the members ranged themselves under Raymond, and their number
was perpetually encreasing. The aristocrats built their hopes on their preponderant wealth and
influence; the reformers on the force of the nation itself; the debates were violent, more violent the
discourses held by each knot of politicians as they assembled to arrange their measures. Opprobrious
epithets were bandied about, resistance even to the death threatened; meetings of the populace
disturbed the quiet order of the country; except in war, how could all this end? Even as the
destructive flames were ready to break forth, I saw them shrink back; allayed by the absence of the
military, by the aversion entertained by every one to any violence, save that of speech, and by the
cordial politeness and even friendship of the hostile leaders when they met in private society. I was
from a thousand motives induced to attend minutely to the course of events, and watch each turn
with intense anxiety. I could not but perceive that Perdita loved Raymond; methought also that he regarded the fair
daughter of Verney with admiration and tenderness. Yet I knew that he was urging forward his
marriage with the presumptive heiress of the Earldom of Windsor, with keen expectation of the
advantages that would thence accrue to him. All the ex-queen's friends were his friends; no week
passed that he did not hold consultations with her at Windsor. I had never seen the sister of Adrian. I had heard that she was lovely, amiable, and fascinating. Wherefore should I see her? There are times when we have an indefinable sentiment of impending
change for better or for worse, to arise from an event; and, be it for better or for worse, we fear the
change, and shun the event. For this reason I avoided this high-born damsel. To me she was
everything and nothing; her very name mentioned by another made me start and tremble; the
endless discussion concerning her union with Lord Raymond was real agony to me. Methought that,
Adrian withdrawn from active life, and this beauteous Idris, a victim probably to her mother's
ambitious schemes, I ought to come forward to protect her from undue influence, guard her from
unhappiness, and secure to her freedom of choice, the right of every human being. Yet how was I to
do this? She herself would disdain my interference. Since then I must be an object of indifference or
contempt to her, better, far better avoid her, nor expose myself before her and the scornful world to
the chance of playing the mad game of a fond, foolish Icarus. One day, several months after my
return to England, I quitted London to visit my sister. Her society was my chief solace and delight;
and my spirits always rose at the expectation of seeing her. Her conversation was full of pointed
remark and discernment; in her pleasant alcove, redolent with sweetest flowers, adorned by
magnificent casts, antique vases, and copies of the finest pictures of Raphael, Correggio, and Claude,
painted by herself, I fancied myself in a fairy retreat untainted by and inaccessible to the noisy
contentions of politicians and the frivolous pursuits of fashion. On this occasion, my sister was not
alone; nor could I fail to recognise her companion: it was Idris, the till now unseen object of my mad
idolatry. In what fitting terms of wonder and delight, in what choice expression and soft flow of language, can
I usher in the loveliest, wisest, best? How in poor assemblage of words convey the halo of glory that
surrounded her, the thousand graces that waited unwearied on her. The first thing that struck you on
beholding that charming countenance was its perfect goodness and frankness; candour sat upon her
brow, simplicity in her eyes, heavenly benignity in her smile. Her tall slim figure bent gracefully as a
poplar to the breezy west, and her gait, goddess-like, was as that of a winged angel new alit from
heaven's high floor; the pearly fairness of her complexion was stained by a pure suffusion; her voice
resembled the low, subdued tenor of a flute. It is easiest perhaps to describe by contrast. I have
detailed the perfections of my sister; and yet she was utterly unlike Idris. Perdita, even where she
loved, was reserved and timid; Idris was frank and confiding. The one recoiled to solitude, that she
might there entrench herself from disappointment and injury; the other walked forth in open day,
believing that none would harm her. Wordsworth has compared a beloved female to two fair objects
in nature; but his lines always appeared to me rather a contrast than a similitude:
  A violet by a mossy stone
  Half hidden from the eye,
  Fair as a star when only one
  Is shining in the sky. Such a violet was sweet Perdita, trembling to entrust herself to the very air, cowering from
observation, yet betrayed by her excellences; and repaying with a thousand graces the labour of
those who sought her in her lonely bye-path. Idris was as the star, set in single splendour in the dim
anadem of balmy evening; ready to enlighten and delight the subject world, shielded herself from
every taint by her unimagined distance from all that was not like herself akin to heaven. I found this vision of beauty in Perdita's alcove, in earnest conversation with its inmate. When my
sister saw me, she rose, and taking my hand, said, "He is here, even at our wish; this is Lionel, my
brother." Idris arose also, and bent on me her eyes of celestial blue, and with grace peculiar said-
"You hardly need an introduction; we have a picture, highly valued by my father, which declares at
once your name. Verney, you will acknowledge this tie, and as my brother's friend, I feel that I may
trust you." Then, with lids humid with a tear and trembling voice, she continued- "Dear friends, do not think it
strange that now, visiting you for the first time, I ask your assistance, and confide my wishes and
fears to you. To you alone do I dare speak; I have heard you commended by impartial spectators; you
are my brother's friends, therefore you must be mine. What can I say? if you refuse to aid me, I am
lost indeed!" She cast up her eyes, while wonder held her auditors mute; then, as if carried away by
her feelings, she cried-"My brother! beloved, ill-fated Adrian! how speak of your misfortunes? Doubtless you have both heard the current tale; perhaps believe the slander; but he is not mad! Were an angel from the foot of God's throne to assert it, never, never would I believe it. He is
wronged, betrayed, imprisoned-save him! Verney, you must do this; seek him out in whatever part
of the island he is immured; find him, rescue him from his persecutors, restore him to himself, to
me-on the wide earth I have none to love but only him!" Her earnest appeal, so sweetly and passionately expressed, filled me with wonder and sympathy;
and, when she added, with thrilling voice and look, "Do you consent to undertake this enterprize?" I
vowed, with energy and truth, to devote myself in life and death to the restoration and welfare of
Adrian. We then conversed on the plan I should pursue, and discussed the probable means of
discovering his residence. While we were in earnest discourse, Lord Raymond entered unannounced:
I saw Perdita tremble and grow deadly pale, and the cheeks of Idris glow with purest blushes. He
must have been astonished at our conclave, disturbed by it I should have thought; but nothing of this
appeared; he saluted my companions, and addressed me with a cordial greeting. Idris appeared
suspended for a moment, and then with extreme sweetness, she said, "Lord Raymond, I confide in
your goodness and honour." Smiling haughtily, he bent his head, and replied, with emphasis, "Do you indeed confide, Lady Idris?" She endeavoured to read his thought, and then answered with dignity, "As you please. It is certainly
best not to compromise oneself by any concealment." "Pardon me," he replied, "if I have offended. Whether you trust me or not, rely on my doing my
utmost to further your wishes, whatever they may be." Idris smiled her thanks, and rose to take leave. Lord Raymond requested permission to accompany
her to Windsor Castle, to which she consented, and they quitted the cottage together. My sister and I
were left-truly like two fools, who fancied that they had obtained a golden treasure, till daylight
shewed it to be lead-two silly, luckless flies, who had played in sunbeams and were caught in a
spider's web. I leaned against the casement, and watched those two glorious creatures, till they
disappeared in the forest-glades; and then I turned. Perdita had not moved; her eyes fixed on the
ground, her cheeks pale, her very lips white, motionless and rigid, every feature stamped by woe, she
sat. Half frightened, I would have taken her hand; but she shudderingly withdrew it, and strove to
collect herself. I entreated her to speak to me: "Not now," she replied, "nor do you speak to me, my
dear Lionel; you can say nothing, for you know nothing. I will see you to-morrow; in the meantime,
adieu!" She rose, and walked from the room; but pausing at the door, and leaning against it, as if her
over-busy thoughts had taken from her the power of supporting herself, she said, "Lord Raymond
will probably return. Will you tell him that he must excuse me to-day, for I am not well. I will see him
to-morrow if he wishes it, and you also. You had better return to London with him; you can there
make the enquiries agreed upon, concerning the Earl of Windsor and visit me again to-morrow,
before you proceed on your journey-till then, farewell!" She spoke falteringly, and concluded with a heavy sigh. I gave my assent to her request; and she left
me. I felt as if, from the order of the systematic world, I had plunged into chaos, obscure, contrary,
unintelligible. That Raymond should marry Idris was more than ever intolerable; yet my passion,
though a giant from its birth, was too strange, wild, and impracticable, for me to feel at once the
misery I perceived in Perdita. How should I act? She had not confided in me; I could not demand an
explanation from Raymond without the hazard of betraying what was perhaps her most treasured
secret. I would obtain the truth from her the following day-in the mean time-But, while I was
occupied by multiplying reflections, Lord Raymond returned. He asked for my sister; and I delivered
her message. After musing on it for a moment, he asked me if I were about to return to London, and
if I would accompany him: I consented. He was full of thought, and remained silent during a
considerable part of our ride; at length he said, "I must apologize to you for my abstraction; the truth
is, Ryland's motion comes on to-night, and I am considering my reply." Ryland was the leader of the popular party, a hard-headed man, and in his way eloquent; he had
obtained leave to bring in a bill making it treason to endeavour to change the present state of the
English government and the standing laws of the republic. This attack was directed against Raymond
and his machinations for the restoration of the monarchy. Raymond asked me if I would accompany him to the House that evening. I remembered my pursuit
for intelligence concerning Adrian; and, knowing that my time would be fully occupied, I excused
myself. "Nay," said my companion, "I can free you from your present impediment. You are going to
make enquiries concerning the Earl of Windsor. I can answer them at once, he is at the Duke of
Athol's seat at Dunkeld. On the first approach of his disorder, he travelled about from one place to
another; until, arriving at that romantic seclusion he refused to quit it, and we made arrangements
with the Duke for his continuing there." I was hurt by the careless tone with which he conveyed this information, and replied coldly: "I am
obliged to you for your intelligence, and will avail myself of it." "You shall, Verney," said he, "and if you continue of the same mind, I will facilitate your views. But
first witness, I beseech you, the result of this night's contest, and the triumph I am about to achieve,
if I may so call it, while I fear that victory is to me defeat. What can I do? My dearest hopes appear to
be near their fulfilment. The ex-queen gives me Idris; Adrian is totally unfitted to succeed to the
earldom, and that earldom in my hands becomes a kingdom. By the reigning God it is true; the paltry
earldom of Windsor shall no longer content him, who will inherit the rights which must for ever
appertain to the person who possesses it. The Countess can never forget that she has been a queen,
and she disdains to leave a diminished inheritance to her children; her power and my wit will rebuild
the throne, and this brow will be clasped by a kingly diadem.-I can do this-I can marry Idris." --
He stopped abruptly, his countenance darkened, and its expression changed again and again under
the influence of internal passion. I asked, "Does Lady Idris love you?" "What a question," replied he laughing.