what will become of us! I never had a murder on my conscience before.” The servant now, by his loud lamentations, informed them of his mater’s name, and poor Sir John quaked at the idea of being accessary to the death of an innocent man; whilst even Miss Clayton’s laurels trembled on her victorious brows, and she heartily wished herself once more in peaceful obscurity at Clayton Hall. Some persons however coming past, conveyed the wounded hero to a house not far distant, and Miss Clayton led the way for the rest of the party, saying, “we have to be sure run confoundedly on the wrong side of the post, and it will be devilishly aukward if we have to swing for it.” “Oh, my dear,” answered Sir John, “do not talk about it, I am all in a flutter and my heart’s in my mouth, I shall never like the report of a gun again. Oh dear; it can only be manslaughter, for I’ll take my affadavit we had no malice afore thought, but I’d as liefe be hanged if it was not for the shame, as be sent to any out o’th’ way place beyond seas; what could I do at my time of life, all among kangaroos and wild men? No, no, I shall die on my passage, and then I shall be thrown overboard without christian burial, who would have thought a month ago that I should have come to such an ignominious end? What a disgrace it will be to my poor nephew? He’ll be forced to change his name, it will be the talk of all Devonshire!” His niece endeavoured to console him by observing, that no man need blush for his name, who was not ashamed of his actions, that with fresh air and exercise life was always worth having, that with good health every body had something to be thankful for, even in Botany Bay, and that after all they might have gone to worse places, as it must be a country that would afford excellent hunting, and plenty of game. “Ah dear heart,” said Sir John, “what good would that do us! if there were as many hares as there must be rogues, they would be of no use to us; we

should have no worthy friends to send them to, or jolly dogs to go out with us; and miserable horse-flesh I do suppose; no, no, England is the only place worth living in; I warrant all the fine places abroad, that they pretend to talk about, are a parcel of dirty beggarly holes.” They now arrived at the house, and found to their great joy, that Breresford had only fainted, and had quite recovered by the motion of removing, though he could not but think himself mortally wounded, and entreated those around him, not to disguise his danger from false compassion. At length, he was with some difficulty convinced that he might consider himself able to pursue his journey, and received the apologies of his adversaries with his usual goodnature. The next day, the whole town was informed of the adventure; Miss Clayton became the rage, and had the pleasure of seeing herself carricatured in every printshop, under the name of the “Fair Amazon, or Rob me if you dare.”—
We are fully sensible of the apology which we ought to make, for stepping out of the direct path of this unparalleled history, to relate Miss Clayton’s vagaries; but we thought it would be an unpardonable neglect of the notoriety, that she had taken such pains to acquire, were we to leave them entirely unnoticed, and to mention them at any other time, would have diverted the attention of our readers too much from the grand, important, and interesting incidents, with which we mean speedily to present them. Ah me, is all our pleasure mix’d with woe! Is there on earth no happiness sincere? Must e’en this bitter stream of sorrow flow From joy’s domestic spring our children dear? How oft did Thetis drop the silver tear,
When with fond eyes she view’d her darling boy, How oft her breast heav’d with presaging fear,
Lest vice’s secret canker should annoy
Fair virtue’s opening bud, and all her hopes destroy. WEST. EDMUND anxiously sought for an opportunity of speaking to the Earl, but unfortunately his lordship had again entered into the labyrinths of politics, notwithstanding the disgust with which disappointment had formerly inspired him: and as it was not in his nature to espouse a cause, with only lukewarm zeal, particularly one so important in his eyes, as the welfare of his country, he devoted his time with such unremitted attention to public affairs, that he was seldom seen even by his own family, until late in the evening, when he endeavoured in social cheerfulness, to unbend his mind from the ardent and busy thought of the day. Edmund sensible of this, was extremely unwilling to obtrude a subject on him, which would inevitably embitter the short time, that he allowed himself for recreation, and add new cares to a brow already clouded with anxieties not his own. But on the other hand, he considered the danger of Mary’s situation, and the temptation of Henry’s; he felt himself accessary to her ruin, in delaying the prevention of it, and he accused himself of negligence in the cause of virtue, whilst he suffered selfish motives to interfere with his endeavours to promote it. In this doubtful and trying situation, his spirits forsook him, and his altered countenance proclaimed a mind disturbed. The gentle Lady Emma sympathized in his uneasiness, though ignorant of its source; delicacy checked every enquiry which anxiety prompted her to make, and when they were alone, each felt restrained and unhappy, yet neither made an effort to discover the cause of these feelings; Edmund guessed however that his apparent reserve wounded Emma’s sensibility, and though fully aware of the confidence due to love, he felt himself unauthorized to entrust it with a secret which belonged not to himself; to see her unhappy was more than he could bear, and he resolved to summon resolution, to acquit himself of the debt, which he conceived he owed to Mary, to Henry, to Lord Drelincourt, and to himself. He would then be released from the painful responsibility which he now held, and in the consciousness of having performed his duty, he hoped soon to lose the sense of anxiety and suspense, under which he suffered. He accordingly entreated Lord Drelincourt
to favour him with a quarter of an hour’s conversation, before he went to the house; the Earl immediately complied, and led the way into his study, with a countenance so

benevolent, and unsuspicious of ill, that Edmund felt anew the utmost reluctance to wound his feelings, and the unpleasant situation in which he himself was placed. However, after he had commenced his account, he surmounted his agitation, and when modestly stating the reasons which actuated his disclosure, and conjuring Lord Drelincourt to save the orphan of a brave officer, whose dying hours had been cheered by the hope, of leaving her not unprotected, his language was so impassioned, his manner so energetic, he maintained the cause of injured unsuspecting innocence with such tender dignity, and pleaded in behalf of forgiveness for Henry’s conduct, with such anxious friendship, that Lord Drelincourt lost in admiration, forgot his firmness, and paid Edmund’s eloquence the tribute of his tears: Edmund was greatly affected, and again entreating pardon, if he had been too importunate; retired with a mind comparatively at ease, but left the Earl a prey to a variety of contending emotions. Shall we exhibit the human heart all its weaknesses to our readers? Or shall we deceive them, and represent Lord Drelincourt as a character rather to be desired than expected, unswayed by prejudice, unchanged by circumstances, unmoved by interest. The partiality with which we are inclined to consider the character of this worthy nobleman, would induce us to conceal his errors, but truth forbids, and us it is our ardent wish to instruct, we must declare his faults, and lament their effects. Lord Drelincourt would have shuddered at the commission of a crime, and had he been left with such a charge, as dying confidence had bequeathed to his son, though the object of it had been lovelier than the Spartan dame, and he in all the pride of youth, and the impetuosity of passion, yet would he have held her sacred and inviolate. His heart might have consumed in flames more ardent from concealment, but silence would have for ever sealed his lips on the subject of his love, which even to have felt he would have considered as a breach of trust. Yet Lord Drelincourt was inclined to be lenient towards his darling son, even on the very articles wherein at his son’s age, he was the most rigorous in judging himself. He examined his own actions by the undeviating principles of rectitude and honor; those of his son, he was willing, to consider like a man of the world, and to judge modern manners, by modern rules. Not that he for a moment thought of conniving at his son's continuing an acquaintance with Miss Macdonald; he was too tender a parent to his own daughters, and felt too forcibly the respect due to them, to see unmoved, the daughter of' Macdonald standing upon the brink of a precipice, from which one false step, would hurl her into ruin: no; knowing her danger, he resolved to avert it, but shall we confess, that his weakness was in wishing that he had not known it? And though he did not say to Edmund in the words of Constance, “away, this news hath made thee a most ugly man;” yet he could not repress a wish, (even whilst his cheek glowed at its impropriety,) that Henry had been more cautious, or Edmund less communicative. That Henry, had possessed more virtue, or Edmund less. But these thoughts were transient, as unworthy; selfishness and vice, were strangers to Lord Drelincourt’s bosom, and if ever they visited it for a moment by mistake, they soon left a place, where they found no congenial associates. Parental anxiety had inspired the wishes, which his nobleness of soul caused him to reject as soon as formed. He had been so happy in seeing his son free from the glaring vices and low excesses of the day, that at the first view he could scarcely regret his having formed a connexion comparatively virtuous: where innocent manners, and a

cultivated mind, would ensure constancy and abhorrence of vice. He feared, also, lest the deprivation of an object so fondly, yet so respectfully beloved, might throw Lord Courtney into despair, and drive him to seek refuge from his own recollections, even in the ruinous and degrading haunts which he had hitherto avoided, from an early instilled virtue, and a proper sense of the purity of religion, as well as of the dignity of rank. These were the considerations that had involuntarily risen in Lord Drelincourt’s mind; but from a mind like his, every selfish thought was speedily expelled, and he resolved to converse seriously with Henry on the subject, not doubting of success, even considering his advice as the effusions of friendship, without calling in the aid of parental authority; which however he felt it would be his duty to employ in its utmost power, should his arguments fail to produce the desired effect. Having resolved on the line of conduct proper to pursue, he endeavoured to compose himself, and went to lose his sense of domestic unhappiness in the discussion of public evils. As soon as Edmund saw Lord Courtney he honestly confessed his breach of trust. Henry looked, on the first hearing of it, as if he knew not exactly how to behave; but after a momentary struggle between anger and friendship the latter prevailed, and he replied, extending his hand to him, “I will not upbraid you, Edmund, with betraying my confidence, first, because I have no right to condemn in another, what I have been glaringly guilty of myself; secondly, because I know you incapable of committing an ungenerous action; and I do firmly believe that in this instance, you have been actuated by the most praiseworthy motives, and a sincere desire to serve me better, than you thought you should do by keeping my secrets; oblige me however, my dear friend, by no more mentioning the subject; it is an unpleasant and an unprofitable one, it engrosses too much of my thoughts, and I wish it not to intrude also on our friendly conversations; let this therefore be the last time of discussing it, and we will now if you please, pay our court to the ladies, whom I have not seen since yesterday at noon.” His determined gravity, discouraged Edmund from answering, and he willingly attended him into the breakfast- room where the ladies were assembled. Henry soon informed then with an abruptness by which they were astonished, that he was going immediately into Oxfordshire, where he should spend a month. “What can tempt you leave town at a time, when you always declare yourself charmed with its gaiety?” Demanded Lady Rosamond. "What would tempt you all my dear sisters to do it likewise, even were you the gayest among the gay;” Lord Courtney replied: Lady Rosamond laughed, and told him that he dealt in enigmas. “ Is there nothing then,” said he, “that would tempt you into the country at this season? I did not really think you such a votary of dissipation.” “Not entirely of dissipation,” answered Lady Rosamond, “but at this season, London affords such various amusements, that both wisdom and folly, may be feasted in the most luxurious manner, according to their several, inclinations.” “Well, you are a good casuist, Rose,” continued he, “but what is your opinion, Maria? you speak not on the weighty subject.” Now it happened that London had always the effect of a hotbed, on Lady Maria’s foibles, causing the seeds which had lain dormant during the latter part of her residence in the country, to spring up rapidly in the warm atmosphere of fashion, and to produce plentifully the fruits of affectation and folly. “I am so wretchedly languid,” replied the indolent beauty in the most affected tone, ’pon honor, my nerves are so weak, that I am utterly unequal to the fatigue of collecting my ideas sufficiently to give an opinion on any topic; but certainly

the calm retirement of the country is much more enviable, than the bustle of this noisy town, particularly to one so unfortunately delicate as I am.” “Yes,” said Henry, with goodhumoured raillery, “it is very shocking to be so weak, that you can only spend every morning in shopping, making visits, attending auctions, and exhibitions, and every evening just visit the theatre, and opera, and look into half a dozen assemblies.” “Ah, but you do not consider, Henry,” she replied, how exhausted I am with any little amusement into which I may enter, in compliance with custom more than my own inclination.” “ Yes,” said he, “I do consider my dear sister, I consider that,
‘Miss D. tottering, catches at your hand, Was ever thing so pretty born to stand?”
Lady Maria had good sense enough, to know, that she sometimes tempted satire, and goodnature enough, to pardon those who applied it to her; a smile was all the answer that she made, but Edmund gallantly took her hand and raising it to his lips, said, “Lady Maria’s charms are too powerful to need any aid, and conscious of their force, she is content to appear ‘ as though secure of all beholder’s hearts, neglecting she could take ’em!” Lady Maria thanked him for the politeness of his counter-quotation, and scarcely suppressed a sigh, as she acknowledged to herself, that the greatest possible inducement to lay aside her indolence, and affectation, would have been the hope of meriting his esteem. Lord Courtney then asked Emma, what would induce her to leave the joys of the town? She raised her eyes involuntarily to Edmund, but meeting his, she cast them clown, and blushing deeply, replied, “The company of my friends makes every place agreeable, and with them I am amused in town, and happy in the country.” “A very prudent reply,” said Lord Courtney, drawing her nearer to him, for she was almost his favorite sister, “why need you blush child? I cannot imagine how you contrive to bring all this pretty pink into your cheeks on every occasion;” then turning to Lady Harriett, he said, “I will not ask your opinion ma belle ange, for I should be jealous of your preference either way.” Lady Harriett looked pleased and silly; to look silly did not indeed require much effort on her part, as nature had kindly adapted her countenance for assuming that expression with great ease. She made no answer, and he feeling unequal at that moment to continuing a conversation, in which he was not interested, gave her a tender pressure of the hand, a kind of language very eloquent in filling up the pauses of a brainless beau, and in general received with such complacency, that Henry laughingly declared, he should use it more frequently, but that he was often afraid of not being suffered to withdraw his hand again. “Well ladies,” he exclaimed, “I am weary of your pretended ignorance, and your disingenuous replies: know then, that I am going on an expedition, which would tempt every one of you, that is to say a matrimonial one.” He then informed them that he had that morning received a letter from Charles Saunders, his intimate friend, and companion at college, with the happy tidings of his being about to shackle himself in silken cords, and golden fetters, with the loveliest of the sex, and imploring the presence of his old acquaintance. “I suppose,” added Henry, “to keep his spirits during the dreadful ceremony, I shall therefore go to witness his felicity, and I hope to anticipate my own.” He then took a seat near Lady Harriett, and assailed her with such a profusion of

compliments, that she even pardoned the temporary desertion of the charms, which he so liberally praised. That same day he communicated his designs to his father, took his leave of him and his mother, embraced his sisters, and Lady Harriett, shook hands with Edmund, and departed, leaving the whole party astonished at the rapidity of his movements, particularly Edmund, who strongly suspected him of making truth, in this instance, yield to circumstance, as he had only in the morning been pressed to dine at Lord John Talbot’s, with him the next day. To chase each partial purpose from his breast, And thro’ the mists of passion and of sense, And thro’ the tossing tide of chance and pain To hold his course unfaultering; while the voice Of truth and virtue, up the steep ascent
Of Nature, calls him to his great reward Th’ applauding smile of heaven. AKENSIDE. LORD Courtney’s stay in Oxfordshire was prolonged from week to week, till Lord Drelincourt began to grow uneasy, and Edmund suspicious; for he had made enquiries at Brompton, and found that Miss Macdonald had left it at the time of Henry’s departure. At last the truant returned, after an absence of nearly three months. His mother and sisters welcomed him with the greatest affection; Edmund flew to meet him with undissembled warmth, but Lord Drelincourt received him with coldness and gravity; the only means by which he ever testified displeasure. Lord Courtney adored his father, and greatly mortified by the first cool reception that he had ever met with from him; he manifested his vexation by silence, and affected to be lost in thought, forgetting that his own conduct had justly merited the displeasure by which he felt offended. Lord Drelincourt impatient at his son’s behaviour, soon desired to speak to him in private; and when they had retired into his study, he, with an asperity very unusual in him, reproached Lord Courtney with his disrespectful conduct in absenting himself so long, and then proceeded to converse on the subject of which his hasty departure had before prevented the mention. After setting forth, in the strongest terms, the baseness of his son’s designs on an innocent girl committed to his charge, the Earl concluded by peremptorily commanding him to see her no more; adding, that he would himself undertake to send her into Scotland to her aunt. Lord Courtney was stung to the quick by his father’s haughty and determined manner. “Your commands, my lord,” he replied with bitterness, “are unfortunately issued too late to benefit the object of them; for, unless you can recall the past, they will be useless; therefore, as far as she is concerned, your interference can be of no service.” “I am sorry for it, young man,” retorted the Earl, “I am sorry Captain Macdonald should have been so deceived; and that his unhappy daughter should have been consigned to so false a guardian, I am sorry a Drelincourt should have disgraced his name by a base action; and you, sir, I pity, for he who incurs self-reproach is a truly pitiable object.” The language of contempt was new to Henry, and ill could his unbroken spirit submit to it. “My Lord,” said he, “spare your censures, I have not deceived the object trusted to my care; I have not yet behaved dishonourably towards her, and time will develope whether I shall ever do it.” “Have you then promised her marriage?” demanded the Earl. “ I have,” replied Lord Courtney, with firmness. “And do you mean to perform your promise!”

continued the Earl, in faultering accents. “If she require the performance of it, I believe I shall,” answered Lord Courtney. The Earl turned pale, he took two or three hasty turns across the room, “Is it come to this!” he exclaimed; but he could say no more, and throwing himself into a chair, he covered his face with his hands. His emotion created sympathetic agony in the breast of Henry, who ardently desired to fall at his father’s feet, and crave forgiveness; but pride, false pride, forbade, and he gazed in silence on the anguish that he had caused in a parent’s heart. At length Lord Drelincourt recovered himself, he looked up, and said in a softened tone of voice, “Henry, I had wished you to begin your travels very soon; I say I had wished, because after the proofs which you have given me of surmounting every thing in the gratification of your own inclinations, I am not weak enough to flatter myself, that you will sacrifice any thing in compliance with mine.” “Oh! my father,” exclaimed Lord Courtney, bursting into tears, “wound me not to the soul by this cruel coldness, as new as it is painful to me. Banish me for ever from your sight if I be grown odious to you; but be not so unjust as for one moment, to imagine that I could be ungrateful and vile enough to fail in my duty to a father, whom I can never sufficiently reverence and love.” It is unnecessary to say after this, that a reconciliation took place. The Earl however trembled, when he recollected that in two months his son would be of age. He was more than ever strenuous for him to go abroad before the arrival of that period; and Henry, anxious to obliterate the recollection of his disobedience from his father’s mind, acquiesced in every thing that was proposed to him, though his compliance, in this instance, required the utmost efforts of his resolution. Lord Courtney’s long absence from the metropolis, in its most inviting season, could not fail to attract the notice of his gay acquaintance; and he found himself, on his return, so weary of enquiries that he did not chuse to answer, and railleries to which he was in no humour to reply, that as soon as the birth-day was over, he was very glad to hear the Earl declare his intention of immediately leaving town. The plan of Henry’s route was soon arranged; and a Mr. Barlowe, a worthy and well-informed clergyman, who had married Lady Emma’s governess, and to whom Lord Drelincourt had presented a living, was fixed on, as his travelling companion and friend. The family were of course soon acquainted with the intended deprivation of Lord Courtney’s society; but the Earl imparted to Lady Drelincourt only, his reasons for hastening his son’s departure, and she acquiesced in the necessity of it, whilst she wept at the idea of parting with him, and lamented the unprotected situation of the orphan girl, who had unfortunately won his regard. The period necessary to elapse, before Lord Courtney was in readiness to depart, rolled slowly on in anxiety and sorrow. He was frequently absent from the Castle; but the Earl knew the severity of his trial, and expected no unnatural firmness from him; though he could not but rejoice, as the moment drew near, which would at once terminate his son’s conflict and his own suspense. After what we have described him to be, after shewing his character in every pleasing and domestic light, it is unnecessary to say, that Lord Drelincourt felt, at his approaching separation from his son, all the anguish of a tender, and all the anxiety of a wise parent. He had seen in Lord Courtney the happiest effects of a domestic education; he saw in his estrangement from home a probability of all the favorable appearances

which he had witnessed with paternal delight, being blasted by the temptations of vice, or lost in the insignificance of folly. It may be asked, if Lord Drelincourt’s enlarged mind could not be brought to consider the world itself as one vast city, where different nations, manners, and opinions, are all lost in the appellation of citizens? It was not that he feared “Antres vast, and desarts idle, and men whose heads do grow beneath their shoulders;” he was well convinced, that in all climates, men are essentially the same, and that one mode of conduct will gain the esteem of all alike; but before he sent his son to traverse the vast city, he wished him to have at least a general idea of its plan, and of the object of his search. He knew that Henry was one of the many who are acted on, almost entirely from accidental causes. He was blest with virtuous inclinations and shining talents; but the careful father saw that the nicest discrimination would be required to guard these endowments from degenerating into vices. The vivacity that rendered him the peculiar favorite of a domestic circle, might among strangers, plunge him into excesses, and the more easily, from the facility with which he yielded to intreaty; and which, though among his friends it could be called by no other name than good-nature, might, among strangers, be productive of the most ruinous consequences. His generosity, under the influence of vanity, might become profusion, and render him the prey of the designing; even his taste for the fine arts, his love of enquiry, and thirst for general knowledge, were now sources of anxiety to the Earl, who feared lest they should induce his son to associate with those in whom the sacred gift of genius is too often rendered of little value by their entire want of conduct. It may be urged that the Earl was so inclined to look on the dark side of probable events, that he gave himself unnecessary pain in thus distrusting a son, who had never deserved the suspicion of being propense to change, merely from a change of air. But the Earl was a tender father, and Lord Courtney was an only son; and such a son as was rare indeed, in the annals of fashion. Many may not enter into Lord Drelincourt’s feelings, because there are not many who possess the greatest treasure that Heaven can bestow on man, a child, amiable, virtuous, and dutiful, as Lord Courtney had hitherto been. The Earl had seen some like Henry, like him they had left their native isle, rich in public and private virtues; the darling of their friends, and making the esteem of those to whom they were dear, their first consideration. He had also seen them return, but alas! how changed! emaciated persons, enervated constitutions, estranged affections and prostituted abilities, were the precious fruits of their travels, the offerings to their mourning disappointed friends. Could he see and not tremble! could he witness the frailty of expectation, the uncertainty of hope, and not dread the possibility of his brightest prospects being overcast? Filled with melancholy reflections, he sent to Lord Courtney the evening before his departure, requesting his company in the library. He came; a few moments elapsed in unpleasant silence, which at length the Earl broke, by saying in a voice that betrayed all his emotions. “Henry I trust you know how dear you are to me, if you had not been convinced of it before, I could not express it at this time. I love you with the tenderest affection. I esteem and admire you for your own worth, independant of every selfish consideration, and when I consider you as my heir, the last of your illustrious house, the centre of all my hopes, I feel grateful to Heaven, for having made me dependant for happiness in this life, on one so capable of bestowing it; one whom I acknowledge with pride, to be the chief source from which I ever can receive it.” He paused, and Henry, pale, and agitated, pressed his father’s hands with fervour to his heart,

and bedewed them with the tears of filial love: the Earl continued, “I shall not occupy your time and my own, with common-place exhortations and remarks; my cares in your education would have been ill bestowed, could I now say any thing to you concerning your duty, and propriety of conduct, of which your own heart has not already informed you. I had wished you to make an entire tour of minute observation, through your own country, before you left it to visit any other; and this not only to avoid the ridicule, justly thrown on those, who in their impatience to go abroad, forget their utter ignorance of every thing at home, but also as it would have produced in you the habits of gaining information, and taught you the best means of acquiring it; a task difficult to be learned, even with a tolerable knowledge of the objects of which you go in search, and an entire command of language; what then must it be in a foreign country, where you are utterly ignorant of its peculiarities, and often unable to express your ideas without difficulty? “Information is never easy to be acquired, and there is no privilege by which nobility can shorten the way to it; pictures indeed are easily seen, and it is easy to praise them in the same language which they have extorted for centuries, and which like birthday odes, weary the hearer by their uniformity, or disgust the reader by their hyperbole. Of our acquaintance, probably one half would pity my folly, and the other my deficiency in taste, did they hear me declare to you, that I had rather have you study the people, than their productions, and the workmen than their works. I am far from commending indolence in the pursuit of perfection, or indifference in the examination of it, and I am well aware that the character of a nation, may be read in its progress in the liberal arts and sciences; I only wish you not to lose time in acquiring that technical and cant language, which has been repeated until it has become a just prey to ridicule. Let the character of the inhabitants, the wealth of the country, and the sources of that wealth, be objects of your strict enquiry, and minute investigation. As a representative of your country, as a politician, and as a man of rank and fortune, which require their possessor to adorn them with talents, you will find these the fields, where enquiry will yield the most fruitful harvest, they are fields rich in information, which lie too often fallow, whilst the worn-out grounds of criticism and admiration, are plowed until barrenness is the only reward of labour. Let others describe pictures, I would have my son know men. To facilitate the acquisition of this necessary knowledge, hear on every subject, as many opinions as you chuse, but form not your own from those of any other person, for you will never find two people who think alike. Let not that love of novelty, which ‘grows by what it feeds upon,’ impel you to change the scene too quickly, for you cannot know immediately what it may contain worthy of observation. Even after a little journey within a hundred miles of the capital, I have frequently heard you regret your ignorance of having been near some particular spot, which you had wished to see, your indolence in suffering an opportunity of examining it, to escape, or your inattention whilst in the act of exploring it, of which you only became sensible, by being unable at a future period, to answer the questions, or join in the opinions of those, who had been more exact in their researches. I have one more remark to make, and that is, on the subject of writing letters; I know that this is an employment of which young people are fond; they are naturally warm in their own attachments, and credulous in believing the professions of others. Self-love easily teaches us to imagine, that what is earnestly solicited, must be sincerely desired; and we judge of the pain which a refusal will occasion, by our own unwillingness to give

it. A request to hear from a person, is often dictated merely by politeness, and a desire to appear interested in his concerns; in some it is the offspring of vanity, and in that case compliance only produces a boast of intimacy, which perhaps never existed. In others it is solicited, merely to give the requester an opportunity of shewing his own skill in epistolary composition; thus at least half the number who solicit your correspondence, are actuated by selfish motives. I will now suppose you convinced that the remaining half, are sincere in their wishes for your welfare, and their desire to hear of it. What is the consequence? you waste in writing letters, the leisure time, which should be devoted to reading on subjects, connected with what you have seen, or digesting and arranging the ideas, naturally arising rapidly in your mind, and which must be noted directly, if you wish to preserve them, or to know their change. But you are a traveller, and letters written at a distance are expected to be entertaining; the consequence is, that opinions are hastily formed, and crudely stated; they are read in a circle of friends, and remembered long after you have become ashamed of them, and would wish them to be forgotten.