said he, faintly smiling. Adeline for a moment resolved to tell him the whole truth; but fearful
of throwing him into a degree of agitation hurtful to his weak frame,
she, who had the moment before so nobly supported the necessity of a
strict adherence to truth, condescended to equivocate and evade; and
turning away her head, while a conscious blush overspread her cheek, she
replied, 'You know that I look forward with anxiety and uneasiness to
the time of my approaching confinement.' Glenmurray believed her; and overcome by some painful feelings, which
fears for himself and anxiety for her occasioned him, he silently
pressed her to his bosom; and, choked with contending emotions, returned
to his own apartment. 'And I have stooped to the meanness of disguising the truth!' cried
Adeline, clasping her hands convulsively together: 'surely, surely,
there must be something radically wrong in a situation which exposes one
to such a variety of degradations!' Mary, meanwhile, had gone in search of a place; and having found the
lady to whom she had been advised to offer herself, at home, she
returned to tell Adeline that Mrs Pemberton would call in half an hour
to inquire her character. The half-hour, an anxious one to Adeline,
having elapsed, a lady knocked at the door, and inquired, in Adeline's
hearing for Mrs Glenmurray. 'Tell the lady,' cried Adeline immediately from the top of the
staircase, 'that Miss Mowbray will wait on her directly.' The footman
obeyed, and Mrs Pemberton was ushered into the parlour: and now, for the
first time in her life, Adeline trembled to approach a stranger; for the
first time she was going to appear before a fellow-creature, conscious
she was become an object of scorn, and, though an enthusiast for virtue,
would be considered as a votary of vice. But it was a mortification
which she must submit to undergo; and hastily throwing a large shawl
over her shoulders, to hide her figure as much as possible, with a
trembling hand she opened the door, and found herself in the dreaded
presence of Mrs Pemberton. Nor was she at all re-assured when she found that lady dressed in the
neat, modest garb of a strict Quaker--a garb which creates an immediate
idea in the mind, of more than common rigidness of principles and
sanctity of conduct in the wearer of it. Adeline curtsied in silence. Mrs Pemberton bowed her head courteously; then, with a countenance of
great sweetness, and a voice calculated to inspire confidence, said, 'I
believe thy name is Mowbray; but I came to see Mrs Glenmurray; and as
on these occasions I always wish to confer with the principal, wouldst
thou, if it be not inconvenient, ask the mistress of Mary to let me see
her?' 'I am myself the mistress of Mary,' replied Adeline in a faint voice. 'I ask thine excuse,' answered Mrs Pemberton, re-seating herself: 'as
thou art Mrs Glenmurray, thou art the person I wanted to see.' Here Adeline changed colour, overcome with the consciousness that she
ought to undeceive her, and the sense of the difficulty of doing so. 'But thou art very pale, and seemest uneasy,' continued the gentle
Quaker--'I hope thy husband is not worse?' 'Mr Glenmurray, but not my husband,' said Adeline, 'is better to-day.' 'Art thou not married?' asked Mrs Pemberton with quickness. 'I am not.' 'And yet thou livest with the gentleman I named, and art the person whom
Mary called Mrs Glenmurray!' 'I am,' replied Adeline, her paleness yielding to a deep crimson, and
her eyes filling with tears. Mrs Pemberton sat for a minute in silence; then rising with an air
of cold dignity, 'I fear thy servant is not likely to suit me,' she
observed, 'and I will not detain thee any longer.' 'She can be an excellent servant,' faltered out Adeline. 'Very likely--but there are objections.' So saying she reached the door:
but as she passed Adeline she stopped, interested and affected by the
mournful expression of her countenance, and the visible effort she made
to retain her tears. Adeline saw, and felt humbled at the compassion which her countenance
expressed: to be an object of pity was as mortifying as to be an object
of scorn, and she turned her eyes on Mrs Pemberton with a look of proud
indignation: but they met those of Mrs Pemberton fixed on her with a
look of such benevolence, that her anger was instantly subdued; and it
occurred to her that she might make the benevolent compassion visible in
Mrs Pemberton's countenance serviceable to her discarded servant. 'Stay, madam,' she cried, as Mrs Pemberton was about to leave the room,
'allow me a moment's conversation with you.' Mrs Pemberton, with an eagerness which she suddenly endeavoured to
check, returned to her seat. 'I suspect,' said Adeline, (gathering courage from the conscious
kindness of her motive,) 'that your objection to take Mary Warner into
your service proceeds wholly from the situation of her present
mistress.' 'Thou judgest rightly,' was Mrs Pemberton's answer. 'Nor do I wonder,' continued Adeline, 'that you make this objection,
when I consider the present prejudices of society.' 'Prejudices!' softly exclaimed the benevolent Quaker. Adeline faintly smiled, and went on--'But surely you will allow, that in
a family quiet and secluded as ours, and in daily contemplation of an
union uninterrupted, faithful, and virtuous, and possessing all the
sacredness of marriage, though without the name, it is not likely that
the young woman in question should have imbibed any vicious habits or
principles?' 'But in contemplating thy union itself, she has lived in the
contemplation of vice; and thou wilt own, that, by having given it an
air of respectability, thou hast only made it more dangerous.' 'On this point,' cried Adeline, 'I see we must disagree--I shall
therefore, without further preamble, inform you, madam, that Mary, aware
of the difficulty of procuring a service, if it were known that she had
lived with a kept mistress, as the phrase is,' (here an indignant blush
overspread the face of Adeline,) 'desired me to call myself the wife of
Glenmurray: but this, from my abhorrence of all falsehood, I
peremptorily refused.' 'And thou didst well,' exclaimed Mrs Pemberton, 'and I respect thy
resolution.' 'But my sincerity will, I fear, prevent the poor girl's obtaining other
reputable places; and I, alas! am not rich enough to make her amends for
the injury which my conscience forces me to do her. But if you, madam,
could be prevailed upon to take her into your family, even for a short
time only, to wipe away the disgrace which her living with me has
brought upon her--'

'Why can she not remain with thee?' asked Mrs Pemberton hastily. 'Because she neglected her duty, and, when reproved for it, replied in
very injurious language.' 'Presuming probably on thy way of life?' 'I must confess that she has reproached me with it.' 'And this was all her fault?' 'It was:--she can be an excellent servant.' 'Thou hast said enough; thy conscience shall not have the additional
burthen to bear, of having deprived a poor girl of her maintenance--I
will take her.' 'A thousand thanks to you,' replied Adeline: 'you have removed a weight
off my mind; but my conscience, has none to bear.' 'No?' returned Mrs Pemberton: 'dost thou deem thy conduct blameless in
the eyes of that Being whom thou hast just blessed?' 'As far as my connexion with Mr Glenmurray is concerned, I do.' 'Indeed?' 'Nay, doubt me not--believe me that I never wantonly violate the truth;
and that even an evasion, which I, for the first time in my life, was
guilty of to-day, has given me a pang to which I will not again expose
myself.' 'And yet, inconsistent beings as we are,' cried Mrs Pemberton,
'straining at a gnat, and swallowing a camel, what is the guilt of the
evasion which weighs on thy mind, compared to that of living, as thou
dost, in an illicit commerce? Surely, surely, thine heart accuses thee;
for thy face bespeaks uneasiness, and thou wilt listen to the whispers
of penitence, and leave, ere long, the man who has betrayed thee.' 'The man who has betrayed me! Mr Glenmurray is no betrayer--he is one of
the best of human beings. No, madam: if I had acceded to his wishes, I
should long ago have been his wife, but, from a conviction of the folly
of marriage, I have preferred living with him without the performance of
a ceremony which, in the eye of reason, can confer neither honour nor
happiness.' 'Poor thing!' exclaimed Mrs Pemberton, rising as she spoke, 'I
understand thee now--Thou art one of the enlightened, as they call
themselves--Thou art one of those wise in their own conceit, who,
disregarding the customs of ages, and the dictates of experience, set up
their own opinions against the hallowed institutions of men and the will
of the Most High.' 'Can you blame me,' interrupted Adeline, 'for acting according to what I
think right?' 'But hast thou well studied the subject on which thou hast decided? Yet,
alas! to thee how vain must be the voice of admonition!' (she continued,
her countenance kindling into strong expression as she spoke)--'From the
poor victim of passion and persuasion, penitence and amendment might be
rationally expected; and she, from the path of frailty, might turn again
to that of virtue: but for one like thee, glorying in thine iniquity,
and erring, not from the too tender heart, but the vain-glorious
head,--for thee there is, I fear, no blessed return to the right way;
and I, who would have tarried with thee even in the house of sin, to
have reclaimed thee, penitent, now hasten from thee, and for ever--firm
as thou art in guilt.' As she said this she reached the door; while Adeline, affected by her
emotion, and distressed by her language, stood silent and almost abashed
before her. But with her hand on the lock she turned round, and in a gentler voice
said, 'Yet not even against a wilful offender like thee, should one
gate that may lead to amendment be shut. Thy situation and thy fortunes
may soon be greatly changed; affliction may subdue thy pride, and the
counsel of a friend of thine own sex might then sound sweetly in thine
ears. Should that time come, I will be that friend. I am now about
to set off for Lisbon with a very dear friend, about whom I feel as
solicitous as thou about thy Glenmurray; and there I shall remain some
time. Here then is my address; and if thou shouldest want my advice or
assistance write to me, and be assured that Rachel Pemberton will try
to forget thy errors in thy distresses.' So saying she left the room, but returned again, before Adeline had
recovered herself from the various emotions which she had experienced
during her address, to ask her Christian name. But when Adeline replied,
'My name is Adeline Mowbray,' Mrs Pemberton started, and eagerly
exclaimed, 'Art thou Adeline Mowbray of Gloucestershire--the young
heiress, as she was called, of Rosevalley?' 'I was once,' replied Adeline, sinking back into a chair, 'Adeline
Mowbray of Rosevalley.' Mrs Pemberton for a few minutes gazed on her in mournful silence:
'And art thou,' she cried, 'Adeline Mowbray? Art thou that courteous,
blooming, blessed being, (for every tongue that I heard name thee
blessed thee,) whom I saw only three years ago bounding over thy native
hills, all grace, and joy, and innocence?' Adeline tried to speak, but her voice failed her. 'Art thou she,' continued Mrs Pemberton, 'whom I saw also leaning from
the window of her mother's mansion, and inquiring with the countenance
of a pitying angel concerning the health of a wan labourer who limped
past the door?' Adeline hid her face with her hands. Mrs Pemberton went on in a lower tone of voice,--'I came with some
companions to see thy mother's grounds, and to hear the nightingales in
her groves; but' (here Mrs Pemberton's voice faltered) 'I have seen a
sight far beyond that of the proudest mansion, said I to those who asked
me of thy mother's seat; I have heard what was sweeter to my ear than
the voice of the nightingale; I have seen a blooming girl nursed in
idleness and prosperity, yet active in the discharge of every Christian
duty; and I have heard her speak in the soothing accents of kindness and
of pity, while her name was followed by blessings, and parents prayed to
have a child like her. O lost, unhappy girl! such _was_ Adeline Mowbray:
and often, very often, has thy graceful image recurred to my remembrance:
but, how art thou changed! Where is the open eye of happiness? where is
the bloom that spoke a heart at peace with itself? I repeat it, and I
repeat it with agony. Father of mercies! is this thy Adeline Mowbray?' Here, overcome with emotion, Mrs Pemberton paused; but Adeline could
not break silence: she rose, she stretched out her hand as if going to
speak, but her utterance failed her, and again she sunk on a chair. 'It was thine,' resumed Mrs Pemberton in a faint and broken voice, 'to
diffuse happiness around thee, and to enjoy wealth unhated, because thy
hand dispensed nobly the riches which it had received bounteously: when
the ear heard thee, then it blessed thee; when the eye saw thee, it gave
witness to thee; and yet--'

Here again she paused, and raised her fine eyes to heaven for a few
minutes, as if in prayer; then, pressing Adeline's hand with an almost
convulsive grasp, she drew her bonnet over her face, as if eager to hide
the emotion which she was unable to subdue, and suddenly left the house;
while Adeline, stunned and overwhelmed by the striking contrast which
Mrs Pemberton had drawn between her past and present situation, remained
for some minutes motionless on her seat, a prey to a variety of feelings
which she dared not venture to analyse. But, amidst the variety of her feelings, Adeline soon found that sorrow,
sorrow of the bitterest kind, was uppermost. Mrs Pemberton had said that
she was about to be visited by affliction--alluding, there was no doubt,
to the probable death of Glenmurray--And was his fate so certain that it
was the theme of conversation at Richmond? Were only _her_ eyes blind to
the certainty of his danger? On these ideas did Adeline chiefly dwell after the departure of her
monitress; and in an agony unspeakable she entered the room where
Glenmurray was sitting, in order to look at him, and form her own
judgment on a subject of such importance. But, alas! she found him with
the brilliant deceitful appearance that attends his complaint--a bloom
resembling health on his cheek, and a brightness in his eye rivalling
that of the undimmed lustre of youth. Surprised, delighted, and overcome
by these appearances, which her inexperience rendered her incapable of
appreciating justly, Adeline threw herself on the sofa by him; and, as
she pressed her cold cheek to his glowing one, her tearful eye was
raised to heaven with an expression of devout thankfulness. 'Mrs Pemberton paid you a long visit,' said Glenmurray, 'and I thought
once, by the elevated tone of her voice, that she was preaching to you.' 'I believe she was,' cheerfully replied Adeline, 'and now I have a
confession to make; the season of reserve shall be over, and I will tell
you all the adventures of this day without _evasion_.' 'Aye, I thought you were not ingenuous with me this morning,' replied
Glenmurray: 'but better late than never.' Adeline then told him all that had passed between her and Mary and Mrs
Pemberton, and concluded with saying, 'But the surety of your better
health, which your looks give me, has dissipated every uneasiness; and
if you are but spared to me, sorrow cannot reach me, and I despise the
censure of the ignorant and the prejudiced. The world approve! What is
the world to me?' --

  'The conscious mind is its own awful world!' Glenmurray sighed deeply as she concluded her narration. 'I have only one request to make,' said he--'Never let that Mary come
into my presence again; and be sure to take care of Mrs Pemberton's
address.' Adeline promised that both his requests should be attended to. Mary was
paid her wages, and dismissed immediately; and a girl being hired to
supply her place, the ménage went on quietly again. But a new mortification awaited Glenmurray and Adeline. In spite of
Glenmurray's eccentricities and opinions, he was still remembered with
interest by some of the female part of his family; and two of his
cousins, more remarkable for their beauty than their virtue, hearing
that he was at Richmond, made known to him their intention of paying him
a morning visit on their way to their country-seat in the neighbourhood. 'Most unwelcome visitors, indeed!' cried Glenmurray, throwing the letter
down; 'I will write to them and forbid them to come.' 'That's impossible,' replied Adeline, 'for by this time they must be on
the road, if you look at the date of the letter: besides, I wish you to
receive them; I should like to see any relations or friends of yours,
especially those who have liberality of sentiment enough to esteem you
as you deserve.' 'You!--you see them!' exclaimed Glenmurray, pacing the room impatiently:
'O Adeline, that is _impossible_!' 'I understand you,' replied Adeline, changing colour: 'they will not
deem me worthy,' forcing a smile, 'to be introduced to them.' 'And therefore would I forbid their coming. I cannot bear to _exclude_
you from my presence in order that I may receive them. No: when they
arrive, I will send them word that I am unable to see them.' 'While they will attribute the refusal to the influence of the
_creature_ who lives with you! No, Glenmurray, for my sake I must insist
on your not being denied to them; and, believe me, I should consider
myself as unworthy to be the choice of your heart, if I were not able
to bear with firmness a mortification like that which awaits me.' 'But you allow it to be a mortification?' 'Yes; it is mortifying to a woman who knows herself to be virtuous, and
is an idolater of virtue, to pay the penalty of vice, and be thought
unworthy to associate with the relations of the man whom she loves.' 'They shall not come, I protest,' exclaimed Glenmurray. But Adeline was resolute; and she carried her point. Soon after this
conversation the ladies arrived, and Adeline shut herself up in her
own apartment, where she gave way to no very pleasant reflections. Nor
was she entirely satisfied with Glenmurray's conduct:--true, he had
earnestly and sincerely wished to refuse to see his unexpected and
unwelcome guests; but he had never once expressed a desire of combating
their prejudices for Adeline's sake, and an intention of requesting that
she might be introduced to them; but, as any common man would have done
under similar circumstances, he was contented to do homage to 'things as
they are,' without an effort to resist the prejudice to which he was
superior. 'Alas!' cried Adeline, 'when can we hope to see society enlightened and
improved, when even those who see and strive to amend its faults in
theory, in practice tamely submit to the trammels which it imposes?' An hour, a tedious hour to Adeline, having elapsed, Glenmurray's
visitors departed; and by the disappointment that Adeline experienced at
hearing the door close on them, she felt that she had had a secret hope
of being summoned to be presented to them; and, with a bitter feeling of
mortification, she reflected, that she was probably to the man whom she
adored a shame and a reproach. 'Yet I should like to see them,' she said, running to the window as
the carriage drove up, and the ladies entered it. At that moment they,
whether from curiosity to see her, or accident, looked up at the window
where she was. Adeline started back indignant and confused; for,
thrusting their heads eagerly forward, they looked at her with the bold
unfeeling stare of imagined superiority; and Adeline, spite of her
reason, sunk abashed and conscious from their gaze. 'And this insult,' exclaimed she, clasping her hands and bursting into
tears, 'I experience from Glenmurray's _relations_! I think I could have
borne it better from any one else.' She had not recovered her disorder when Glenmurray entered the room,
and, tenderly embracing her, exclaimed, 'Never, never again, my love,
will I submit to such a sacrifice as I have now made;' when seeing her
in tears, too well aware of the cause, he gave way to such a passionate
burst of tenderness and regret, that Adeline, terrified at his
agitation, though soothed by his fondness, affected the cheerfulness
which she did not feel, and promised to drive the intruders from her
remembrance. Had Glenmurray and Adeline known the real character of the unwelcome
visitors, neither of them would have regretted that Adeline was not
presented to them. One of them was married, and to so accommodating a
husband, that his wife's known gallant was his intimate friend; and
under the sanction of his protection she was received every where, and
visited by every one, as the world did not think proper to be more
clear-sighted than the husband himself chose to be. The other lady was a
young and attractive widow, who coquetted with many men, but intrigued
with only one at a time; for which self-denial she was rewarded by being
allowed to pass unquestioned through the portals of fashionable society. But these ladies would have scorned to associate with Adeline; and
Adeline, had she known their private history, would certainly have
returned the compliment. The peace of Adeline was soon after disturbed in another way. Glenmurray
finding himself disposed to sleep in the middle of the day, his cough
having kept him waking all night, Adeline took her usual walk, and
returned by the church-yard. The bell was tolling; and as she passed she
saw a funeral enter the church-yard, and instantly averted her head. In so doing her eyes fell on a decent-looking woman, who with a sort of
angry earnestness was watching the progress of the procession. 'Aye, there goes your body, you rogue!' she exclaimed indignantly, 'but
I wonder where your soul is now?--where I would not be for something.' Adeline was shocked, and gently observed, 'What crime did the person of
whom you are speaking, that you should suppose his soul so painfully
disposed of?' 'What crime?' returned the woman: 'crime enough, I think:--why, he
ruined a poor girl here in the neighbourhood: and then, because he never
chose to make a will, there is she lying-in of a little by-blow, with
not a farthing of money to maintain her or the child, and the fellow's
money is gone to the heir-at-law, scarce of kin to him, while his own
flesh and blood is left to starve.' Adeline shuddered:--if Glenmurray were to die, she and the child which
she bore would, she knew, be beggars. 'Well, miss, or madam, belike, by the look of you,' continued the woman
glancing her eye over Adeline's person, 'what say you? Don't you think
the fellow's soul is where we should not like to be? However, he had his
hell here too, to be sure! for, when speechless and unable to move his
fingers, he seemed by signs to ask for pen and ink, and he looked in
agonies; and there was the poor young woman crying over him, and holding
in her arms the poor destitute baby, who would as he grew up be taught,
he must think, to curse the wicked father who begot him, and the naughty
mother who bore him!' Adeline turned very sick, and was forced to seat herself on a tombstone. 'Curse the mother who bore him!' she inwardly repeated,--'and will my
child curse me? Rather let me undergo the rites I have despised!' and
instantly starting from her seat she ran down the road to her lodgings,
resolving to propose to Glenmurray their immediate marriage. 'But is the possession of property, then,' she said to herself as
she stopped to take breath, 'so supreme a good, that the want of it,
through the means of his mother, should dispose a child to curse that
mother?--No: my child shall be taught to consider nothing valuable but
virtue, nothing disgraceful but _vice_.--Fool that I am! a bugbear
frightened me; and to my foolish fears I was about to sacrifice my own
principles, and the respectability of Glenmurray. No--Let his property
go to the heir-at-law--let me be forced to labour to support my babe,
when its father--' Here a flood of tears put an end to her soliloquy,
and slowly and pensively she returned home. But the conversation of the woman in the church-yard haunted her while
waking, and continued to distress her in her dreams that night, and she
was resolved to do all she could to relieve the situation of the poor
destitute girl and child, in whose fate she might possibly see an
anticipation of her own: and as soon as breakfast was over, and
Glenmurray was engaged in his studies, she walked out to make the
projected inquiries. The season of the year was uncommonly fine; and the varied scenery
visible from the terrace was, at the moment of Adeline's approach to it,
glowing with more than common beauty. Adeline stood for some minutes
gazing on it in silent delight; when her reverie was interrupted by the
sound of boyish merriment, and she saw, at one end of the terrace, some
well-dressed boys at play. 'Alas! regardless of their doom
    The little victims play!' immediately recurred to her: for, contemplating the probable evils of
existence, she was darkly brooding over the imagined fate of her own
offspring, should it live to see the light; and the children at their
sport, having no care of ills to come, naturally engaged her attention. But these happy children ceased to interest her, when she saw standing
at a distance from the group, and apparently looking at it with an eye
of envy, a little boy, even better dressed than the rest; who was
sobbing violently, yet evidently trying to conceal his grief. And while
she was watching the young mourner attentively, he suddenly threw
himself on a seat; and, taking out his handkerchief, indignantly and
impatiently wiped away the tears that would no longer be restrained. 'Poor child!' thought Adeline, seating herself beside him; 'and has
affliction reached thee so soon!' The child was beautiful: and his clustering locks seemed to have been
combed with so much care; the frill of his shirt was so fine, and had
been so very neatly plaited; and his sun-burnt neck and hands were so
very very clean, that Adeline was certain he was the darling object of
some fond mother's attention. 'And yet he is unhappy!' she inwardly
exclaimed. 'When my fate resembled his, how happy I was!' But from the
recollections like these she always hastened; and checking the rising
sigh, she resolved to enter into conversation with the little boy. 'What is the matter?' she cried.--No answer. 'Why are you not playing
with the young gentlemen yonder?' She had touched the right string:--and bursting into tears, he sobbed
out, 'Because they won't let me.' 'No? and why will they not let you?' To this he replied not; but
sullenly hung his blushing face on his bosom. 'Perhaps you have made them angry?' gently asked Adeline. 'Oh! no, no,'
cried the boy; 'but--' 'But what?' Here he turned from her, and with his
nail began scratching the arm of the seat.