A love of literature, had guarded his son from the ruinous and degrading effects of vice and dissipation; and had preserved his daughters from the unmeaning frivolity of some ladies of quality and the unblushing effrontery of others. He saw his family respected and happy; their conversation could not be heard without pleasure, or attended to without instruction, and the hours flew unmarked, but by that increase of mental riches, which a judicious use of them bestowed. Unhappily Lady Harriett had no idea of the real value of time, and if she ever thought of it, her only study was, how to trifle it away with the most ease to herself. When she first came to the Castle, ashamed of being idle where every other person was constantly employed, she had endeavoured to find occupation in the same elegant pursuits, which afforded delight to all around her; but the very perfection that would have encouraged any one possessed of a spark of emulation, to endeavour to profit by it, disgusted the indolent Lady Harriett, who soon ceased to imitate where she despaired of equalling: her crayons were thrown aside, because she could not bear to see her imperfect attempts, compared to Lady Rosamond’s elegant designs; and the little music that she had learnt, was lost by not practising, for she had just ear enough to distinguish between her own feeble attempts and the finished performances of the three sisters; nay, even needle- work was neglected, because she found that Lady Emma not only excelled her in the finer branches of it, but could perform the minutest trifles, with a delicacy and exactness which she vainly endeavoured to imitate. Reading she never could be taught to consider as an amusement; and such was her desultory mode of conducting it, that even in the perusal of a novel, she had the childish and impatient folly to look at the conclusion, as soon as she was interested in the commencement. Lord Drelincourt, always anxious to exhibit instruction in its most pleasing form, one evening turned the conversation to that branch of literature, which, though deservedly esteemed the most superficial and useless, is yet

studied so universally, as to make it a serious object of criticism. He had taken from his ward’s work-box a book, the alluring title of which he read aloud, as follows, “The Mysterious Cavern, or the Phantom of the Abbey, a tale of mystery and horror.” The cheeks of the owner were crimsoned with blushes, whilst she inwardly acknowledged, that, however the title might have raised her expectations of pleasure, from the perusal of a work so mysterious, and consequently so interesting, it was more adapted to catch the eye, than to please the ear. Her guardian good-naturedly relieved her confusion, by saying “Do not imagine, my dear Lady Harriett, that I am going to criticise too severely, the sort of reading to which your sex are, in general, partial; that they should be so cannot excite surprise, for a ficticious work, considered merely in the light of amusement, certainly possesses advantages over many others; no previous knowledge is required, the subjects are generally of such a nature, as to be easily comprehended by the most ignorant, and sometimes so interesting, as to excite anxiety even in the most indolent. I repeat therefore, that I am not surprised at the avidity with which works of the imagination are perused, neither will I entirely condemn the perusal of them; I have never wished to prohibit novels in my family, and I am only anxious to warn you against the abuse of them; an objection has often been urged against them, which is certainly a very important one, that truth appears insipid to those, who are delighted with fiction; Beattie says,
“Eyes dazzl’d long by fiction’s gaudy rays, In modest truth nor light nor beauty find.”
“But this, though too general a consequence, is not a necessary one, and a person who is really fond of reading, and anxious to acquire information, will not long be content to peruse adventures, differing from each other, only in the names of the parties concerned in them. However my intention at present, is not to enter into dissertation on the advantages and disadvantages, arising from the study of novels, but simply to enquire, who are your favourite authors, and what are the beauties you particularly admire in each?” He might as well have enquired what she thought of the perpetual motion, the quadrature of the circle, or the everlasting lamps of the antients, as Lady Harriett could just have replied with equal readiness. Favourite authors she had none, for she most impartially read every novel that was published, and to enumerate the peculiar beauties or excellencies in any, was utterly out of her power; for she read with too much rapidity and too little attention, ever to be able to form an opinion of the real merits of a work; the utmost praise therefore that she could bestow on any, was to call it pretty, an epithet applied by her, to every thing that claimed her approbation, whether tender or sublime, grave or gay, lively or severe, all were pretty; though she never could explain in what their prettiness consisted. The Earl was mortified at receiving no other answer to his enquiries, concerning her opinion on the most popular novels, than that she had almost forgotten them, but that she believed she had thought them pretty; he ceased questioning, and made the discourse general. “If,” said he, addressing himself to Mr. Fletcher, “Fielding has been charged with not sufficiently attending to the morality of his heroes, what shall we say of Smollet, who appears to have delighted in exhibiting human nature in its worst colours? He seems incapable of delineating an amiable character, his heroes seldom possess any claim to the affection, or sympathy of his readers, and if he

accidentally introduce a virtuous person, it is generally in a subordinate view; and to be abandoned with the utmost indifference, as soon as he is no longer necessary to the story; this is a great fault, and considerably lessens the pleasure, which the reader would otherwise receive from his easy manner of depicting life, with every scene of which, he was thoroughly acquainted, being perfectly familiar with all the varied minutiae that he so accurately describes.” “Yes,” said Mr. Fletcher drily, “I acknowledge he may be clever, but I own I feel no great interest in his Roderick Random, after he pulls the ears of his faithful Strap, whose money he has lost at the gaming table, and I cannot help thinking, that Smollet, in a similar situation, would have behaved in the same manner, by the coolness, wholly divested of reprehension, with which he relates the circumstance.” “That,” said the Earl smiling, “is being too severe on poor Smollet, Johnson said, in reply to some one, who in order to enhance Garrick’s merit as a performer, asserted, that by the force of his genius, he actually imagined himself Richard the Third, whilst representing that character. ‘Then, sir, if he actually believed himself to be Richard, he deserved to be hung, as much as Richard did.’ And you seem to think, that Smollet could only relate the actions of his heroes so naturally, because he himself would have acted, as he describes them to have done.” “No,” replied Mr. Fletcher, “I wish not to condemn him, but I confess, that if I had been a Strap, I would not have served a Smollet.” “Well,” said Lady Rosamond, “you professed to speak of novelists of the present day, and I am impatient to improve by your criticisms, only beware how you break a fly upon the wheel.” “That is far from my intention,” returned the Earl, “I mean merely to remark upon some of the principal authors of the day, and to the credit of the ladies, I am happy to find that they consist chiefly of the fair sex. I will place Mrs. Radcliffe the first on the list, not that by so doing, I mean to acknowledge her as the most perfect writer, but as she has introduced into this country a new species of writing; a species which Horace Walpole seems to have foreseen when he says, ‘I believe it very possible to invent a story, of which all the events shall appear supernatural, and yet shall in the conclusion be all naturally accounted for.’ In his Castle of Otranto, he has given a specimen of the kind of writing, to which he alludes, and that work may perhaps be regarded as the foundation-stone of the marvellous style, which is at present so much in vogue, and in which, Mrs. Radcliffe has had a croud of imitators, without one rival; for to her alone it has belonged, to make improbabilities pleasing. By the great springs of terror and pity, she obtains unlimited command over the minds of her readers, and the most powerful emotions are excited by her interesting narratives; but her peculiar excellence, consists in the striking situations, into which her characters are thrown; they are conceived in the true spirit of genius, and were I a painter, I know not any modern works, that would afford so many grand and speaking scenes, as are offered by the fertility of her imagination, and the sublimity of her ideas. To illustrate them with the pencil, would be a design worthy of a Beauclerc, nay, even of the lovely princess, whose talents are as exalted as her rank. I have often wished to mention this to you my dear Rose, I think from the works of Mrs. Radcliffe, you could furnish another room, in as interesting a style, as that which you have decorated from Milton; allowing something for the peculiar advantages of his subjects.” Lady Rosamond’s eyes were cast down at this address, and the tears which filled them could not be entirely concealed; she recollected that Clayton had made the same remark, and the wish to please him, had animated her to excel in her attempt; her father observed her emotion, and without

waiting for an answer, kindly continued. “Having paid due acknowledgments to this queen of terrors, I will proceed to express my admiration where universal praise is given, to the nature-drawing pen of Mrs. D’Arblay; her Cecilia is a constellation of beauties, and if there be one fault in that charming performance, it arises from an exuberance of genius, which delineates every actor in it as a character, and paints them in the strongest though most varied colours; by this means she sometimes destroys the appearance of reality, for in real life most people ‘have no character at all;’ this however, is a fault with which her novel of Camilla cannot be charged, nor do I know one more simply interesting. The picture of an amiable family, must ever be so to the affectionate and unsophisticated mind, and though I am well aware that with many, I should find my opinion singular, I must yet acknowledge, that Camilla is the work of this charming writer, which I the most admire.” Fortunately Lady Harriett had just read this favorite novel, and ventured to say so, adding that she thought it very pretty. Henry smiled archly, and asked her if she knew any one who resembled Indiana, she hesitated, and he continued in a half whisper, “Can Lady Harriett, be so unconscious of her charms, as not to recognize her own portrait, in the beautiful all conquering Indiana?” The credulous fair one, taking as a compliment, what one possessed of any discernment, and knowing the frivolous character to which he alluded, must have felt a severe satire, replied, “Now indeed my lord you mean to flatter me.” Her guardian was shocked to hear her put the construction of flattery on a speech little short of insult, and yet more shocked that such a speech should be made by his son, could not hide his mortification sufficiently to continue his discourse immediately. He paused, and Lady Rosamond, thinking he had finished his remarks, exclaimed with unusual animation, “You have been very brief in your strictures, but surely you will not conclude your account of able writers, without mentioning one who might well claim the foremost place on your list, one whose genius is an honour to her country, in elucidating the peculiarities and characteristics of which, it has been most ably and agreeably employed.” “By that well deserved eulogium,” replied the Earl, smiling, “I presume you mean Miss Owenson, whose talents I admire too warmly to be capable of forgetting them. Her productions bear indeed the sacred stamp of genius in no common degree; they frequently exhibit the beauties of Sterne, Goethe, and Rousseau, and proclaim in every page, an elegant taste, a cultivated mind, and a benevolent heart. Her faults, like those of Mrs. D’Arblay, are only exuberances of genius; finding language sometimes inadequate to the expression of her feelings, she seeks to supply its deficiencies, by laboured epithets and lengthened description; her modesty likewise, frequently urges her to lay before her readers, the rich attainments of her mind from foreign sources, instead of relying on its native wealth, though from the purity and splendour of the specimens which she affords us of it, all other aids appear superfluous.” “Her delineation of female characters,” said Lady Rosamond, “is exquisite; they are all that a woman would wish to see in her sex represented, and Miss Owenson shews at once what a female ought to be, and what she is capable of being.” “I grant her all her merits,” replied the Earl, “and am very ready to rank her among the first writers of the present day. There are undoubtedly, many others very ingenious, but I do not admire the melocompositions, of some gentlemen writers, who blunt the edge of their wit, by loading the pages of a novel, with latin and greek notes, to shew their learning, or make them the vehicles for serious discussions on literature, politics, and even religion. I would have a novel a pleasing natural description

of events, which might happen in real life, conveying an useful moral in its conclusion, and drawing characters as they in general exist; such as may be imitated or shunned, accordingly as they are virtuous or vicious, yet not coloured until they are all perfection, or all vice, faults very common with common-place writers, who generally draw in extremes, and make some one unfortunate character the scape-goat of the piece, dismissing him or her at its close, loaded with all the enormities of vice, and responsible for all the misfortunes of the innocent.”
And here, lest our readers should think us in danger of falling into the very error condemned by Lord Drelincourt, of entering into dissertations foreign to the subject, we shall take the liberty of concluding the conversation, much to the joy of Lady Harriett, who was in the utmost dread of again being called on to give her opinion, though she was astonished that the Earl should mention so few authors, and wondered how he could omit, “The Mystic Cottager.” “The Delusions of Sentiment.” “Mysterious Horrors.” “The Fair Orphan.” “Child of Wonder.” &c. &c. &c. All which she had read, and thought very pretty. Faire was the day, but fairer was the mayde,
Who that day’s morne into the green woodes strayde; Sweet was the ayre, but sweeter was her breathing, Such rare perfumes the roses are bequeathing. W. BROWNE. WHATEVER might be Henry’s failings, that of indolence certainly did not enter into their catalogue. He was fully sensible of the value of time; and though he might occasionally waste it in dissipation, he never lost it in sloth. He adhered invariably to Lord Chesterfield’s advice, in never suffering the hour of his retiring to bed, to influence that of leaving it; and it would be well if those young men, who most scrupulously observe all the censurable parts of his lordship’s doctrines, did not in their haste to practise them, entirely overlook the really valuable instructions which are to be met with in his works. The hours gained by Henry before the family assembled, were spent in reading or writing, and generally concluded with a stroll into the park, or shrubberies; in which he was always now accompanied by his friend Edmund, who was as active, and as early a riser as himself. One morning they were taking their usual promenade, but finding that they had more of the company of a certain gentleman named Boreas, than was agreeable, they proposed turning back; when their attention was attracted by the sylphlike figure of a young girl, whom, by a sudden angle, they discovered within sight of the house, and who was too busily employed in recovering her shawl from the rough attack of the gentleman above-mentioned, to see that she was observed. She was simply attired in a brown jacket and petticoat trimmed with blue; on her head she wore a straw bonnet, tied down with ribbons of the same colour; and the friendly zephyrs that deprived her ivory neck of its covering, also set at liberty a profusion of chesnut coloured ringlets, which shaded and contrasted its whiteness; whilst every gust discovered a foot and ancle of the most delicate symmetry. She appeared à la distance like some cottage girl, but surely the loveliest cottager that ever was beheld; and the young men at that instant discovering that the morning was fine, and the breeze refreshing, resolved to take a nearer survey of the fair stranger. She advanced a few steps, till the encreasing narrowness of the path, obliged them to rouse her attention, for they were under the necessity of standing still, to let her pass. Surprise and confusion crimsoned her lovely face, when, on looking up she saw how near to the house she had unconsciously approached, and she hesitatingly endeavoured to apologize for her intrusion, “I fear—I hope, —I have not exceeded proper limits,” said she, in sweet, though trembling accents; “but we understood that Lord Drelincourt kindly wished strangers to enjoy the beauties of his grounds, and we have been therefore encouraged to—.” She stopped, unable to proceed, for Henry’s admiration was too evident, not to distress her. The unfinished speech however was not that of a cottage-girl, though Henry was bent upon still thinking her one. He took the opportunity

of her silence to say, “Your presence can never be an intrusion, but an honor to any place that you adorn with it; every lady, however, who enters this part of Lord Drelincourt’s grounds, is expected to pay the tribute of a salute, to a person whom he appoints to receive it, and I am happy to say, that I am the fortunate man so empowered.” “I did not know, sir,” replied the young incognita, the deep blush of anger suffusing her cheek; “I did not know, that in any part of his lordship’s domains, a female was liable to meet with insult, and I shall be careful how I expose myself to it for the future.” She was turning away, but the volatile incorrigible Henry, forcibly seizing her hand, exclaimed, “Now, upon my soul you are too cruel, I meant not to offend, and, as a proof of what I assert, I will be contented to accept, as a pledge of your forgiveness, that which I have a right to demand.” Resentment flashed in her eyes; “Begone, instantly,” she exclaimed, raising her voice, “or suffer me to go, and do not force me to wound the feelings of my father, by calling him to see his child insulted. His misfortunes have not yet sufficiently humbled him, to bear that patiently.” The agitated girl here touched a string which vibrated to her heart, and she burst into tears. Edmund was shocked, and tenderly taking the hand which she had snatched with disdain from Henry, he implored her to compose herself, and pardon the thoughtless gaiety of his friend, who, he would pledge his own honor, meant not to hurt her feelings by disrespect. “Suffer me then,” said the weeping girl, “to return to my father; he desired me to continue my walk, whilst he rested from the fatigue of coming here; already he will think me tardy, and I fear his affectionate eyes will see that I have been disturbed.” Henry now apologized, with unfeigned sorrow, for his foolish levity, and begged that he might conduct her to her father, to whom he would repeat his apology; but his request was refused with modest dignity, and at Edmund’s entreaty, the parties separated. Henry, however, was not of a disposition to be easily repulsed, and returning immediately home, he dispatched his valet to gain intelligence of the wanderers, and took his station at a window, commanding a view of the road into the village; whence he had soon the pleasure of seeing the lovely girl advance, supporting an old veteran, who leaned on her with one arm, whilst the other was rested in a sling. This circumstance, joined to his military air, authorized Henry to conjecture that he belonged to that profession, where honor is too often the sole reward of bravery. Nor was Lord Courtney, in this instance, mistaken; his trusty emissary soon returned with the information, that the gentlemen’s name was Macdonald, that he was a Captain in the —th regiment of foot, and had lately returned from America, where he had buried a beloved wife; that grief for her loss, and the irritation of a wound, received some time before, had thrown him into a bad state of health, and that his physicians had prescribed his native air, as the only chance of saving his life. “He lodges, my Lord,” continued the faithful narrator, “at the little white cottage, at the foot of the hill, not a quarter of a mile from the gates; the young lady is his only child, and they walk in the grounds every morning; I met them, my Lord, returning home; the gentleman has been a fine man, but he looks very ill, and I believe he is only in confined circumstances, poor gentleman; but his daughter is very pretty, and so dutiful, that the old people at the cottage say her father doats on her, and cannot bear her to be out of his sight; she is, indeed, very pretty.” “Enough,” interrupted Henry; for though under the necessity of employing a servant, he yet felt degraded in listening to him, and had sufficient delicacy to be mortified in hearing a female, for whom he already felt a penchant, made the theme of his valet’s praise. The obsequious Dawson made his bow, and withdrawing to form his own conjectures as to the enquiries of his master, Henry was left to ruminate upon the plans, necessary to be formed, in order to become a villain. The day after this adventure, he requested Edmund to accompany him in a ride, adding, that he had determined to call on Captain Macdonald, and apologize for the familiarity with which he had treated his daughter, as he could not bear the idea of appearing to intentionally insult a worthy and unfortunate gentleman. This resolution appeared so proper to Edmund, that he willingly agreed to accompany his friend on so laudable an expedition; their horses were accordingly ordered, and they sallied forth. They soon came within sight of the cottage, in the front of which grew two elms, clipped by the fanciful hand of the owner, who was a gardener, into the forms of peacocks, agreeably to the fashion of the last century; and he was, at that moment, employed in pruning the luxuriance of their tails, and giving an account of the variety of monsters which his ingenuity could shape, to a young lady in a white frock, who stood near him, and whom Henry’s beating heart soon recognized, as the same that he had wilfully mistaken in her humble garb for a cottage girl. She was laughing at the old man’s ideas on taste in gardening; for he was warmly regretting the disuse of what he called ornament; but, on looking towards the road, she ran into the cottage, and left him to conclude his disertation alone. To her surprise she saw the objects of her alarm alight; she went from the window and endeavoured to conceal her blushes; she heard voices on the stairs, and her whole frame trembled; her father must inevitably have remarked her confusion, but at that instant the strangers were announced, and his attention was called to them. Henry saw immediately that his conduct had not been mentioned by the young lady, and, at the same moment, he determined to be no less lenient to himself than she had been; not a word of the apology therefore passed his lips; but his behaviour was, in every other particular, marked by the most respectful politeness. The manners of Captain Macdonald were polished, his appearance highly interesting, and his conversation animated and instructive, to a degree that made Edmund soon attend only to him, whilst Henry discoursed in silent eloquence with the lovely girl, who sat at her father’s feet, and affected to be wholly engaged in caressing a lap-dog; but the lively crimson which dyed her cheeks, when her eyes, lifted up for a moment, met those of Henry, and the arch smile that played upon her lips, sufficiently betrayed that the favoured Pompey did not engross the whole of her attention. After an agreeable visit, lengthened beyond the mere forms of ceremony, Edmund and Henry took their leave; the latter assuring Captain Macdonald, in the politest manner, that Lord Drelincourt would have the pleasure of calling on him, after which he should hope to see him at the castle; begging in the mean time that he would send for fruit, venison, or any thing which might be agreeable or serviceable in his weak state of health. The interesting invalid gracefully thanked Lord Courtney for his attention, adding, “I have trespassed on Lord Drelincourt’s kindness ever since I took up my abode here, by making his grounds my constant walk; but of late, my foolish Mary,” smiling affectionately on his daughter, “has deprived me of that pleasure: she was frightened one morning by meeting a dog, when she was alone, and I never could persuade her to walk there after, though she repeatedly acknowledged, that it was only a puppy which had so much alarmed her.” It was not Mary alone who blushed at these words, and Henry replied, with some confusion, that, though he was glad the cause of her

fright was so harmless, yet he was sorry Captain Macdonald’s walks should be interrupted by any thing unpleasant; but that for the future, he would take care to prevent every obstacle, and hoped to have the pleasure of seeing them resumed. On their departure, the young men found ample food for conversation. Edmund admired the fire of the old veteran, tempered with an interesting melancholy, which at once announced that he had been unfortunate, and undeservedly so. Henry dwelled on the animated graces of the daughter, her native innocence, and unaffected modesty; and from that day, he thought only of cultivating an acquaintance, which he had so fortunately commenced. It was easy to prevail on the Earl to honor the Captain with a visit; to be poor, infirm, and unfortunate, were always claims on his compassion; but when, added to these, he heard that Macdonald was a brave officer, and a man of family, he felt that he also owed him his respect. Such fate to suffering worth is given, Who long with want and woes has striven, By human pride or cunning driven
To misery’s brink. Till wrench’d of every stay but heaven,
He ruined sink. BURNS. CAPTAIN Macdonald was highly gratified by his lordship’s attention, though his health declined too rapidly to allow him to profit much by it. Henry was a frequent visitor at the cottage, and his conversation and soothing kindness relieved the hours of pain, and enlivened those of languor. The Captain was fond of chess, and Henry frequently played with him; whilst Mary, working by her father’s side, lost all fear of the puppy that had alarmed her in the park. Henry had the resolution to treat her merely with civility, and the kind of affectionate politeness due to an amiable child, as he always affected to regard her. Unfortunately the Captain considered her entirely as such, and he would often expatiate to her, on the humane attentions, and compassionate friendliness of Lord Courtney, as wonderful in a young man of his rank, particularly when joined to such varied talents and inexhaustible spirits. But he never for one moment suspected that any motive, more powerful than compassion, urged the constancy of these visits. The winter was now rapidly advancing, and Captain Macdonald’s worn-out constitution, appeared incapable of resisting its rigor. Henry was shocked one day to observe an evident change in him; for though the motives of his intimacy, could not for a moment bear scrutinizing, yet it was impossible not to become attached to the society, and charmed with the virtues of the very man, towards whom, seduced by the sophistry of self-love, and encouraged by the relaxed morality of the present day, he was meditating an injury “sharper than the serpent’s tooth.” Captain Macdonald saw the emotion which Henry could not hide, and after thanking him for his numerous attentions, he added, “I fear I shall never have it in my power to shew you, that they have not been bestowed on one, ungrateful for them. I am well aware of my danger, and as a christian and a soldier, I can meet death with resignation and courage; but as a father, I shrink from it; you, my Lord, have seen the innocent gaiety, and the unceasing affection of my poor child; ever since her mother’s death, she has been my hope and solace; Alas! I shall leave her unprovided for, and unprotected; and this sad reflection renders her presence, which was my sole pleasure, now painful to me. I cannot, my Lord, give a greater proof of my esteem for your character, than in the request I am about to make. You have already conferred favours on me, which as a stranger I could not have hoped for; add to them yet another; promise me, that when I am no more, you will condescend to procure a safe and reputable conveyance for my Mary into Scotland. She has an aunt, who lives near Glasgow; a woman of family and fortune, who is her only relation, but who has never been her friend. Poor Child!” added he speaking quickly, and a flush passing across his

cheek, “poor child! she must learn to bear the taunts of ill-natured pride, and the sneers of insolent wealth, but she will not, cannot, be refused an asylum, where she may be safe, if not happy.” He paused, but his fine expressive eyes enquired most eloquently of Henry, if his hopes might be indulged? and the appeal to a heart so good and tender, was not made in vain. Lord Courtney looked earnestly upon him, and in proportion to the confidence expressed in Macdonald’s animated though grief-worn countenance, his self-reproach was increased. “And I,” he mentally exclaimed, “was about to deprive this brave and unfortunate man, of his sole remaining treasure! I would have planted a dagger in his already lacerated bosom, and under the sacred mask of friendship, have dared to mediate an injury to him, which my heart’s blood could not have expiated!” Need we add that the agitated repentant young man, solemnly promised to do every thing that Macdonald should require, his quivering lip, his tears and varying complexion, were vouchers of his sincerity. Macdonald saw, believed, and felt comparatively happy. Let us do Lord Courtney the justice to declare, that at this moment he most devoutly meant to perform every thing that he had promised; but let no one depend on his own strength, the safest way of conquering temptation, is to avoid it, for security begets danger, and the most virtuous of men, cannot say that he is safe from the snares of vice. A few days after this conversation, the sufferings of the brave and unfortunate Macdonald were concluded, and he found that repose in death, which during life had been denied to him. He had at an early age married a beautiful and amiable young woman, against the consent of her parents, and to the inexpressible anger of her eldest sister, whose heart had been freely offered to his acceptance. “Earth has not rage like love to hatred turn’d,” and the young married couple found in the rejected fair-one, an enemy as active and powerful, as she was malignant and inexorable. By her arts, a reconciliation with the parents was rendered impossible, they died leaving their entire property to the eldest daughter, and their unaltered displeasure to their youngest, who on her knees conjured permission to see them for one moment, and was refused. She willingly left Scotland, rendered hateful to her by the cruelty of her sister, and the death of her parents, and after some time spent in England, accompanied her husband to America. The brave are not always fortunate, and Captain Macdonald was an instance, that merit may sometimes be conspicuous, without being rewarded. Ever the foremost in danger, he was repeatedly wounded, and in attending on him during a dangerous illness, occasioned by receiving a ball in his breast, the delicate frame of his wife sunk under bodily fatigue, and mental uneasiness. His newly gained strength was so severely tried by grief for her death, that a relapse was the consequence, and he was only restored from the brink of the grave, by the assiduous cares of his daughter, who buried in her anxiety for her remaining parent, her anguish for the one whom she had lost. He would immediately on his arrival in England have proceeded northward, determining to forget in his affection for his daughter, his just resentment against the sister of his injured wife; hoping to succeed in working on her tenderness, or rousing her remorse so far, as to procure a home for his friendless girl; but the mild air of Devonshire, was so strongly recommended to him, that he resolved to spend the winter there, and defer his journey into Scotland until the spring. The spring he was not permitted to see, but his last hours were soothed, by the cheering thought, that he had raised up one friend for his child, and by an involuntary pleasing hope, that if she were

refused an asylum, or rendered unhappy with her aunt, Lord Drelincourt would through his son’s representation, procure her an eligible situation in some respectable family; he could not refrain from imparting to her, the consolation that he felt, he conjured her to be virtuous, as she hoped for happiness, adding “When your conscience reproaches you, my darling Mary, think that you have caused your parents a pang, and I am sure the punishment will warn you not to incur it again, by a repetition of the offence. I have recommended you, my child, to Lord Courtney, he is amiable and good, and I trust that Lord Drelincourt will also befriend you if you require aid. We may be permitted to watch over thee, my darling, therefore think not that thou art left alone in the world; trust to God, and to thine own integrity.” He had made a strong effort to finish his sentence, and exhausted by it, he fell back on his pillow, clasped his daughter’s hand, and spoke no more. Be obstinately just,
Indulge no passion, and deceive no trust;
Let never man be hold enough to say,
Thus far, no farther shall my passions stray,
The first crime past, compels us into more,
And guilt grows fate, which was but choice before. HILL. NEED we describe the agony and dismay of the innocent, deserted Mary? Ah, no! which of our readers have been fortunate enough never to have wept the ravages of death, never to have felt the melancholy void which his triumph leaves in the aching heart? This poor girl, left at the age of sixteen, without a home, without a protector;—deprived of her only parent, whom she adored; thrown on the wide world in utter ignorance of its ways; no one to direct her, no one to confide in! her anguish amounted to agony; and during the first few days after the melancholy event she was on the verge of despair. Can it be wondered at, if in this situation Lord Courtney appeared to the solitary sufferer as a guardian angel? can it be wondered at, if she wept with softened grief when she saw his tears flow likewise? and can it be wondered at, if the enamoured Henry felt all his affection encreased, as he endeavoured to console this lovely child of sorrow? In respect to her affliction, he had forborne to visit her till the evening before the funeral; when, being anxious to take every trouble of that mournful ceremony, he was under the necessity of going to the cottage, and could not resist the temptation of sending to enquire after her, whilst she, ignorant of form, unsuspicious of ill, following solely the dictates of her heart, requested to see him. The interview was pathetic, though short. Henry, much affected by her father’s death, solemnly vowed never to forsake her; and her heart sinking under anxiety, and oppressed with woe, expanded to the appearance of affection; and, from that moment, admitted unconsciously, a warmer sentiment than it had ever yet received. Edmund willingly accompanied Henry to Macdonald’s grave; and after the last offices were performed to the lamented dead, they paid their respects to the afflicted Mary, who appeared yet more lovely in her sable garbs. Her cheek, blanched by sorrow, was tinted with a faint blush, and the traces of tears remained on it, as dewdrops tremble on a white rose. The gentle languor of her manners, the affectionate gratitude with which she received every endeavour to console her, powerfully interested the feelings of her visitors. When they left her, Edmund was eloquent in her praise, but Henry was silent, for his mind was a chaos, and his thoughts not to be expressed by words. A few days after this visit, Lord Drelincourt was expressing his pity for the fate of Captain Macdonald, and enquired what had become of his daughter? Henry hastily replied, that she had gone according to her father’s desire into Scotland, where she had an aunt in genteel circumstances, and who was her only relation. “I am glad of it,” said the Earl, “I wish she may be comfortably situated, and if she had been left utterly

unprotected, I would have endeavoured to procure her some agreeable situation.” “Poor child,” said Lady Drelincourt, who was composed of every feminine virtue, “she should have been welcome to reside in my family, and with needle-work, and reading to my daughters, I dare say she would have spent her time very pleasantly.” The conversation dropped here, but Henry’s agitation whilst the subject continued, did not escape Edmund’s observation; he, however, accounted for it in his own mind, very easily, by conceiving that Henry had involuntarily engaged his affections more than he suspected, till absence had taught him the extent of his attachment. With this idea, Edmund was perfectly satisfied, rejoicing that the object of temptation was removed, and hoping that Henry would soon recover his usual cheerfulness, of which he had been somewhat deprived by the recent melancholy event. After this, every thing went on much as usual, except that Henry conceived a violent passion for field sports, in which, however, he was so little successful, that he was frequently absent for whole days without being able to produce a single brace of birds, as vouchers of his skill; and, whether he were fatigued by his exertions, or mortified to find them thrown away, was not easy to determine, but it is certain, that he frequently returned home out of spirits, and out of humour; even his attention to Lady Harriett slackened, she was therefore obliged to console herself, by a yet closer intimacy with Miss Dunderton; and there was seldom a day passed in which the young ladies did not see each other, or exchange epistles, where warmth of expression, and luxuriance of imagination, were more conspicuous than grammatical propriety, or classical elegance. Mr. Fletcher continued to be a frequent guest, and Lady Rosamond appeared more amiable in his presence, than at any other time, for she valued his esteem, and was anxious to deserve it. Lady Maria, finding beauty a very insufficient foundation on which to raise esteem, endeavoured to rouse herself from mental indolence, and bodily languor; whilst Mr. Breresford, whenever he visited the Castle, conscious how nearly at one time, he had lost her affections, sedulously imitated the manners of his involuntary rival, laid aside his most effeminate habits, and discovered, at every visit, some interesting trait, or pleasing accomplishment. As for Edmund and Lady Emma, every day heightened their mutual regard and confidence, and made them more sensible of the happiness which they enjoyed in each other: Love had struck them with his golden-pointed dart, and his flame glowed in their hearts with congenial steady warmth, which required not to be encreased by opposition, or exalted by misfortune.