"My friend resides here at present," said Miss Moreton; "his continuance here is amongst
the profound mysteries of human destiny!" Mary Cuthbert now saw several centinels, clad in military array, pacing before a
structure, which she perceived was not a private habitation; the momentary idea which it gave
birth to, was that of its being the county prison. Miss Moreton then had come to visit a friend under confinement; and, whether for debt or
for some unexpiated offence, was doubtful, in as much as in her selection of intimates she used
no discrimination! The step of the chaise was let down; a centinel advanced, and asked Miss Moreton her
business, telling her, at the same time, it was past the hour of admittance. "I come to speak to
Captain Walwyn, friend," said Miss Moreton. Mary's heart sank within her; she flung herself back in the chaise with a despairing and
impetuous emotion. Miss Moreton perceived her not; the soldier answered, "What, Captain
Frederic Walwyn of the -- regiment? please to come in, Ma'am; he-is just-" "Is he dead?" said Miss Moreton. "Speak! I charge you speak; but say not he is dead!" "Dead-oh! no, no,
Miss, he's all alive and kicking-he's the captain on guard in the mess room; and if you'll follow
that man-here Walter, Walter, shew Miss to the mess room." "Where are we, then? For God's
sake tell me, where are we?" cried Mary Cuthbert, retreating with an impulsive movement of
horror. "Oh, you are in H-- barracks, young lady," said the soldier, tipping the wink to the
man, and whistling as he walked off. It may now be necessary to account (as far as we are able,) for Miss Moreton's having
undertaken the journey to H--. Walwyn had been very loth to leave the Villa, and such a
formidable enemy as the Chevalier D'Aubert. He saw that this gentleman seemed to get on better
by sighs, and interjections, and languishments, than he had done by ranting and poetic fervor; but
he determined that, to guard against the mischief which might be done in his absence, he would
also change his mode of attack; and, therefore, he indited a letter to the full as tender, and as
pathetic, and as thick of notes of admiration, as the Chevalier could have done. He bewailed his hard fate in being torn from the society of her, who only could sooth his
soul; and he talked of the racking pangs of absence, and of his wasting form, and broken spirits,
in a strain which he thought must reach the heart of his fair Dulcinea. He wrote the letter on the
pillow of sickness, and he besought his idolized Miss Moreton, the phoenix of her sex, the
embodied image of genius and perfection, to raise him from the grave, by a few lines from her
own dear hand! In some parts of this epistle Captain Walwyn had certainly been too verbose and
overstrained; but, with regard to the pillow of sickness, he had not been guilty of any
exaggeration.-The last night's intemperance had been succeeded by the usual nausea of the
stomach,-an aching head, a heavy eye lid; and, not wishing another post to escape him, he had
raised himself on his bed, at noon-day, to dispel the misty vapours of his brain, by composing an
epistle to his mistress. Miss Moreton received it in an auspicious moment.-She had just separated, perhaps for
ever, from her beloved friend, the Chevalier; and had accommodated him with a thousand
pounds, to insure a flight from his unjust and savage enemies.-She saw the Attic Villa, that
elegant mansion which had been ornamented and decorated by her orders, and according to her
taste, "by the coarse hands of village ruffians," cruelly despoiled of half its beauty; all her friends
had quitted her, and her sick and jaundiced mind, recurring on self, would probably have been
visited by some compunctious emotions, if this letter had not given a new stimulus to her ideas. "Walwyn was ill, and at a distance! She had never before received a letter from him, so
tender, or so touching.-True, her heart was Montgomery's alone; yet he would rejoice to hear
that she had visited his friend whilst he lay extended on the bed of sickness;-the world might
blame-Montgomery must applaud! Had not Corinna gone immediately to Lord Nelville on
hearing of his illness? And did she quit him while his recovery was doubtful? Besides, should the
illness of Walwyn increase, (and that of course it would,) it surely was the most natural
circumstance for him to send for his friend Montgomery, the beloved confidante of his soul! Then!-oh! what an extatic scene would ensue! Montgomery would behold the woman he
adored make her appearance on such an amiable, such a benevolent errand! How would his
noble heart dilate with rapture at beholding such a proof of generous, of exalted friendship in a
female! For he then would learn,-yes, surely he must learn, that the most pure, the most
disinterested emotions, had alone impelled her in this visit to his friend; and that Montgomery-
Montgomery alone was the master of her destiny!" Eager to execute this scheme of sentimentality, we have seen how adroitly Miss Moreton
managed to make Mary Cuthbert a participator in it. The Corinna of Italy, indeed, had never
chosen a female companion; but, had she been left the guardian of an orphan cousin, Miss
Moreton was confident she would not have left her behind; and her own tall and majestic form
looked so graceful, when gently bending on Mary; it formed, besides, another so pleasing a trait
in her character, to have it said, "She was always accompanied by her ward;"-it looked so
affectionate, so benevolent, that, on no account, could she let her remain at the Villa. Besides, Mrs. Deborah Moreton would take advantage of her absence, to impress her
formal and ridiculous dogmas on the ductile mind of Mary; and Miss Davenport might make her
as puritanical as herself; therefore, if only in common justice to the girl, she must take her with
her. But the retired and obsolete notions of Mary might render her averse to enter the
habitation of soldiers, (even on an errand of mercy,) if she were to apprize her of her intention;
and the surprize of Mary on her arrival at H--, would give additional interest to the whole
scene. Mrs. Deborah Moreton might interpose with starched advice and curious queries, as to
where, and to what place, she was about to bend her course; it should, therefore, be her business
to elude her aunt, and detain Mary at the Villa till the hour of their departure. We have marked how Miss Moreton's plan succeeded, and if our readers have curiosity
sufficient to take another peep at H-- barracks, they must follow us to the next chapter. "Let us go, and let us fly!" GRAY. UNDAUNTEDLY Miss Moreton followed the servant who was her conductor through a long
passage, lighted occasionally by a lamp, and from opening doors as they passed, from whence
soldiers were seen issuing, or were discovered cleaning their arms, and brushing their uniforms. The laugh, the song, the oath was heard; and while Mary, with hesitating step and down-cast eye,
walked on in trembling agitation, Corinna seemed to have acquired a firm and martial tread, on
breathing a military atmosphere; and as the folding doors of the guard room were thrown open,
she expanded her arms, and hastily looking round the large apartment, and seeing numerous
faces, she no sooner caught a glance of Walwyn's, then, rushing towards him, she cried out, "He
lives, he lives!" and sunk at his feet. Surprize and consternation for a moment intimidated the whole party; even Walwyn was
struck dumb, and could hardly believe his eye-sight had not deceived him, and that he really
beheld Miss Moreton at his feet in the guard room of H-- barracks; but he had taken his usual
quantity of wine, and, soon recovering himself, was able to raise the prostrate fair, and to express
his wonder, his surprize, and pleasure! The terror-struck Mary, seeing the doors opened, and beholding the numerous lights, and
the large party of red coats, who were promiscuously dispersed over the room, some engaged in
drinking, play, negligently lounging, or parading to and fro in the apartment, made a sudden
retreat; but, not knowing where to fly for protection or shelter, she ran into the corner of the
room, turning her back to the whole of the company. No sooner was her situation perceived, than it added to their entertainment, (which was
become very general,) at witnessing the behaviour of Miss Moreton towards Walwyn, and the
surprize attendant on his first reception of her. "To what cause am I indebted for this unexpected honour from Miss Moreton?" asked
Walwyn, reassuming his self-possession, and hoping to impress his brother officers with respect,
from announcing the name of his visitor, of whose fortune and consequence they had been
frequently apprized by his conversation. "Your letter-your own letter, my dear friend," said Miss Moreton; "Alas! I scarcely
thought to find you alive, so forcibly did it describe your illness." Walwyn seemed a little confused;-two or three of his comrades broke out into a horse
laugh.-"Fairly bit, by G-d, Walwyn," cried one; -"Well done, noble captain!" said another;
"And which is YOUR chere amie of this good company, my pretty incognita?" asked a young
man, very much intoxicated, reeling to the part of the room where Mary was yet hiding her face,
and rudely putting his arm round her waist, he turned her towards the candle, saying, "Come,
come, my little Q in a corner, you need not hide your blushes, they will bear the light of day;
come, chuse a chere amie." "And pray let that happy lot be mine," said a mincing Jemmy
Jessamy red coat, tripping up in a most effeminate manner, and leisurely biting his nails to shew
his white hand, and cocking his opera-glass to his eye as he spoke. Mary Cuthbert broke from the retaining grasp of the first gentleman, and springing
towards Miss Moreton, she said, "Pray, Ma'am, leave this room-leave this house instantly! Miss Moreton, consider; I conjure you consider the imprudence of your conduct.-Captain
Walwyn, I beseech you lead Miss Moreton to the carriage!" "Do not alarm yourself, child!" said Miss Moreton, rising and leaning on the arm of
Walwyn, and looking round with the utmost non chalance on the company as she spoke.-"So
happy, so blest am I to find my beloved friend in a state of convalescence, that I have no room
for the entrance of any other sentiment!" "Do not alarm yourself, Miss Cuthbert," said Walwyn, offering Mary his disengaged
hand, which she snatched instinctively, and, whispering in his ear, said, "Pray, Sir, let us go." Her ingenuous manner redoubled the mirth of the spectators, and,-"Two at a time!-
Two strings to your bow!-How happy could I be with either!" and various other witticisms
were heard on all sides. "I will call on you early in the morning at H--," said Walwyn, pressing the hand of
Miss Moreton, "and would fain escort you there myself to-night, but that, being the commanding
officer on duty, I must not desert my post." "Alas! how unfortunate!" said Miss Moreton. "She sighed for love, and he for glory!" sung out an officer, with no bad voice or
expression. When they had reached the passage, Walwyn called his servant,"-Light us to the
carriage." "Sir?" said the man, and he looked all consternation.-"Do you hear my orders?" "The
chaise as brought the ladies, Sir, drove off again as soon as it had set they down!" "Good
Heavens!" cried Mary Cuthbert, stamping her foot in agony. A horse-laugh saluted her from
behind, and she perceived that all the officers were crowding after them. "What is the reason of this, Ma'am?" asked Mary. "What shall we-what can we do? "-
and the distressed tone in which she spoke might have moved a stoic. "My anxious fears on your account, my friend," said Miss Moreton, turning to Walwyn,
"were uncontrollable, and imagining you at the very point of death, I thought of nothing save the
receiving your last sigh in my arms, and watching your livid corpse through the long and solitary
night. I neglected to tell the postillions to await my further pleasure; and, having paid them at the
foregoing stage, in order to save time, they doubtless thought I had no further business for them
here." "Good morning to my night-cap!" sang out a gentleman from behind. "What is now to be
done, Madam?" asked Mary Cuthbert, in an impatient tone. "Cannot you accommodate us for the
night?" asked Miss Moreton; "you know that I mind no hardships in the cause of friendship, and
that with a kindred mind, all situations are alike to me!" "My sitting-room is so very small," said Walwyn, "that I can scarcely ask you to go into
that. It is very unfortunate-but these cursed barracks are so very inconvenient. Suppose you
return again to the guard-room, we'll make it as comfortable as we can for you; and I am
confident that my brother officers will pay you every attention." "Any where," said Miss Moreton. "Oh! no, by no means, by no means," cried Mary
Cuthbert. "Pray let us go into a private room, no matter where; and send instantly to H-- for a
chaise. I beg of you, Captain Walwyn, do not delay another minute!" "That will be the better way, I believe," said Walwyn; who, feeling assured that Miss
Moreton meant to bestow her hand and fortune upon him (and that anxiety for his health had
been the real, as it was the ostensible, cause of her taking this journey,) though very free in his
notions with regard to the female character, was yet inclined to be careful of the reputation of
her, whom he was hereafter to call his wife, and consequently he did not like the idea of her
remaining all night in the H-- barracks. A door in the passage at this moment opened; it was the entrance to a small and desolate
apartment with a stone floor; and a broken drum, on which was rested a lighted candle, was all
its furniture. The officers in the passage crouded on the ladies; and Mary could not retreat or
advance; she felt as if she could not breathe. The soldiers, as they passed, looked with unlicenced freedom at her; and, rushing into the
narrow room, the door of which was left open by the soldier who had quitted it, she ran in there
as to a place of refuge, crying "here, here, Miss Moreton, come here, till the chaise arrives!" Miss Moreton, it was evident, would have preferred the guard-room; but Walwyn
following Mary Cuthbert's motion, she suffered herself to be led in by him, and, while chairs
were procuring for their accommodation, Mary shut the door, to prevent the intrusion of the
gentlemen, who were still jostling, laughing, and quizzing, in the passage. "This place feels like a grave!" said Miss Moreton. Mary Cuthbert felt an internal shiver,
and her teeth chattered in her head; but she attributed this to the agitation of her mind, and waited
in a state of most dreadful and perturbed anxiety, for the return of Captain Walwyn's servant,
with the chaise, to convey them to the town.