'So, then, this angel of purity
turns out to be a kept lady!' At this remark Miss Maynard laughed
heartily, but Maynard, to hide his confusion, commanded silence, and
went on with the letter:

     'But spite of her situation, strange as it may seem to you,
     believe me, no wife was ever more pure than Adeline.' At this passage the sisters could no longer contain themselves, and they
gave way to loud bursts of laughter, which Maynard could hardly help
joining in; but being angry at the same time he uttered nothing but an
oath, which I shall not repeat, and retreated to his chamber to finish
the letter alone. During his absence the laughters redoubled;--but in the midst of it
Maynard re-entered, and desired they would allow him to read the letter
to the end. The sisters immediately begged that he would proceed, as it
was so amusing that they wished to hear more.--Glenmurray continued
thus:

     'You have no doubt yet to learn that some few years ago I
     commenced author, and published opinions contrary to the
     established usage of society: amongst other things I proved the
     absurdity of the institution of marriage; and Adeline, who at
     an early age read my works, became one of my converts.' 'The man is certainly mad,' cried Maynard, 'and how dreadful it is that
this angelic creature should have been his victim.' 'But perhaps this _fallen_ angel, brother, for such you will allow she
is, spite of her _purity_, was as wicked as he. I know people in general
only blame the seducer, but I always blame the seduced equally.' 'I do not doubt it,' said her brother sneeringly, and going on with the
letter. 'No wonder then, that, being forced to fly from her maternal
     roof, she took refuge in my arms.' 'Lucky dog!' 'But though Adeline was the victim neither of her own weakness
     nor of my seductions, but was merely urged by circumstances to
     act up to the principles which she openly professed, I felt so
     conscious that she would be degraded in your eyes after you
     were acquainted with her situation, though in mine she appears
     as spotless as ever, that I could not bear to expose her even
     to a glance from you less respectful than those with which you
     beheld her last night. I therefore prevailed on her to leave
     Lisbon; nor had I any difficulty in so doing, when she found
     that your wish of introducing her to your sisters was founded
     on your supposition of her being my wife, and that all chance
     of your desiring her acquaintance for them would be over, when
     you knew the nature of her connexion with me. I shall now bid
     you farewell. I write in haste and agitation, and have not time
     to say more than God bless you! 'F. G.'

'Yes, yes, I see how it is,' muttered Mr Maynard to himself when he had
finished the letter, 'he was jealous of me. I wish (raising his voice)
that he had not been in such a hurry to go away.' 'Why, brother,' replied Mrs Wallington, 'to be sure you would not have
introduced us to this piece of angelic purity a little the worse for
the wear!' 'No,' replied he; 'but I might have enjoyed her company myself.' 'And perhaps, brother, you might have rivalled the philosophic author in
time,' observed Miss Maynard. 'If I had not, it would have been from no want of good will on my part,'
returned Maynard. 'Well, then I rejoice that the creature is gone,' replied Mrs Wallington,
drawing up. 'And I too,' said Miss Maynard disdainfully: 'but I think we had better
drop this subject; I have had quite enough of it.' 'And so have I,' cried Mrs Wallington: 'but I must observe, before we
drop it entirely, that when next my brother comes home and wearies his
sisters by exaggerated praises of another woman, I hope he will take
care that his goddess, or rather his angel of purity, does not turn out
to be a kept mistress.' So saying she left the room, and Miss Maynard, tittering, followed her;
while Maynard, too sore on this subject to bear to be laughed at, took
his hat in a pet, and, flinging the door after him with great violence,
walked out to muse on the erring but interesting companion of
Glenmurray. While these conversations were passing at Lisbon, Glenmurray and Adeline
were pursuing their journey to France; and insensibly did the charm of
being together obliterate from the minds of each the rencontre which had
so much disturbed them. But Adeline began to be uneasy on a subject of much greater importance;
she every day expected an answer from her mother, but no answer arrived;
and they had been stationary at Perpignan some days, to which place they
had desired their letters to be addressed, _poste restante_, and still
none were forwarded thither from Lisbon. The idea that her mother had utterly renounced her now took possession
of her imagination, and love had no charm to offer her capable of
affording her consolation: the care which she had taken of her infancy,
the affectionate attentions that had preserved her life, and the
uninterrupted kindness which she had shown towards her till her
attachment to Sir Patrick took place,--all these pressed powerfully and
painfully on her memory, till her elopement seemed wholly unjustifiable
in her eyes, and she reprobated her conduct in terms of the most bitter
self-reproach. At these moments even Glenmurray seemed to become the object of her
aversion. Her mother had forbidden her to think of him; yet, to make her
flight more agonizing to her injured parent, she had eloped with _him_. But as soon as ever she beheld him he regained his wonted influence over
her heart, and her self-reproaches became less poignant: she became
sensible that Sir Patrick's guilt and her mother's imprudent marriage
were the causes of her own fault, and not Glenmurray; and could she but
receive a letter of pardon from England, she felt that her conscience
would again be at peace. But soon an idea of a still more harassing nature succeeded and
overwhelmed her. Perhaps her desertion had injured her mother's health;
perhaps she was too ill to write; perhaps she was dead:--and when this
horrible supposition took possession of her mind she used to avoid even
the presence of her lover; and as her spirits commonly sunk towards
evening, when the still renewed expectations of the day had been
deceived, she used to hasten to a neighbouring church when the bell
called to vespers, and, prostrate on the steps of the altar, lift up her
soul to heaven in the silent breathings of penitence and prayer. Having
thus relieved her heart she returned to Glenmurray, pensive but
resigned. One evening after she had unburthened her feelings in this manner,
Glenmurray prevailed on her to walk with him to a public promenade; and
being tired they sat down on a bench in a shady part of the mall. They
had not sat long before a gentleman and two ladies seated themselves
beside them. Glenmurray instantly rose up to depart; but the gentleman also rose and
exclaimed, ''Tis he indeed! Glenmurray, have you forgotten your old
friend Willie Douglas?' Glenmurray, pleased to see a friend whom he had once so highly valued,
returned the salutation with marked cordiality; while the ladies with
great kindness accosted Adeline, and begged she would allow them the
honour of her acquaintance. Taught by the rencontre at Lisbon, Adeline for a moment felt
embarrassed; but there was something so truly benevolent in the
countenance of both ladies, and she was so struck by the extreme beauty
of the younger one, that she had not resolution to avoid, or even to
receive their advances coldly; and while the gentlemen were commenting
on each other's looks, and in an instant going over the occurrences of
past years, the ladies, pleased with each other, had entered into
conversation. 'But I expected to see you and your lady,' said Major Douglas; 'for
Maynard was writing to me from Lisbon when he laid by his pen and took
the walk in which he met you; and on his return he filled up the rest of
his letter with the praises of Mrs Glenmurray, and expressions of envy
at your happiness.' Glenmurray and Adeline both blushed deeply. 'So!' said Adeline to
herself, 'here will be another letter to write when we get home;' for,
though ingenuousness was one of her most striking qualities, she had not
resolution enough to tell her new acquaintance that she was not married:
besides, she flattered herself, that, could she once interest these
charming women in her favour, they would not refuse her their society
even when they knew her real situation; for she thought them too amiable
to be prejudiced, as she called it, and was not yet aware how much the
perfection of the female character depends on respect even to what may
be called the prejudices of others. The day began to close in; but Major Douglas, though Glenmurray was too
uneasy to answer him except by monosyllables, would not hear of going
home, and continued to talk with cheerfulness and interest of the scenes
of his and Glenmurray's early youth. He too was ignorant of his friend's
notoriety as an author: he had lived chiefly at his estates in the
Highlands; nor would he have left them, but because he was advised to
travel for his health: and the lovely creature whom he had married, as
well as his only sister, was anxious on his account to put the advice in
execution. He therefore made no allusions to Glenmurray's opinions that
could give him an opportunity of explaining his real situation; and he
saw with confusion, that every moment increased the intimacy of Adeline
and the wife and sister of his friend. At length his feelings operated so powerfully on his weak frame, that a
sudden faintness seized him, and supported by Adeline and the major,
and followed by his two kind companions, he returned to the inn: there,
to get rid of the Douglases and avoid the inquiries of Adeline, who
suspected the cause of his illness, he immediately retired to bed. His friends also returned home, lamenting the apparently declining
health of Glenmurray, and expatiating with delight on the winning graces
of his supposed wife; for these ladies were of a different class of
women to the sisters of Maynard.--Mrs Douglas was so confessedly a
beauty, so rich in acknowledged attractions, that she could afford to do
justice to the attractions of another: and Miss Douglas was so decidedly
devoid of all pretensions to the lovely in person, that the idea of
competition with the beautiful never entered her mind, and she was
always eager to admire what she knew that she was incapable of rivalling. Unexposed, therefore, to feel those petty jealousies, those paltry
competitions which injure the character of women in general, Emma
Douglas's mind was the seat of benevolence and candour,--as was her
beautiful sister's from a different cause; and they were both warmer
even than the major in praise of Adeline. But a second letter from Mr Maynard awaited Major Douglas at the inn,
which put a fatal stop to their self-congratulations at having met
Glenmurray and his companion. Mr Maynard, full of Glenmurray's letter, and still more deeply impressed
than ever with the image of Adeline, could not forbear writing to the
major on the subject; giving as a reason, that he wished to let him know
the true state of affairs, in order that he might avoid Glenmurray.--The
letter came too late. 'And I have seen him, have welcomed him as a friend, and he has had the
impudence to introduce his harlot to my wife and sister!' So spoke the major in the language of passion,--and passion is never
accurate.--Glenmurray had _not_ introduced Adeline: and this was gently
hinted by the kind and candid Emma Douglas; while the younger and more
inexperienced wife sat silent with consternation, at having pressed with
the utmost kindness the hand of a kept mistress. Vain were the representations of his sister to sooth the wounded
pride of Major Douglas. Without considering the difficulty of such a
proceeding, he insisted upon it that Glenmurray should have led Adeline
away instantly, as unworthy to breathe the same air with his wife and
sister. 'You find by that letter, brother,' said Miss Douglas, 'that this
unhappy Adeline is still an object of respect in his eyes, and he could
not wound her feelings so publicly, especially as she seems to be more
ill-judging than vicious.' She spoke in vain.--The major was a soldier, and so delicate in his
ideas of the honour of women, that he thought his wife and sister
polluted from having, though unconsciously, associated with Adeline;
being violently irritated therefore at the supposed insult offered him
by Glenmurray, he left the room, and, having dispatched a challenge to
him, told the ladies he had letters to write to England till bed-time
arrived: then, after having settled his affairs in case he should fall
in the conflict, he sat brooding alone over the insolence of his former
friend. There was a consciousness too which aggravated his resentment. Calumny
had been busy with his reputation; and, though he deserved it not, had
once branded him with the name of coward. Besides, his elder sister had
been seduced by a man of very high rank, and was then living with him as
his mistress. Made still more susceptible therefore of affront by this
distressing consciousness, he suspected that Glenmurray, from being
acquainted with these circumstances, had presumed on them, and dared to
take a liberty with him, situated as he then was, which in former times
he would not have ventured to offer. As Adeline and Glenmurray were both retired for the night when the
major's note arrived, it was not delivered till morning,--nor then,
luckily, till Adeline, supposing Glenmurray asleep, was gone to take her
usual walk to the post-office: Glenmurray, little aware of its contents,
opened it, and read as follows:--

       'SIR,

     'For your conduct in introducing your mistress to my wife and
     sister, I demand immediate satisfaction. As you may possibly
     not have recovered your indisposition of last night, and I wish
     to take no unfair advantages, I do not desire you to meet me
     till evening; but at six o'clock, a mile out of the north side
     of the town, I shall expect you.--I can lend you pistols if you
     have none.' 'There is only one step to be taken,' said Glenmurray mentally, starting
up and dressing himself: and in a few moments he was at Major Douglas's
lodgings. The major had just finished dressing, when Glenmurray was announced. He
started and turned pale at seeing him; then, dismissing his servant and
taking up his hat and his pistols, he desired Glenmurray to walk out
with him. 'With all my heart,' replied Glenmurray. But recollecting himself, 'No,
no,' said he: 'I come hither now, merely to talk to you; and if, after
what has passed, the ladies should see us go out together, they would be
but too sure of what was going to happen, and might follow us.' 'Well, then sir,' cried the major, 'we had better separate till
evening.' 'I shall not leave you, Major Douglas,' replied Glenmurray solemnly,
'whatever harsh things you may say or do, till I have made you listen to
me.' 'How can I listen to you, when nothing you can say can be a justification
of your conduct?' 'I do not mean to offer any.--I am only come to tell you my story, with
that of my companion, and my resolutions in consequence of my situation;
and I conjure you, by the recollections of our early days, of our past
pleasures and fatigues, those days when fatigue itself was a pleasure,
and I was not the weak emaciated being that I am now, unable to bear
exertion, and overcome even to female weakness by agitation of mind such
as I experienced last night--'

'For God's sake sit down,' cried the major, glancing his eye over the
faded form of Glenmurray.--Glenmurray sat down. 'I say, I conjure you by these recollections,' he continued, 'to hear me
with candour and patience. Weakness will render me brief.' Here he
paused to wipe the damps from his forehead; and Douglas, in a voice of
emotion, desired him to say whatever he chose, but to say it directly. 'I will,' replied Glenmurray; 'for indeed there is one at home who will
be alarmed at my absence.' The major frowned; and, biting his lip, said, 'Proceed, Mr Glenmurray,'
in his usual tone. Glenmurray obeyed. He related his commencing author,--the nature of his
works,--his acquaintance with Adeline,--its consequences,--her mother's
marriage,--Sir Patrick's villany,--Adeline's elopement, her refusal to
marry him, and the grounds on which it was founded. 'And now,' cried
Glenmurray when his narration was ended, 'hear my firm resolve. Let the
consequences to my reputation be what they may, let your insults be what
they may, I will not accept your challenge; I will not expose Adeline
to the risk of being left without a protector in a foreign land, and
probably without one in her own. I fear that, in the natural course of
things, I shall not continue with her long; but while I can watch over
and contribute to her happiness, no dread of shame, no fear for what
others may think of me, no selfish consideration whatever shall induce
me to hazard a life which belongs to her, and on which at present her
happiness depends. I think, Douglas, you are incapable of treating me
with dignity; but even to that I will patiently submit, rather than
expose my life; while consoled by my motive, I will triumphantly
exclaim--'See, Adeline, what I can endure for thy sake!' Here he paused; and the major, interested and affected, had involuntarily
put out his hand to him; but, drawing it back, he said, 'Then I may be
sure that you meant no affront to me by suffering my wife and sister to
converse with Miss Mowbray?' Glenmurray having put an end to these suspicions entirely, by a candid
avowal of his feelings, and of his wish to have escaped directly if
possible, the major shook him affectionately by the hand, and told him
that though he firmly believed too much learning had made him mad, yet,
that he was as much his friend as ever. 'But what vexes me is,' said he,
'that you should have turned the head of that sweet girl. The opinion of
the world is every thing to a woman.' 'Aye, it is indeed,' replied Glenmurray; 'and, spite of ridicule, I
would marry Adeline directly, as I said before, to guaranty her against
reproach,--I wish you would try to persuade her to be mine legally.' 'That I will,' eagerly replied the major; 'I am sure I shall prevail
with her. I am sure I shall soon convince her that the opinions she
holds are nothing but nonsense.' 'You will find,' replied Glenmurray, blushing, 'that her arguments are
unanswerable notwithstanding.' 'What, though taken from the cursed books you mentioned?' 'You forget that I wrote these books.' 'So I did; and I wish she could forget it also: and then they would
appear to her, as they must do no doubt to all people of common sense,
and that is, abominable stuff.' Glenmurray bit his lips,--but the author did not long absorb the lover,
and he urged the major to return with him to his lodgings. 'Aye, that I will,' cried he: 'and what is more, my sister Emma, who
writes admirably, shall write her a letter to convince her that she had
better be married directly.' 'She had better converse with her,' said Glenmurray. The major looked grave, and observed that they would do well to go and
consult the women on the subject, and tell them the whole story. So
saying, he opened the door of a closet leading to their apartment: but
there, to their great surprise, they found Mrs Douglas and Emma, and as
well informed of everything as themselves;--for, expecting that a duel
might be the consequence of the major's impetuosity, and hearing Mr
Glenmurray announced, they resolved to listen to the conversation, and,
if it took the turn which they expected, to rush in and endeavour to
mollify the disputants. 'So, ladies; this is very pretty indeed! Eaves-droppers, I protest,'
cried Major Douglas: but he said no more; for his wife, affected by the
recital which she had heard, and delighted to find that there would be
no duel, threw her arms round his neck, and burst into tears. Emma,
almost equally affected, gave her hand to Glenmurray, and told him
nothing on her part should be omitted to prevail on Adeline to sacrifice
her opinions to her welfare. 'I said so,' cried the major. 'You will write to her.' 'No; I will see her, and argue with her.' 'And so will I,' cried the wife. 'That you shall not,' bluntly replied the major. 'Why not? I think it my duty to do all I can to save a fellow-creature
from ruin; and words spoken from the heart are always more powerful than
words written.' 'But what will the world say, if I permit you to converse with a kept
mistress?' 'The world here to us, as we associate with none and are known to none,
is Mr Glenmurray and Miss Mowbray; and of their good word we are sure.' 'Aye,' cried Emma, 'and sure of succeeding with this interesting Adeline
too; for if she likes us, as I think she does--'

'She adores you,' replied Glenmurray. 'So much the better:--then, when we shall tell her that we cannot
associate with her, much as we admire her, unless she consents to become
a wife, surely she will hear reason.' 'No doubt,' cried Mrs Douglas; 'and then we will go to church with her,
and you, Emma, shall be bride's maid.' 'I see no necessity for that,' observed the major gravely. 'But I do,' replied Emma. 'She will repeat her vows with more heartfelt
reverence, when two respectable women, deeply impressed themselves with
their importance, shall be there to witness them.' 'But there is no Protestant church here,' exclaimed Glenmurray:
'however, we can go back to Lisbon, and you are already resolved to
return thither.' This point being settled, it was agreed that Glenmurray should prepare
Adeline for their visit; and with a lightened heart he went to execute
his commission. But when he saw Adeline he forgot his commission and
every thing but her distress; for he found her with an open letter in
her hand, and an unopened one on the floor, in a state of mind almost
bordering on phrensy. As soon as Adeline beheld Glenmurray, 'See!' she exclaimed in a
hoarse and agitated tone, 'there is my letter to my mother, returned
unopened, and here is a letter from Dr Norberry which has broken my
heart:--however, we must go to England directly.' The letter was as follows:--

     'You have made a pretty fool of me, deluded but still dear
     girl! for you have made me believe in forebodings. You may
     remember with what a full heart I bade you adieu, and I
     recollect what a devilish queer sensation I had when the
     park-gates closed on your fleet carriage. I almost swore at the
     postillions for driving so fast, as I wished to see you as long
     as I could; and now I protest that I believe I was actuated by
     a foreboding that at that house, and on that spot, I should
     never behold you again. (Here a tear had fallen on the paper,
     and the word, '_again_' was nearly blotted out.) Dear, lost
     Adeline, I prayed for you too! I prayed that you might return
     as innocent and happy as you left me. Heaven have mercy on us! who should have thought it?--But this is nothing to the
     purpose, and I suppose you think you have done nought but what
     is right and clever.' He then proceeded to inform Adeline, who had written to him to implore
his mediation between her and her mother, 'that the latter had sent
express for him on finding, by the hasty scrawl which came the day after
Adeline's departure from the farm-house, that she had eloped, and who
was the companion of her flight; that he found her in violent agitation,
as Sir Patrick, stung to madness at the success of his rival, had with
an ingenuousness worthy a better cause avowed to her his ardent passion
for her daughter, his resolution to follow the fugitives, and by every
means possible separate Adeline from her lover; and that, after having
thanked Lady O'Carrol for her great generosity to him, he had taken his
pistols, mounted his horse, attended by his groom also well armed, and
vowed that he would never return unless accompanied by the woman whom he
adored.' 'No wonder therefore,' continued the doctor, 'that I was an
     unsuccessful advocate for you,--especially as I was not
     inclined to manage the old bride's self-love; for I was so
     provoked at her folly in marrying the handsome profligate,
     that, if she had not been in distress, I never meant to see her
     again. But, poor silly you! she suffers enough for her folly,
     and so do you;--for, her affections and her self-love being
     equally wounded by Sir Patrick's confession, you are at present
     the object of her aversion. To you she attributes all the
     misery of having lost the man on whom she still dotes; and when
     she found from your last letter to me that you are not the wife
     but the mistress of Glenmurray, (by the bye, your letter to her
     from Lisbon she desires me to return unopened,) and that the
     child once her pride is become her disgrace, she declared her
     solemn resolution never to see you more, and to renounce you
     for ever--(Terrible words, Adeline, I tremble to write them.) But a circumstance has since occurred which gives me hopes that
     she may yet forgive, and receive you on certain conditions. About a fortnight after Sir Patrick's departure, a letter from
     Ireland, directed to him in a woman's hand, arrived at the
     Pavilion. Your mother opened it, and found it was from a wife
     of her amiable husband, whom he had left in the north of
     Ireland, and who, having heard of his second marriage, wrote to
     tell him that, unless he came quickly back to her, she would
     prosecute him for bigamy, as he knew very well that undoubted
     proofs of the marriage were in her possession. At first this
     new proof of her beautiful spouse's villany drove your mother
     almost to phrensy, and I was again sent for; but time,
     reflection, and perhaps my arguments, convinced her, that
     to be able to free herself from this rascal for ever, and
     consequently her fortune, losing only the ten thousand pounds
     which she had given him to pay his debts, was in reality a
     consoling circumstance. Accordingly, she wrote to the real Lady
     O'Carrol, promising to accede quietly to her claim, and wishing
     that she would spare her and herself the disgrace of a public
     trial; especially as it must end in the conviction of Sir
     Patrick. She then, on hearing from him that he had traced you
     to Falmouth, and was going to embark for Lisbon when the wind
     was favourable, enclosed him a copy of his wife's letter, and
     bade him an eternal farewell!--But be not alarmed lest this
     insane profligate should overtake and distress you. He is gone
     to his final account. In his hurry to get on board, overcome as
     he was with the great quantity of liquor which he had drunk to
     banish care, he sprung from the boat before it was near enough
     to reach the vessel; his foot slipped against the side, he fell
     into the water, and, going under the ship, never rose again. I
     leave you to imagine how the complicated distresses of the last
     three months, and this awful climax to them, have affected your
     mother's mind; even I cannot scold her, now, for the life of
     me: she is not yet, I believe, disposed in your favour; but
     were you here, and were you to meet, it is possible that,
     forlorn, lonely, and deserted as she now feels, the tie between
     you might be once more cemented; and much as I resent your
     conduct, you may depend on my exertions.--O Adeline, child of
     my affection, why must I blush to subscribe myself

                                     'Your sincere friend,
                                                         'J. N.?' Words cannot describe the feelings of anguish which this letter
excited in Adeline: nor could she make known her sensations otherwise
than by reiterated requests to be allowed to set off for England
directly--requests to which Glenmurray, alarmed for her intellects,
immediately assented. Therefore, leaving a hasty note for the Douglases,
they soon bade farewell to Perpignan; and after a long laborious
journey, but a short passage, they landed at Brighton. It was a fine evening; and numbers of the gay and fashionable of both
sexes were assembled on the beach, to see the passengers land. Adeline
and Glenmurray were amongst the first: and while heartsick, fatigued,
and melancholy, Adeline took the arm of her lover, and turned disgusted
from the brilliant groups before her, she saw, walking along the shore,
Dr Norberry, his wife, and his two daughters. Instantly, unmindful of every thing but the delight of seeing old
acquaintances, and of being able to gain some immediate tiding of her
mother, she ran up to them: and just as they turned round, she met
them, extending her hand in friendship as she was wont to do.--But in
vain;--no hand was stretched out to meet hers, nor tongue nor look
proclaimed a welcome to her; Dr Norberry himself coldly touched his hat,
and passed on, while his wife and daughters looked scornfully at her,
and, without deigning to notice her, pursued their walk. Astonished and confounded, Adeline had not power to articulate a word;
and had not Glenmurray caught her in his arms, she would have fallen to
the ground. 'Then now I am indeed an outcast! even my oldest and best friend
renounces me,' she exclaimed. 'But I am left to you,' cried Glenmurray. Adeline sighed. She could not say, as she had formerly done, 'and you
are all to me.' The image of her mother, happy as the wife of a man she
loved, could not long rival Glenmurray; but the image of her mother,
disgraced and wretched, awoke all the habitual but dormant tenderness of
years; every feeling of filial gratitude revived in all its force; and,
even while leaning on the shoulder of her lover, she sighed to be once
more clasped to the bosom of her mother. Glenmurray felt the change, but, though grieved, was not offended:--'I
shall die in peace,' he cried, 'if I can but see you restored to your
mother's affection, even though the surrender of my happiness is to be
the purchase.' 'You shall die in peace!' replied Adeline shuddering. The phrase was
well-timed, though perhaps undesignedly so. Adeline clung close to his
arm, her eyes filled with tears, and all the way to the inn she thought
only of Glenmurray with an apprehension which she could not conquer. 'What do you mean to do now?' said Glenmurray. 'Write to Dr Norberry. I think he will at least have humanity enough to
let me know where to find my mother.' 'No doubt; and you had better write directly.' Adeline took up her pen. A letter was written,--and as quickly torn. Letter succeeded to letter; but not one of them answered her wishes. The
dark hour arrived, and the letter remained unwritten. 'It is too soon to ring for candles,' said Glenmurray, putting his arm
round her waist and leading her to the window. The sun was below the
horizon, but the reflection of his beams still shone beautifully on the
surrounding objects. Adeline, reclining her cheek on Glenmurray's arm,
gazed in silence on the scene before her: when the door suddenly opened,
and a gentleman was announced. It was now so dark that all objects were
indistinctly seen, and the gentleman had advanced close to Adeline
before she knew him to be Dr Norberry: and before she could decide how
she should receive him, she felt herself clasped to his bosom with the
affection of a father. Surprised and affected, she could not speak; and Glenmurray had ordered
candles before Adeline had recovered herself sufficiently to say these
words, 'After your conduct on the beach, I little expected this visit.' 'Pshaw!' replied the doctor: 'when a man out of regard to society has
performed a painful task, surely he may be allowed, out of regard to
himself, to follow the dictates of his heart.--I obeyed my head when I
passed you so cavalierly, and I thought I should never have gone through
my task as I did;--but then for the sake of my daughters, I gave a gulp,
and called up a fierce look. But I told madam that I meant to call on
you, and she insisted, very properly, that it should be in the dark
hour.' 'But what of my mother?' 'She is a miserable woman, as she deserved to be--an old fool.' 'Pray do not call her so; to hear she is miserable is torment sufficient
to me:--where is she?' 'Still at the Pavilion: but she is going to let Rosevalley, retire to
her estate in Cumberland, and live unknown and unseen.' 'But will she not allow me to live with her?' 'What! as Mr Glenmurray's mistress? receive under her roof the seducer
of her daughter?'