Are these the words of a dependent, who has wronged his patron in his bed? If they were but innocent!---if they were!---I will go this moment to my wife! I left Gifford waiting for me in the public-house: I entirely forgot him. As I passed along, I endeavoured to collect my thoughts. I determined to exercise the utmost degree of subtlety and craft in exploring the truth. I found Mary
in her dressing-room. I said to her, Have you seen my shirt-pin?---I have lost one of my tan-coloured gloves.---I think it is a long time since we heard from Kenrick. The words seemed to stick in my throat, as I endeavoured to speak them. When I uttered the name of my kinsman, I fixed my eyes upon her countenance. I saw she
was much disordered. It is a long while. How long? It must be almost a month. You have not heard from him? Her lips formed themselves to say the word No. You have not seen him to-day? To-day?---How should I?---Is not he at his quarters at Beverley? I grasped her by the arm.---Did not you see him to-day, in the elm-walk, behind the alehouse of the Spotted Dog? Unhand me, sir!---Mr. Fleetwood, this is not the tone in which I am to be interrogated! Cunning witch! artful hypocrite!--- What matters it whether the questions are asked in polished words and a gallant tone? They must be answered!---How came
Kenrick in Berkshire? That is a question I am not at liberty to resolve. And, whatever may be the consequence to myself, I will not reply to it! Not at liberty to answer! And all the confusion you betrayed at the mention of his name, your prevarication, your circumlocution, the guilty stops in your
voice, these you disdain to account for! Fleetwood, you will repent this violence! Yesterday in the garden, for no cause whatever, you used me like a brute. Pooh, pooh!---Answer to the purpose, and leave these subterfuges!---When were you first acquainted with this wretch? How frequent were your interviews in
Merionethshire?---You are with child! Mary, fall upon your knees, and answer me, by the great God, who made heaven and earth, whose child is that in your
womb? Almighty God! and is it I, of whom such a question is asked?---Lightnings blast me! God, in thy mercy strike me dead!---Fleetwood, if I were to live to the
ages of eternity, never from this hour would I hold intercourse with you! I was moved at the earnestness, the dignity, that appeared in her rage.--- Mary, I intreat you; by every thing sacred, by all the endearments that have passed
between us, answer my questions,

and resolve my doubts! Oh, if you could but take away the horror that overwhelms my soul, worlds could not buy the happiness! I thought she hesitated for a moment. ---Fleetwood, it is too late! I have been an exemplary wife to you; from the hour of our marriage, I have studied your
happiness in every thing; my tenderness and forbearance have only served to render you more unjust. I am an altered woman since yesterday. And the man who
has
uttered against me such brutal reproaches as you have now done, is no husband of mine! Very well, madam, very well! I was a fool to ask you a single question. I had evidences enough before. But the despicable subterfuges to which you have now
resorted, one after another, are equal to a thousand witnesses. She cast up her eyes with wildness, yet with a concentred spirit.---My dear

father! my angel-mother! you are my only refuge! Come, and let your spirits rest upon my bosom! Come, and console your brutally-treated, unsheltered
daughter! This was the tenderest argument upon which she could have touched. It ought to have won my protection and forgiveness, even to an adultress. It struck upon a
wrong string. Bursting as I was with rage and agony, I could not bear any thing that was calculated to excite an opposite passion. It created confusion in my

mind; it made me half fear I was doing wrong: and to conquer this fear, I became ten times more furious and peremptory than ever. Be gone from my presence. For the last time, be gone!---Horrible wretch, do you think to disarm my justice by naming your parents! How dare you take their pure
and sacred name into your lips! She proceeded a few steps; she moved with all the pride of innocence.---She recollected herself, and turned again.--- Hear me, miserable, deluded Fleet wood, a
word! One expiring sentiment of nature stirred in my breast. In a dead, and scarcely audible voice I said, Speak! I have no wishes for myself. I scorn to defend my actions. You are nothing to me.---But Kenrick, poor Kenrick,--- it is my last request---do not let him suffer
for any misconstruction on my conduct!---You will soon be undecei---. At the name of Kenrick thus falling from her lips, my heart swelled as if it would have leaped from my bosom.--- Impudent harlot! Do you come back for
this?---Yes, I will fondle and caress him!---I wish I had him now writhing at my feet!---Kenrick!--- Ha, ha, ha! I burst out of the room. As I went, I met Gifford. I caught hold of his arm.---Lead me, lead me any whither from this hated house!---We passed along. We came
near the great road. A chaise (how it came there I knew not; I did not once think of so unimportant a question; I scarcely considered any thing I did) was
standing near a stile. We got into it. It proceeded toward Newbury. I will set out for the continent this night! Gifford expostulated with me on this sudden resolution. His objections were for the most part trivial and insignificant, when weighed with the terrible
situation in which I stood. Slight opposition, as

he well foresaw, only served to make me more determined. If he suggested any difficulty which seemed of more serious import, he took care himself to supply me
with the arguments that might invalidate it. We went across the country to Brighthelmstone, whence I immediately took passage for Dieppe. From the former of these places, I dispatched a letter to my
principal homme d'affaires , acquainting him with my intention of instantly proceeding for the continent, where I might perhaps remain for years, and
directing
him how to conduct himself with regard to the remittances to be forwarded to me. But the main purport of my letter was concerning my wife. I gave the most
peremptory orders, that she should not remain another night under my roof, that she should be suffered to take away with her nothing but what strictly
belonged
to her person,

and that she should, on no pretext whatever, receive a farthing out of the produce of my estate.---I delighted myself with the hope, that she would perish in
abject misery.---This letter was in the hand-writing of Gifford, and I annexed to it my signature.---From Dieppe I and my fellow-traveller proceeded to
Paris. It is impossible for words to express any thing so wretched, as the state of my mind during the whole of this journey. Sometimes I was turbulent and
ungovernable; I was little less than raving mad. At other times I was silent, and seemed wholly bereft of sensation. For days I did not utter a single word;
I
could scarcely be prevailed on to take an atom of sustenance. Sleep was wholly a stranger to my eyes; for fourteen days and nights neither I nor my companion

was aware that I slept for a moment. Nothing could be more exemplary than the attention I received

from Gifford during the whole of this period. He never left me; he never ceased from studying the means of restoring me; the meanest offices were not repulsive
to his kindness and zeal. I am certain that, in this extremity, I owed the preservation of my life to his care. Yet I did not thank him for all his assiduities. Life was the object of my hatred. Often did I meditate the means of self-destruction. Ten times did he prevent
the accomplishment of my purpose, by the indefatigable way in which he watched the turn of my eye, and the movement of my limbs, and by constantly removing
from me the instruments of death I had fixed upon. He talked to me in tones of the sweetest humanity. He contrived a thousand ingenious methods of diverting
me
from the griefs that absorbed my mind. Frequently I fell into paroxysms of rage

against him. I loaded him with every opprobrious term that frenzy could invent. I would not suffer him to sit down at table with me. I obliged him to squeeze
himself into the remotest corner of our travelling carriage, and raved with resentment and fury, if he happened to touch me. He bore all with unconquerable
patience.---At times I became sensible of his merit in this. I thanked him for his distasteful attentions, and begged his pardon for all my violence and
unreasonableness. I owned (and then a burst of tears gushed into my eyes) that I had no friend in the world but him, and intreated that he would never desert

me. He readily promised that he would stick to me for life. In the bitterness of my soul I imprecated the most horrible curses that imagination could devise, upon the memory of the excellent Macneil. But for him I
should have exhausted the miserable

dregs of my existence in quiet. I had fallen into a sort of lethargy compared with what I now felt, in which, if I was wretched and forlorn, habit had taught
me not to writhe under my misery. Every one of his advices had fallen out unhappily to me. He had recommended to me a wife, the society of my kindred, and
that
I should cherish the fond anticipation of offspring. Each of these pretended sources of happiness had proved a scorpion, stinging my before palsied senses
into
a capacity of the acutest torments.---Had Mary and Kenrick been really as guilty as I believed them to be, if they had seen the condition to which I was
reduced, they would have pitied me; and guilt itself would have generously wished to impart its privileges to my insupportable innocence. There was but one
man, who, whatever fair appearances he might put on, never pitied me for a moment. Every time a packet of letters reached me from England, strange as it may seem, I tore them open with furious impatience, in hope of finding one line from
Kenrick or Mary. I had built my conclusions upon such strong circumstances, that scarcely a husband in existence would have resisted their evidence. Yet a
sentiment still lingered in the corner of my heart, that whispered me at times the possibility of their innocence. I therefore suffered a continually renewed

anguish in the still repeated disappointments I experienced. In my frenzy I had written letters both to Mary and the adulterer, full of the sharpest
reproaches, curses, expostulations, stained with blots, and in every other respect expressive of the disorder of my mind. These Gifford, with apparent
propriety, confessed he had intercepted. When I had outlived the most terrible distemper of my mind, I

wrote to my wife a sedate, heart-breaking letter, in which I rebuked her conduct, described with what vehemence I had loved her, and informed her that I had
ordered my steward to supply to her one thousand pounds per annum in quarterly payments. Could any thing but self-convicted guilt have persisted in so
ill-boding a silence? Gifford hurried me from place to place, through France, Germany, and the north of Italy. He had acquired an ascendancy over me during my frenzy, which
afterward I could not easily shake off. I did not fully understand the reason of these frequent removals, but I regarded them with an eye of passiveness and

indifference. Gifford's general pretence was the benefit which my health would derive from travelling and change of air. At length the time came, when it was necessary that I should think of the law-proceedings, if they were to be

entered upon, for a divorce and the illegitimating my unborn child. Gifford often reminded me of these things, yet contrived to present the subject under such
faces, as could least suggest the idea of his being animated by any views of personal interest. I on my part willingly entertained the project. It well
suited
the gloomy conceptions in my mind, of the justice I was bound to execute upon my guilty wife; nor could I endure to think that the child of her polluted
embraces should inherit any part of my estate. I had also for some time cherished the plan of making my faithful and entire friend heir to the gross of my
fortunes, and this I could not do without thus cutting off the descent of my land. When every thing was ready, I requested Gifford to proceed to England for

the management of my cause. My presence was judged not to be indispensible, and I gladly excused

myself from the journey. We parted at Marseilles. There I met with an English lawyer of some eminence, with whom I advised on the subject; for I was peremptory
that I would not separate myself from this only friend I possessed, till I had executed an instrument, by which I should make him, to the utmost of my power,

in the event of my decease the successor to all my estates. Among other provisions of this my last will and testament, I stated that it was my intention, in

case, which I had every reason to expect, the proceedings now depending should terminate in rendering my marriage null, and declaring the child with which my

wife was great a bastard, that my kinsman and fellow-traveller should be deemed to be as fully and entirely the successor to my property, as if he had been
my
only son. Gifford seemed earnestly to oppose the execution of this testament. He represented such

a measure, particularly under the present uncertainty of my affairs, as in a high degree indecorous and premature. The more he resisted my pleasure in this
article, the more obstinately I became bent upon it. The will was drawn out in complete form; I delivered it into his hands, and insisted upon it, as he
valued
my future favour or peace, that he should never suffer it to go out of his possession. The proceedings upon my complaint were complicated and tedious. I know not whether my mode of existence during this suspense and desertion, does not deserve to
be styled more deplorable, than under all the agony and delirium of the first detection. My mind was then hurried with never-ceasing vehemence from thought
to
thought. Even when I appeared, to the eye of the bystander, bereft of all sensation, and was wholly without motion or notice to indicate

that there was a soul shut up within my corporal bulk, my brain was for every busy, and I might fitly be compared to an immense pile of mechanism, the
furniture of a dead and windowless structure, on surveying the walls of which you perceive no signs of activity, though a thousand cogs and ten thousand
wheels
are for ever working within. The distempered activity under which I then suffered, was now gone. I became jaundiced, body and soul. My blood loiteringly
crept
through palsied veins. I was like one of the metamorphoses of the Grecian fables, rooted to a spot, and cursed with the ineffective wish to move. How slowly

did the never-ending days and nights revolve over my head! How deep was the despair that embraced and struck its fangs into my soul! Hope, under no one of
the
varied forms in which she ever showed herself to mortal eye, came near me! My great constant

sensation was a sickness of heart, nauseating existence, and all that existence brings along with it. With vacant eye I observed every thing that moved around
me, and said, Would to God it were all still! What a relief would death, or the resolution to die, have been from this insupportable burthen! July came, and brought along with it the anniversary of my marriage. It was July too, that was to give birth to the child, to whom I had once looked forward
with raptures, on whom I now thought with sensations little less than infernal. I resolved to solemnise a strange and frantic festival on my wedding-day. I
wrote to Gifford to procure me by some means a complete suit of my wife's clothes, together with a lieutenant's uniform, made to pattern, according to the
mode
of the regiment to which Kenrick belonged. I assured him that my life depended upon the fulfilling my present demand. Ever faithful to gratify my slightest
request, he punctually sent me the articles I desired. I had in my

possession a miniature of my wife. I went to a celebrated modeller in wax, in the city of Florence where I now was, and caused him to make a likeness, as exact
as he could, of the size of life. I was myself not without some skill in modelling, and I directed and assisted him. For the wearer of the regimentals, I
fixed
upon a terrible and monstrous figure of a fiend, which I found in the magazine of my artist. I ordered a barrel-organ to be made for the same occasion. I
recollected the tunes which Mary and Kenrick had sung together when at Bath, and I caused my instrument to be made to play those tunes. I bought a cradle,
and
a chest of childbed linen. It is inconceivable what a tormenting pleasure I took in all these preparations. They employed me day after day, and week after
week. When at length the fifteenth of July came, I caused a supper of cold meats

to be prepared, and spread in an apartment of my hotel. All the materials which I had procured with so much care and expence, were shut up in the closets of
this apartment. I locked myself in, and drew them forth one after another. At each interval of the ceremony, I scated myself in a chair, my arms folded, my
eyes fixed, and gazed on the object before me in all the luxury of despair. When the whole was arranged, I returned to my seat, and continued there a long
time. I then had recourse to my organ, and played the different tunes it was formed to repeat. Never had madness in any age or country so voluptuous a
banquet. I have a very imperfect recollection of the conclusion of this scene. For a long time I was slow and deliberate in my operations. Suddenly my temper changed. While I was playing on my organ one of the tunes of Kenrick and Mary---

it was a duet of love, the mistress, in a languishing and tender style, charged her lover with indifference, the lover threw himself at her feet, and poured
out his soul in terms of adoration---my mind underwent a strange revolution. I no longer distinctly knew where I was, or could distinguish fiction from
reality. I looked wildly and with glassy eyes all round the room; I gazed at the figure of Mary; I thought, it was, and it was not, Mary. With mad and idle
action I put some provisions on her plate; I bowed to her in mockery, and invited her to eat. Then again I grew serious and vehement, I addressed her with
inward and convulsive accents in the language of reproach; I declaimed with uncommon flow of words upon her abandoned and infernal deceit; all the tropes
that
imagination ever supplied to the tongue of man seemed to be at my command. I know not whether this

speech was to be considered as earnest, or as the Sardonic and bitter jest of a maniac. But, while I was still speaking, I saw her move---if I live, I saw it. She turned her eyes this way and that; she grinned and chattered at me. I looked from her to the other figure; that grinned and chattered too. Instantly a
full
and proper madness seized me; I grinned and chattered in turn to the figures before me. It was not words that I heard or uttered; it was murmurs and hissings

and lowings and howls. I became furious. I dashed the organ into a thousand fragments. I rent the child-bed linen, and tore it with my teeth. I dragged the
clothes which Mary had worn, from off the figure that represented her, and rent them into long strips and shreds. I struck the figures vehemently with the
chairs and other furniture of the room, till they were broken to pieces. I threw at them in despite, the plates and

other brittle implements of the suppertable. I raved and roared with all the power of my voice. I must have made a noise like hell broke loose; but I had given
my valet a charge that I should not be intruded upon, and he, who was one of the tallest and strongest of men, and who ever executed his orders literally,
obstinately defended the door of my chamber against all inquisitiveness. At the time this behaviour of his I regarded as fidelity; it will be accounted for
hereafter. He was the tool of Gifford; he had orders that I should not be disturbed; it was hoped that this scene would be the conclusion of my existence. I
am
firmly persuaded that, in the last hour or two, I suffered tortures, not inferior to those which the North American savages inflict on their victims; and,
like
those victims, when the apparatus of torture was suspended, I sunk into immediate insensibility. In this state I

was found, with all the lights of the apartment extinguished, when at last the seemingly stupid exactness of my valet gave way to the impatience of others, and
they broke open the door. The ceremonies of this evening had a terrible effect upon me. For fifteen days I never left my bed. For the most part of the time I was really insane, but I
was too weak to break out into the paroxysms of insanity, and those about me were scarcely aware of the degree of my derangement. From the moment the
physicians were called in, they pronounced that it was impossible I should recover. I gradually wasted away, till I seemed to be arrived at the last gasp. They
were mistaken however; I was reserved for more sufferings, and for stranger adventures. A favourable crisis took place in my disease, and I became slowly and

tediously convalescent. Gifford wrote to me regularly during the whole period of his absence. I

always opened his letters with vehement emotion; a strange expectation still lingered about me that I should find the accused parties innocent. Nothing in
Gifford's communications encouraged this idea; the delays that the cause suffered appeared to be no more than is always incident to such prosecutions. He
wrote
me word that he had procured witnesses of the criminal conversation of my wife and her paramour in Merionethshire; he had even been so fortunate as to meet
with an evidence, to whom Mary had expressly confessed, that the child with which she was great, was the child of Kenrick. The lieutenant had quitted
England;
heavy damages were awarded against him in the court of King's Bench. A decree of divorce was obtained from the ecclesiastical judges. At length my
correspondent informed me, that an act of parliament, completing my objects, had gone through nearly all the forms, but the last; and he desired me to meet

him on a certain day at Paris, where he assured me he should arrive, bringing over with him the full and consummate fruit of his labours. I had already crossed
the Alps, and come as far as Montpelier for that purpose. Gifford had received but an imperfect information of the state of my health during the latter part of July. As soon as I became capable of reflection, I was
alarmed lest the accounts he received from my valet should have the effect of making him desert the business in which he was engaged, and come over instantly

to Florence to attend me. Gifford was in no danger to be misled by any such sentiments as I imputed to him. All the world could not have induced him to such
an
act. He had my testament in his possession; and the cause was by this time in such forwardness, that the news of my death could not arrive in time to suspend

the conclusion. Besides,

he had given the necessary directions for making my death, if it took place, a secret, till he should give the signal for its publication. I went at Florence
by a false name. Previously to his departure for England, he had watched over me with more anxiety, with more demonstrations of affection and concern, than a

mother over her first-born son. Now he did not care, if I died. He had punctually supplied me with all the particulars I required for the solemnity of the
fifteenth of July, in the hope of such a consequence as resulted, and that that consequence would have led to a more perfect termination. How perverse was the constitution of my mind! The act of parliament, dissolving my union with my wife, and disinheriting my only child, was an object I had
sought for with the greatest ardour. When Gifford and I parted at Marseilles, I thought the only chance I

had for ever enjoying a peaceful moment, rested in the success of his expedition. What could be more natural? Who would not wish, to be disjoined for ever from
a perfidious and abandoned consort, and to prevent all possibility that the offspring of her guilty amours should succeed to the inheritance of his
ancestors? Yet, as I have said before, it was Gifford that kept alive this object in my mind. When he had left me, my contemplation took a different turn. If I thought
of
Mary as guilty, still I remembered how I had loved her, I regarded her as a consecrated piece of earth, never to be violated by any irreverence or levity of

mine; if I beheld her covered with the deformities and leprosy of her fall, I did not fail also to recollect how white, and smooth, and rich in lustre, that

figure had once appeared to me. I never repeated her name in soliloquy, in my sober moments, without

that awe, and suspension of voice, with which a pious man speaks of his God. But I did not always think of her as guilty: I had visions of her restoration to
character and honour. These sentiments, and the feelings with which I was accustomed to open his letters, sometimes obtruded into my replies to Gifford, and

made him comprehend that I was not a man to be depended upon. In my earliest letters after the event of July, I spoke of my determination to see Mary once
again, and to extort from her own lips an explanation of her perfidy. It was the end of August. I was no longer subject to the transports of passion from which I had already suffered so much. My frame was feeble and languid. I
was wasted almost to a skeleton. My face was thin, and wan, and colourless. I seemed to be overtaken with a premature old age. My hair

was almost changed to grey. Yet, as I have said, I was convalescent. My eyes were brighter than they had been, and my countenance, though exceedingly pale, was
of a less leaden and death-like hue. It seemed probable that I was reserved for years more of existence. My constitution had been originally robust; I had
been
all my life accustomed to travelling and exercise; and these favourable circumstances now began to show on which side the victory would be, for life, or
death. I approached Paris. The day and hour had been fixed between Gifford and me, at which I should arrive. About six miles from the capital we had to pass through a
wood, celebrated for the robberies and murders that had been committed in it. I thought not of this, and paid little attention to any of the objects in the
road. As we entered the wood, my mind was absent and dreaming; I was like a man asleep, but my eyes were open. I was in my travelling chariot, with my valet

sitting beside me. Suddenly I heard a voice, which called to the carriage to stop. It stopped. Three men in masks came up to the door, opened it, and laid
violent hands upon

me. Mechanically I had had recourse to my pocket, and drawn out my purse, which I proffered to the assailants. They took no notice of this action, but
proceeded to endeavour to force me from the chariot. Alarmed at this, I struggled with the ruffians, and called out to my valet, and to my servants who were
in
sight, to assist me. No one assisted me; and, as I was dragged from my seat, I felt my valet give me a push from behind. In all the confusion and violence of

the scene, this action forcibly struck me. It gave a sort of convulsive shock to my mind, and made me view all that was passing in a very different light. Is

it one of the effects of wealth, that with it we enlist men into our service, to murder us? The feeling of my situation made me desperate, and I struggled
more
violently than my feeble condition could have given reason to expect. I wished for

my pistols; it was too late; they were left in the carriage. I saw that it was impossible to escape, and that I had but a few minutes to live. Two men who had hold of me, dragged me a considerable way from the chariot; a third staid with the carriage; my own servants remained behind. At the fatal
moment, four horsemen advanced at full speed in the opposite direction. As they came near, the assassin who had hold of me on the right side, presented his
pistol at my head. It missed fire. Goaded with desperation, he struck me a furious blow with the butt end of it just above the ear, which brought me
senseless
to the ground. Instantly the ruffians left me, and ran as fast as they could. One of the horsemen remained with me; the other three pursued the fugitives. The
assassins endeavoured to make their way into the thickets: one of them was shot dead

by the pursuers; the other two escaped. The horseman who had remained to take care of me, had endeavoured to raise me from the ground; the others now assisted him, and conveyed me to my chariot. I
was stunned with the blow I had received, and continued speechless. My conductors therefore did not convey me to the hotel in Paris where I was to have met
Gifford, but to another of their own choosing. They put me to bed, and sent for an eminent surgeon, who took from me a considerable quantity of blood, and
then
left me, with directions that I should be kept as quiet as possible. In the course of the night I perfectly recovered my recollection. I saw myself in a strange chamber, with a taper glimmering in the chimney, and an old woman
sitting at some distance from the bed, to watch by me. I said, Where is

my friend, my only friend,---where is he? Who, sir? Mr. Gifford. I never heard of him. Where is my valet? I do not know. You are a stranger to me. In what place am I? Whose are these apartments? I am ordered not to answer questions. You are in very good hands. Keep yourself quiet. Suspend your curiosity till the morning. Here our dialogue ended. After a minute's silence, I heard the door of my chamber softly open; the nurse went toward it, and she and the man who opened it,
spoke two or three times alternately. What was said was uttered in a whisper; yet I thought the voice of the unseen was like some voice with which my ear was

acquainted. I could

not solve the mystery. The door was then shut again with equal caution. I obeyed the injunction of the nurse, and was silent. The woman who had watched in my chamber during the night, was French. In the morning, when the surgeons attended me, a second female of menial rank entered the
apartment. There was something about her, that caught my attention, and made me inquisitive. I was sure I had seen her before, and that feelings of warmth
and
interest had been connected with her person in my mind. This was my first impression. After a few minutes of doubt and perplexity, I perceived who it was. It

was Martha, the wife of William, the Merionethshire peasant, whose life I had contributed to save, while yet a boy with my father. Bless me, Martha, said I,
is
it you? When the surgeons had finished their visit, she was going out

of the room with them. I said softly, I want to speak with you. She promised to return, and was not long in keeping her word. My dear master, said she, the doctors say you are better, and have given me leave to speak to you, so it be only for five minutes. I did not understand their
jabber, but my master's gentleman told me that was the meaning of it. Who is your master? How came you in France? Ah, sir! that is a long story. You shall know all by and by. Whose apartments are these? They are not the same I tenanted before. They are mr. Scarborough's. Of Berkshire? Yes, sir. How came I here? Where is mr. Gifford?