So saying, she very politely spit on the carpet, and shrugged her shoulders: "Mais, tenez,
mademoiselle, de porter has shew him into de littell anti-room next to de salle � manger;
dare you vill find him." Mademoiselle then, who was completely equipped in a most elegant and
voluptuous morning costume, hastily descended; and Margaret, with a fluttering heart,
trembling lest Sir Charles had been imprudent enough to have hazarded the sending her a
letter by some precarious hand, was some moments in that agitation, which prevented her
from immediately descending; but summoning all her resolution, she judged how very
imprudent it was in her to delay, and how much it behoved her to hasten and snatch from
the herald of her admirer the love-breathing epistle before any questions might be asked,
or perhaps the amourous effusions of her devoted knight be perused by another. As she passed the door of Mrs. Davenport's dressing-room, which stood open, she
beheld, to her amazement, Mademoiselle Minette on the staircase, clasped in the arms of
Mr. Davenport, who was giving her several fervent kisses, while she impudently threw
her arms round his neck, saying, "Dare, monsieur, dat is de last, madame is vaiting for
me." "Shocked at what she had seen and heard, Margaret yet trembled for the repose of
her benefactress, and gently approached her door in order to close it, and while in the
good-natured act, Mrs. Davenport screamed out, "Merciful heaven! who is shutting my
room-door? I am almost dying with the unusual heat of the weather!" then advancing


forward, she added, with the most quiet sang-froid,* "Come, Davenport, when you can
spare Minette, do send her to me; I am going to Ackermann's this morning to choose
some dressing-boxes and a few ornaments, and I want her attendance." "Upon my word, Emily," replied he, "I never saw Minette look so pretty in my
life." He then laughed, gave her another kiss; and the astonished Margaret could not
avoid feeling disgust at this licentious accommodation of modern manners, which was
carried to that unfeeling excess by Mr. and Mrs. Davenport, as had not only been
unwitnessed by herself, but by every one else; and was unparalleled in all the annals of
fashion. A greater surprise, however, succeeded, and of a very different kind, when she
beheld in the porter's anti-room, wiping his face from profuse perspiration, Phelim
O'Gurphy! To see at this moment the son of one of the kings of Ireland filled her bosom with
self-reproach and violent agitations; she felt that it was now utterly impossible for her
ever again to have the least regard for him, for all her fondest affections centered in Sir
Charles Sefton: no, Phelim could no longer make any impression on her heart, even if he
had then laid a crown and sceptre at her feet. She fervently wished for his immediate
departure, and broke silence by speedily asking after the health of her father and sister. "Och, and they are all well," said Phelim, "and there's my young mistress
Harrington, to be sure, and hasn't she a deal of business now? She has masters out of
number-just as many as three of them, for music, singing, and dancing: and then there's
Sir Edward Harrington teaching her to spake a new kind of language." "What, is it
German?" said Margaret; "Och! miss, mayhap it may be, I don't know; only I am sure it
is not Irish, for och gramachree, it is not half so sweet by a third part." "But have you no letters for me?" asked Margaret. "Och! and by the powers but I
have, miss: be so good as to read that direction, miss, whether that letter is for you or the
lady of the house?" Margaret was astonished that this scion of royalty knew not how to read; but
imagining it was only pretension, from fear of a discovery, and that he was over-acting
his part, she said, "Oh! Phelim, why this disguise? it is all in vain--"
"Och! by the holy St. Patrick, miss, and there is no disguise at all, at all: why, I
saw my master direct the letter himself, with his own hand and pen." One of the letters was directed to Mrs. Davenport; and Margaret immediately
hastened with it, upstairs, to that lady's dressing-room, and then retired to peruse her
own. She found therein, that in about a fortnight her father purposed visiting town, with
letters of recommendation from Sir Edward Harrington to the Chancellor, requesting his
favour and patronage to a most worthy divine, and that he would bestow on him one of
those valuable livings which were in his immediate gift. She perceived a kind of
depression of spirits ran through every line of this letter, and that he appeared by no
means elevated with the fair prospects which awaited him. He wrote her word also that
her uncle Charles had been amongst the sick at Flushing, but was speedily recovering,
and expected shortly to arrive in England. She shed a few bitter tears; she dreaded the
arrival of this uncle; she had acted that culpable part which she knew, if discovered, he



would never forgive; for oh! the silly and romantic Margaret Marsham had suffered
herself to be dishonoured by a treacherous and abandoned libertine! Though her betrayer had triumphed over her innocence and credulity, yet she was
not an adept in art; vice was a stranger to her, and she was never likely, with all her
failings, to become depraved: though her eyes were not yet open to the absurdity of the
opinions she had imbibed from her dangerous readings, yet, after this, her fatal error, her
sentiments became more refined, her way of thinking more just, and even her heart might
be said to be better. Sir Charles had triumphed over all her scruples, had taught her to
consider her connection with him as virtuous: as yet she had perceived no change in his
affections; and Sir Charles had really wondered at himself that she pleased him so long:
but there was a novelty in the amour; their interviews were short and stolen, and a kind of
mystery attached to the intrigue which rendered it out of the common way, and gave a
zest and a variety to his amorous pursuits. He told her how requisite it was, at present, from the eyes of a prying world
(which he rejoiced to find was daily getting more liberal and enlightened), to conceal
their present state of happiness, and confine it to their own bosoms: the consciousness of
her deceitful conduct, an innate sense of the principles of female honour, which she knew
she had violated, now made her heart sink with shame, and the big tear of unavailing
repentance and regret dropped from her eye. Mrs. Davenport's bell rang, and roused her to rally and recover her spirits;
Margaret was summoned into her presence. "I have here a letter from your father,
Margaritta," said she; "in a fortnight I expect he will be in town." "So he writes me word,
madam," said Margaret. "Well, my dear," said Mrs. Davenport, with her accustomed
good-nature, "will you have the goodness to answer this letter for me; make every
apology on my part, but tell him I am obliged to go out, or I would certainly have done
myself the honour of answering it myself; but be sure you tell him that I entreat, as does
Mr. Davenport also, that he will make our house his home during his stay in town: and
while you write your letter, pray see that the young man who brought these has whatever
refreshment he may wish, and that the larder and cellar can afford: I love your father,
Margaritta, and oh! how dearly, in my girlish days, did I love your dear mother!" Here a
sigh of regret stole also from the bosom of Mrs. Davenport at the recollection of her days
of innocence, for which fashion, that approximate goddess of vice, had made her so little
amends by the change; but hurrying reflection from her mind, as a painful intruder, she
dashed off, in all the morning elegance of modern taste, in her new carriage to the
Repository of Arts and Fashion. A momentary gleam of comfort, when she saw her depart with smiles beaming
upon her, quieted the mind and conscience of Margaret, and she hastened to write her
letter to her father; but as she again descended to desire Phelim to avail himself of Mrs.
Davenport's kind hospitality, she beheld the royal Phelim and a stout Hibernian, who was
one of the supporters of Mrs. Davenport's sedan, in a firm embrace; both crying, or
almost howling, and speaking together in a language she could not understand; but she
was sure it was neither Italian nor German, though no doubt much sweeter to the ears of
the present speakers, being the ancient language of dear little Ireland! This brawny son of Erin, whom Phelim now embraced, was coarseness and
vulgarity personified; and the very sight of him had often disgusted the romantic fair-one,
who now looked with wonder on the scene before her. But now she was soon convinced of all the native low breeding of Phelim, and
that he was no royal or noble lover in disguise; for turning to her, he exclaimed, while a
broad grin embellished the countenance of his companion, as he wiped away the tears
with his sleeve, "Och! Miss Margaret, and I am sure now, you are so kind-hearted, that
you will be glad to hear that, who should this be but my own cousin, who I thought had
been drowned in the Dublin packet, as he came over to hay-making, when he arrived here
about two summers ago: och! and you did not do well not to let me know whether you
was dead or alive! Well, what a blessed day is this! for just stop a little, now, miss, and be
after listening to me a bit: a young girl named Jenny O'Dunnahough, sells milk here to
my lady's house, and do you know that she promised to marry me when I first saw her at
the time I went with my poor mother to Dublin: och! what a little bit of a thing was Jenny
then! I think I see her padding barefoot after her mother, along Fish-amble-street; och! Paddy Gallacher, did not her mother sell the best Dublin bays* in the whole city?" "By
J--s and she did," replied the chairman; "but make yourself aisy, honey, and I'll
warrant you Jenny will be glad enough to keep her word; she did not come here with the
soldiers for nothing; one of the guards got her to milk the cows in the park; and now she
makes a pretty penny, let me tell you, by selling milk about, and puts as much water in it
as any girl in London." Phelim did not much like the remembrance of Jenny O'Dunnahough having
followed the soldiers from Dublin, and was glad to wave the subject, by accepting the
repeated offer of Margaret to refresh himself; and repairing to Mr. Davenport's plentiful
kitchen, made himself ample amends for the fatigues of his journey. Poor Margaret found great relief in the task Mrs. Davenport had set her, of
answering her father's letter which he had addressed to that lady; she would otherwise
have been much at a loss for expressions to lengthen her own. The sun of innocence had
set never to rise again; and her now overstrained terms of filial affection, though regarded
by her parent as proceeding from that romantic enthusiasm she had ever evinced, were yet
very different from those which formerly filled her letters: for heaven, when it formed the
hearts of the Marshams, filled them with the fondest natural affections for the ties of
blood and kindred, which nothing could eradicate, nor indeed obscure. But Margaret knew, in spite of all Sir Charles Sefton's sophistry, that she had
acted wrong; she rejoiced when she saw Phelim, half intoxicated, depart with the letters;
and hastening to her dressing-room, she indulged her sorrow and inward anguish in a
copious flood of tears. Sir Charles Sefton, however, soon restored comfort to her mind,
who finding out by his spies that Mr. and Mrs. Davenport were from home, was ushered,
for a golden bribe, by the convenient Minette into the apartment of Miss Marsham. Sir Charles certainly felt some degree of tenderness for one who, though nature
had been led astray by the delusions of imagination, was yet a child of nature; artifice and
deceit were by no means the native inhabitants of her breast, they were as foreign to her
heart as it was repellant to them. * A name given by the common people in Ireland to the herrings caught in Dublin-bay. He did not now perceive her red and swoln eyes without an emotion of pity and
concern; and from his kind soothings and ardent protestations of unchanging affection, he
soon restored her to that state of happiness which she thought it impossible ever again to
feel, after the mental anguish she had experienced in the morning. "Oh!" thought she, "he
often told me, and he told me true, that his love for me would increase each day by
possession: I am the happiest of my sex! and, ah! how delightful is a connexion like ours,
how superior to the cold restraints of formal marriage!" Sir Charles had stayed with Margaret till he heard the clock strike five; he was yet
in his morning dress; and the hair of Margaret was still en papillotes. The Leslies were
expected in the evening, and the family were to dine at half past five; Margaret had not
seen them at Mrs. Davenport's rout, being confined to her room by a cold, and she
reckoned much on seeing Lady Caroline that evening, when she hoped to hear something
of Lady Isabella, her sister, whom she had ever loved, and to whose principles she had too
fondly listened and adhered;-yet though it took her more than half an hour always to
adorn herself, for it was now but very seldom that she could get any one to assist her, yet
she could not forbear intreating the baronet to stay a little longer: but soon the thundering
peal at the knocker of Mrs. Davenport's door convinced the lovers it was time to separate;
and put Sir Charles at his wit's end to frame an excuse for being caught there in his
morning dishabille at so late an hour: he, however, endeavoured to dart to the drawingroom,
but not time enough to prevent his meeting Mrs. Davenport, as he descended the
last stair which led from Miss Marsham's apartment. "Pray, Sir Charles," said Mrs. Davenport, while her face flushed with passion,
"what am I to understand by this? Have you an intrigue with my chambermaid, or any one
else, upstairs? for as to Miss Marsham, you have often told me she was too ugly for any
man to think about her, so I suppose it is not that lady you have just been visiting." Sir Charles stood before the lady, whom he had often declared the sole divinity to
whom he paid adoration, in deep confusion: the edge of his beaver was applied to his lips,
and helped to shade a part of his face, the natural yellow tinge of which was suffused by a
kind of orange-coloured red, which imparted that shame to the speaking eyes he
possessed from nature, that Mrs. Davenport was now convinced, as she, with the
quickness of thought and recollection, revolved over with rapidity several concurring
circumstances, which served to prove to her that Sir Charles had a nymph in her house
which was much dearer to him than herself, whom he had frequently styled his matchless
Calypso. She, therefore, rang the bell with violence, and ordered a servant to let Miss
Marsham be informed that she wanted her instantly in the drawing-room, and that she
must descend, dressed or undressed. "I must beg then to take my leave," said the wily baronet, "as the lady may
perchance be the latter; oh! thou medicean goddess, if it was thee in such a guise, I would
stay with all the temerity love inspires, though all the artillery of earth and heaven were
pointed against me." "Hold! hold! Sir Charles," said Mrs. Davenport, with a scornful sneer, "explain
this morning visit to my satisfaction, and then--" "Why," interrupted Sir Charles, "I
called to ask Davenport how he did; the girl was in the parlour, and-" "What girl?" said
Mrs. Davenport. "Why-why, Miss Marsham," stammered out the baronet; "and she
teazed me to go and look at her tasteful dressing-room, as I had once promised her: it was


late, to be sure, when I came-but I do not think I have spoken five words to her; I was
reading the Morning Post almost all the time. What do you think of the brutes* at Covent-
Garden Theatre opposing Jack Kemble and the divine Catalani?" "That is nothing to the purpose, Sir Charles," said Mrs. Davenport; and
immediately poor Margaret entered, with her hair just combed out, and a dressing-jacket
on: she would fain have retreated at sight of Sir Charles, but Mrs. Davenport immediately
stopped her, and said, "Why you were not in the parlour, I think, when Sir Charles came,
were you?" "No, madam." "Very well," said Mrs. Davenport, darting an angry look at Sir
Charles, between whom and Margaret she had so placed herself as to prevent any
intelligent looks. "Go, Margaritta, and fetch me the Morning Post out of your room." "Madam, if you recollect, you took it out with you on account of an advertisement about
some laces that were to be sold." "Oh! yes, here it is," said Mrs. Davenport, taking it from
her ridicule; "and now, sir, you may read about the brutes at Covent-Garden, while I and
this young lady go to dress ourselves, as we dine to-day before six: Margaritta, take care
of this gentleman, he has more art than you, my poor girl." Mrs. Davenport had no idea that the baronet and Margaret were carrying on their
intrigue under her roof, or that she had been so long the object of his intended seduction;
but yet she saw she had every reason, with all her superior beauty and peculiar loveliness,
to be jealous of a girl whose person would never have been noticed in her presence,
unless to make comparisons very much to the disadvantage of Margaret: yet Mrs.
Davenport had penetration enough to see, and knowledge of the fashionable world
enough to know that variety, in almost any form, is pleasing to the depraved libertine; and
that the uncontaminated youth of Margaret, and the simplicity of her character might
render her a formidable rival: she would not, however, even to her highly-favoured
Minette, impart her ideas that such an object as Miss Marsham could inspire her with
jealousy; but she was resolved to watch all her movements herself, and put some scheme
in execution to get rid of such an inmate, whom she now heartily repented having taken
under her protection. About ten the Leslies arrived: Mr. Leslie thought Margaret much improved in her
person, and expatiated upon the change in many fashionable compliments. Mr. Davenport
just looked off his cards with that kind of expression in his countenance which seemed to
say, Good Heavens! what must she have been then? while Lady Caroline, when at supper,
happening to sit near her, and having been uncommonly in luck at the card-table, was in
high good humour, and addressed her with, "Why, Miss Marsham, you really look
divinely! I am sure, Theodore," added she, turning towards her husband, "Miss
Marsham's late lover, Sir Charles Sefton, must now be completely captivated: I never
saw such an alteration in my life for the better in any young person." The agitation of Mrs. Davenport, at discovering that Sir Charles had so long been
an admirer of Margaret's, almost caused that lady an hysteric fit, had she not flattered
herself that she perceived in her Ladyship's manner a great deal of the fashionable hoax. * Historique. * Historique. * Historique. * Historique. * Historique. "Pray, my Lady," said Margaret, smiling (for she did not now dread to smile when
she spoke, having had her broken teeth replaced by a skilful dentist, at the earnest
entreaties of Sir Charles), "permit me to ask you if you have heard lately from your
charming sister, Lady Isabella Raymond?" "Oh! we very seldom hear from her," replied
her ladyship, "but we often hear of her: Isabel had always an independent spirit; and
wherever she goes, and whatever she does, she will always be a pattern of fashionable
notoriety: your brother-in-law, Harrington, is now her favoured swain." "Indeed!" said
Margaret. "Aye," said the rector, "Isabel must take care of herself; for if she is guilty of
any indiscretion, all the world will be acquainted with it, from her known celebrity." "I
dare answer for my sister," said Lady Caroline, "for I am sure she would never live with
loss of reputation." "Why, no," said Mr. Leslie, "she holds it as a constant maxim, that our life is
always at our own disposal; and Isabella does not damp the joy of the present hour by any
idle notions concerning futurity; which, by the bye, we none of us know any thing about. Come, Davenport, pledge me in a bumper of Madeira, to the delights of our present
existence." "Encore! Bravo!" said Davenport, tossing off two bumpers, one after the
other. Lady Caroline laughed, and joined in the gay unthinking toast, saying, "Come,
ladies, follow my example." Mrs. Davenport forced a smile; for even Mrs. Davenport,
with all her fashionable folly, with all the coldness of her moral character, knew how
dearly to estimate the principles of the pious curate, Marsham, before those of his
dissipated rector. "I know," said Lady Caroline, with an arch look, "Miss Marsham will not drink
this toast, for she looks forward to the happy future moments, not of heavenly bliss, but
the earthly joy of being Lady Sefton!" Oh! no, indeed," said Margaret, again smiling; for
though she would have liked the title, Sir Charles had succeeded in making her dislike the
married state; and reflecting on her brother-in-law being now the declared admirer of
another lady than his wife, and contrasting with such a wedded state her own present
happiness, she cheerfully joined in the toast. "Well, I never did see any one so wonderfully improved," said Lady Caroline,
looking quizzically at Margaret's mouth; but Mrs. Davenport, who had also many of her
toilette-mysteries, which she wished to conceal, said, "Dear Lady Caroline, I see nothing
extraordinary, that so very young a girl as Miss Marsham should improve in her outward
appearance; think of the advantages she derives from seeing nothing but fashionable life;
and the care that is taken of her person, which is never thought of in the country." Lady Caroline, who owed very little of her beauty to the auxiliaries of art, replied,
as she glanced her meaning eyes at the fine red and white of Mrs. Davenport's
complexion; "Undoubtedly you are in the right; numerous are the aids in London to set
off the person; which, though they may have found their way into the country amongst a
few who are past the bloom of life, are scarcely ever practised there by young ladies, till
the town air, and continual dissipation, render it indispensable!" The wit of the ladies began now to border on satiric invective: the gentlemen had
taken wine sufficient to be captious, but not enough to be pleased with any thing and
every thing. Lady Caroline's servants, and those of other gay visitants, were called;-
amongst this partie en famille, were Mrs. Benworth and her daughter; the latter, who had
not spoken three words the whole evening, made herself amends for her silence as she


went home, expatiating on the false teeth of Miss Marsham, and how easily they might be
known from those that were natural. The varnished face of Mrs. Davenport, and her
pencilled eye-brows; with the pains she took to shew her real fine teeth, and the dimple in
her cheek, which Mrs. Davenport was continually flattered about, and which she herself
thought so bewitching, but which she, Miss Benworth, looked upon as a vile defect: Lady
Caroline Leslie was certainly pretty, if she was not so pale; she wondered she did not use
a little rouge, as it would certainly set off her eyes, which, though fine, looked rather
languid and hollow. These and other similar remarks amused the mother and daughter in
their short ride to Berkeley Square, from the morning hour of three (the time they left Mr.
Davenport's house), till a few minutes after, when they arrived at their own mansion. --------------Ye fair,
Be wisely cautious of your sliding hearts;
Dare not th' infectious sigh, the silent look,
Down-cast and low, in meek submission dress'd,
But full of guile: let not the fervent tongue,
Prompt to deceive, with adulation smooth,
Gain on your purpos'd will: nor in the bow'r,
Where woodbines flaunt and roses spread a couch,
When evening draws her crimson'd curtains round,
Trust your soft minutes with betraying man. THOMSON. THE study of politics affording so little comfort to the mind of Mr. Marsham; and
being no ways interested in the opposition of the public against the raised prices at the
new theatre of Covent-Garden, with which accounts the papers were filled, although he
certainly rejoiced at the systematic loyalty of the populace, as much as he detested the
factious mob which succeeded after the sitting of the committee: he left his daughter one
morning wholly occupied with her worthy uncle, who was attending to the progress of her
improvements, and repaired to the library: he there, turning over some of the books,
without settling to the study of any one in particular, found a collection of valuable notes
in manuscript, by the late Miss Seward, which Mr. Harrington had purchased at a great
price at the sale of that celebrated lady's effects after her decease: the hand-writing was
somewhat similar, and brought to his recollection that of the packet his nephew had given
him the last time he called at the farm; for Mr. Matthew Marsham had taken a journey
into Suffolk soon after, and had not yet returned. Edward had laid the paper in his bureau, and had forgotten it till the present
moment; he therefore closed the volume in his hand, and retiring to his chamber, he
opened the packet and read as follows:
"To my beloved child Matthew Marsham,
to be perused by him when he
shall have attained his four-and-twentieth
year. "As the hand of sickness is now extended over my shattered frame, and unavailing
and bitter regret for past errors lacerates my bleeding heart, and threatens my prime of
life, with rapid and premature decay, I look forward in imagination to those years which
you, an healthy promising child, will doubtless, with the blessing and protection of the
Almighty, attain unto. When you open this paper, my beloved son, you will have attained
your twenty-fourth year; and when you arrive at that period, your unfortunate mother will


have long descended to the "narrow house" appointed to us all. But that period was to me
the happiest I knew, since the fault that plunged me into sorrow, my family into disgrace,
yet made me the happy mother of a child, who, though so very young in years, seems rich
in sense and every moral virtue. "At this area of my life, after seven years unremitting and implacable anger from
my sole surviving parent-a father! I received, with a summons to my long-forbidden
home, his last blessing and forgiveness; till then, after my fatal crime, committed at the
inexperienced and thoughtless age of seventeen, his doors had been shut against me, and
all the ardent pleadings of a tried and valued friend were in vain. Oh! my son, had it not
been for that friend, thy mother would have never lived to have brought thee forth!