All the forenoon, as the wives that went to the
meal-market, came back railing with toom pocks and basins, it might have
been foretold that the farmers would have to abate their extortion, or
that something would come o't before night. My new house and shop being
forenent the market, I had noted this, and said to Mrs Pawkie, my wife,
what I thought would be the upshot, especially when, towards the
afternoon, I observed the commonality gathering in the market-place, and
no sparing in their tongues to the farmers; so, upon her advice, I
directed Thomas Snakers to put on the shutters. Some of the farmers were loading their carts to go home, when the schools
skailed, and all the weans came shouting to the market. Still nothing
happened, till tinkler Jean, a randy that had been with the army at the
siege of Gibraltar, and, for aught I ken, in the Americas, if no in the
Indies likewise;--she came with her meal-basin in her hand, swearing,
like a trooper, that if she didna get it filled with meal at
fifteen-pence a peck, (the farmers demanded sixteen), she would have the
fu' o't of their heart's blood; and the mob of thoughtless weans and idle
fellows, with shouts and yells, encouraged Jean, and egged her on to a
catastrophe. The corruption of the farmers was thus raised, and a young
rash lad, the son of James Dyke o' the Mount, whom Jean was blackguarding
at a dreadful rate, and upbraiding on account of some ploy he had had
with the Dalmailing session anent a bairn, in an unguarded moment lifted
his hand, and shook his neive in Jean's face, and even, as she said,
struck her. He himself swore an affidavit that he gave her only a ding
out of his way; but be this as it may, at him rushed Jean with open
mouth, and broke her timbermeal-basin on his head, as it had been an egg-
shell. Heaven only knows what next ensued; but in a jiffy the whole
market-place was as white with scattered meal as if it had been covered
with snow, and the farmers were seen flying helter skelter out at the
townhead, pursued by the mob, in a hail and whirlwind of stones and
glaur. Then the drums were heard beating to arms, and the soldiers were
seen flying to their rendezvous. I stood composedly at the dining-room
window, and was very thankful that I wasna provost in such a hurricane,
when I saw poor Mr Keg, as pale as a dish clout, running to and fro
bareheaded, with the town-officers and their halberts at his heels,
exhorting and crying till he was as hoarse as a crow, to the angry
multitude, that was raging and tossing like a sea in the market-place. Then it was that he felt the consequence of his pridefulness towards me;
for, observing me standing in serenity at the window, he came, and in a
vehement manner cried to me for the love of heaven to come to his
assistance, and pacify the people. It would not have been proper in me
to have refused; so out I went in the very nick of time: for when I got
to the door, there was the soldiers in battle array, coming marching with
fife and drum up the gait with Major Blaze at their head, red and furious
in the face, and bent on some bloody business. The first thing I did was
to run to the major, just as he was facing the men for a "charge
bagonets" on the people, crying to him to halt; for the riot act wasna
yet read, and the murder of all that might be slain would lie at his
door; at which to hear he stood aghast, and the men halted. Then I flew
back to the provost, and I cried to him, "Read the riot act!" which some
of the mob hearing, became terrified thereat, none knowing the penalties
or consequences thereof, when backed by soldiers; and in a moment, as if
they had seen the glimpse of a terrible spirit in the air, the whole
multitude dropped the dirt and stones out of their hands, and, turning
their backs, flew into doors and closes, and were skailed before we knew
where we were. It is not to be told the laud and admiration that I got
for my ability in this business; for the major was so well pleased to
have been saved from a battle, that, at my suggestion, he wrote an
account of the whole business to the commander-in-chief, assuring him
that, but for me, and my great weight and authority in the town, nobody
could tell what the issue might have been; so that the Lord Advocate, to
whom the report was shown by the general, wrote me a letter of thanks in
the name of the government; and I, although not provost, was thus seen
and believed to be a person of the foremost note and consideration in the
town. But although the mob was dispersed, as I have related, the consequences
did not end there; for, the week following, none of the farmers brought
in their victual; and there was a great lamentation and moaning in the
market-place when, on the Friday, not a single cart from the country was
to be seen, but only Simon Laidlaw's, with his timber caps and luggies;
and the talk was, that meal would be half-a-crown the peck. The grief,
however, of the business wasna visible till the Saturday--the wonted day
for the poor to seek their meat--when the swarm of beggars that came
forth was a sight truly calamitous. Many a decent auld woman that had
patiently eiked out the slender thread of a weary life with her wheel, in
privacy, her scant and want known only to her Maker, was seen going from
door to door with the salt tear in her e'e, and looking in the face of
the pitiful, being as yet unacquainted with the language of beggary; but
the worst sight of all was two bonny bairns, dressed in their best, of a
genteel demeanour, going from house to house like the hungry babes in the
wood: nobody kent who they were, nor whar they came from; but as I was
seeing them served myself at our door, I spoke to them, and they told me
that their mother was lying sick and ill at home. They were the orphans
of a broken merchant from Glasgow, and, with their mother, had come out
to our town the week before, without knowing where else to seek their
meat. Mrs Pawkie, who was a tender-hearted mother herself, took in the bairns
on hearing this, and we made of them, and the same night, among our
acquaintance, we got a small sum raised to assist their mother, who
proved a very well-bred and respectable lady-like creature. When she got
better, she was persuaded to take up a school, which she kept for some
years, with credit to herself and benefit to the community, till she got
a legacy left her by a brother that died in India, the which, being some
thousands, caused her to remove into Edinburgh, for the better education
of her own children; and its seldom that legacies are so well bestowed,
for she never forgot Mrs Pawkie's kindness, and out of the fore-end of
her wealth she sent her a very handsome present. Divers matters of
elegance have come to us from her, year by year, since syne, and
regularly on the anniversary day of that sore Saturday, as the Saturday
following the meal mob was ever after called. I have had occasion to observe in the course of my experience, that there
is not a greater mollifier of the temper and nature of man than a
constant flowing in of success and prosperity. From the time that I had
been dean of guild, I was sensible of a considerable increase of my
worldly means and substance; and although Bailie M'Lucre played me a
soople trick at the election, by the inordinate sale and roup of his
potatoe-rig, the which tried me, as I do confess, and nettled me with
disappointment; yet things, in other respects, went so well with me that,
about the eighty-eight, I began to put forth my hand again into public
affairs, endowed both with more vigour and activity than it was in the
first period of my magisterial functions. Indeed, it may be here proper
for me to narrate, that my retiring into the background during the last
two or three years, was a thing, as I have said, done on mature
deliberation; partly, in order that the weight of my talents might be
rightly estimated; and partly, that men might, of their own reflections,
come to a proper understanding concerning them. I did not secede from
the council. Could I have done that with propriety, I would assuredly
not have scrupled to make the sacrifice; but I knew well that, if I was
to resign, it would not be easy afterwards to get myself again chosen in. In a word, I was persuaded that I had, at times, carried things a little
too highly, and that I had the adversary of a rebellious feeling in the
minds and hearts of the corporation against me. However, what I did,
answered the end and purpose I had in view; folk began to wonder and
think with themselves, what for Mr Pawkie had ceased to bestir himself in
public affairs; and the magistrates and council having, on two or three
occasions, done very unsatisfactory things, it was said by one, and
echoed by another, till the whole town was persuaded of the fact, that,
had I lent my shoulder to the wheel, things would not have been as they
were. But the matter which did the most service to me at this time, was
a rank piece of idolatry towards my lord, on the part of Bailie M'Lucre,
who had again got himself most sickerly installed in the guildry. Sundry
tacks came to an end in this year of eighty-eight; and among others, the
Niggerbrae park, which, lying at a commodious distance from the town,
might have been relet with a rise and advantage. But what did the dean
of guild do? He, in some secret and clandestine manner, gave a hint to
my lord's factor to make an offer for the park on a two nineteen years'
lease, at the rent then going--the which was done in my lord's name, his
lordship being then provost. The Niggerbrae was accordingly let to him,
at the same rent which the town received for it in the sixty-nine. Nothing could be more manifest than that there was some jookerie cookerie
in this affair; but in what manner it was done, or how the dean of
guild's benefit was to ensue, no one could tell, and few were able to
conjecture; for my lord was sorely straitened for money, and had nothing
to spare out of hand. However, towards the end of the year, a light
broke in upon us. Gabriel M'Lucre, the dean of guild's fifth son, a fine spirited laddie,
somehow got suddenly a cadetcy to go to India; and there were
uncharitably-minded persons, who said, that this was the payment for the
Niggerbrae job to my lord. The outcry, in consequence, both against the
dean of guild, and especially against the magistrates and council for
consenting thereto, was so extraordinary, and I was so openly upbraided
for being so long lukewarm, that I was, in a manner, forced again forward
to take a prominent part; but I took good care to let it be well known,
that, in resuming my public faculties, I was resolved to take my own way,
and to introduce a new method and reformation into all our concerns. Accordingly, at the Michaelmas following, that is, in the eighty-nine, I
was a second time chosen to the provostry, with an understanding, that I
was to be upheld in the office and dignity for two years; and that sundry
improvements, which I thought the town was susceptible of, both in the
causey of the streets and the reparation of the kirk, should be set about
under my direction; but the way in which I handled the same, and brought
them to a satisfactory completeness and perfection, will supply abundant
matter for two chapters. In ancient times, Gudetown had been fortified with ports and gates at the
end of the streets; and in troublesome occasions, the country people, as
the traditions relate, were in the practice of driving in their families
and cattle for shelter. This gave occasion to that great width in our
streets, and those of other royal burghs, which is so remarkable; the
same being so built to give room and stance for the cattle. But in those
days the streets were not paved at the sides, but only in the middle, or,
as it was called, the crown of the causey; which was raised and backed
upward, to let the rain-water run off into the gutters. In progress of
time, however, as the land and kingdom gradually settled down into an
orderly state, the farmers and country folk having no cause to drive in
their herds and flocks, as in the primitive ages of a rampageous
antiquity, the proprietors of houses in the town, at their own cost,
began, one after another, to pave the spaces of ground between their
steadings and the crown of the causey; the which spaces were called
lones, and the lones being considered as private property, the
corporation had only regard to the middle portion of the street--that
which I have said was named the crown of the causey. The effect of this separation of interests in a common good began to
manifest itself, when the pavement of the crown of the causey, by
neglect, became rough and dangerous to loaded carts and gentlemen's
carriages passing through the town; in so much that, for some time prior
to my second provostry, the carts and carriages made no hesitation of
going over the lones, instead of keeping the highway in the middle of the
street; at which many of the burgesses made loud and just complaints. One dark night, the very first Sunday after my restoration to the
provostry, there was like to have happened a very sore thing by an old
woman, one Peggy Waife, who had been out with her gown-tail over her head
for a choppin of strong ale. As she was coming home, with her ale in a
greybeard in her hand, a chaise in full bir came upon her and knocked her
down, and broke the greybeard and spilt the liquor. The cry was
terrible; some thought poor Peggy was killed outright, and wives, with
candles in their hands, started out at the doors and windows. Peggy,
however, was more terrified than damaged; but the gentry that were in the
chaise, being termagant English travellers, swore like dragoons that the
streets should be indicted as a nuisance; and when they put up at the
inns, two of them came to me, as provost, to remonstrate on the shameful
condition of the pavement, and to lodge in my hands the sum of ten pounds
for the behoof of Peggy; the which was greater riches than ever the poor
creature thought to attain in this world. Seeing they were gentlemen of
a right quality, I did what I could to pacify them, by joining in every
thing they said in condemnation of the streets; telling them, at the same
time, that the improvement of the causey was to be the very first object
and care of my provostry. And I bade Mrs Pawkie bring in the wine
decanters, and requested them to sit down with me and take a glass of
wine and a sugar biscuit; the civility of which, on my part, soon brought
them into a peaceable way of thinking, and they went away, highly
commanding my politess and hospitality, of which they spoke in the
warmest terms, to their companion when they returned to the inns, as the
waiter who attended them overheard, and told the landlord, who informed
me and others of the same in the morning. So that on the Saturday
following, when the town-council met, there was no difficulty in getting
a minute entered at the sederunt, that the crown of the causey should be
forthwith put in a state of reparation.