Adieu. 'It is my lady, O it is my love!' exclaimed Lord Altamont Mortimer
Montmorenci, as he flew, like a winged mercury, into my apartment this
morning. A loud rap at the door checked his eloquence, and spoiled a
most promising posture. 'Is Miss Wilkinson within?' said a voice in the hall. 'No such person lives here,' replied the maid, who was accustomed to
hear me called Miss Donald. 'But there does, and on the ground-floor too, and I will find her out,
I warrant,' cried the same voice. My door was then thrown open, and who should waddle into the room, but
fat Wilkinson! My first feeling (could you believe it) was of gladness at seeing him;
nor had I presence of mind enough, either to repulse his embrace, or
utter a piercing shriek. Happily my recollection soon returned, and I
flung him from me. 'Cherry,' said he, 'dear Cherry, what have I done to you, that you
should use me thus? Was there ever a wish of your heart that I left
ungratified? And now to desert me in my old age! Only come home with
me, my child, only come home with me, and I will forgive you all.' 'Wilkinson,' said I, 'this interview must be short, pointed, and
decisive. As to calling yourself my father, that is a stale trick, and
will not pass; and as to personating (what I perceive you aspire to)
the grand villain of my plot, your corpulency, pardon me, puts that out
of the question for ever. I should be just as happy to employ you as
any other man I know, but excuse me if I say, that you rather overrate
your talents and qualifications. Have you the gaunt ferocity of famine
in your countenance? Can you darken the midnight of a scowl? Have you
the quivering lip and the Schedoniac contour? And while the lower part
of your face is hidden in black drapery, can your eyes glare from under
the edge of a cowl? In a word, are you a picturesque villain, full of
plot, and horror, and magnificent wickedness? Ah, no, Sir, you are only
a sleek, good-humoured, chuckle-headed gentleman. Continue then what
nature made you; return to your plough, mow, reap, fatten your pigs and
the parson; but never again attempt to get yourself thrust into the
pages of a romance.' Disappointment and dismay forced more meaning into his features than I
thought them possessed of. The fact is, he had never imagined that my
notions of what villains ought to be were so refined; and that I have
formed my taste in these matters upon the purest models. As a last effort of despair, the silly man flung himself on his knees
before me, and grasping my hands, looked up in my face, with such an
imploring wretchedness of expression, while the tears rolled silently
down his cheeks, that I confess I was a little moved; and for the
moment fancied him sincere. 'Now goodness bless thee,' said he, at length, 'goodness bless thee,
for those sweet tears of thine, my daughter!' 'Tears!' cried I, quite shocked. 'Yes, darling,' said he, 'and now with this kiss of peace and love, we
will blot out all the past.' I shrieked, started from my seat, and rushed into the expanding arms of
Montmorenci. 'And pray, Sir,' cried Wilkinson, advancing fiercely, 'who are you?' 'A lodger in this house, Sir,' answered his lordship, 'and your best
friend, as I trust you will acknowledge hereafter. I became acquainted
with this lady at the table of our hostess, and learned from her, that
she had left your house in disgust. Yesterday morning, on entering her
apartment, to make my respects, I found an old gentleman there, one
Doctor Merrick, whom I recognized as a wretch of infamous character;
tried twice for shoplifting, and once for having swindled the Spanish
ambassador out of a golden snuff-box. I, though an humble individual,
yet being well acquainted with this young lady's high respectability,
presumed to warn her against such a dangerous companion; when I found,
to my great concern, that she had already promised him her hand in
marriage.' Wilkinson groaned: I stared. 'On being apprised of his character,' continued Montmorenci, 'the young
lady was willing enough to drop the connection, but unfortunately, the
ruffian had previously procured a written promise of marriage from her,
which he now refuses to surrender; and at the moment you came, I was
consulting with your daughter what was best to be done.' 'Lead me to him!' cried Wilkinson, 'lead me to the villain this
instant, and I will shew you what is best to be done!' 'I have appointed an interview with him, about this time,' said his
lordship, 'and as your feelings might probably prompt you to too much
warmth, perhaps you had better not accompany me; but should I fail in
persuading him to deliver up the fatal paper, you shall then see him
yourself.' 'You are a fine fellow!' cried the farmer, shaking his hand, 'and have
bound me to you for ever.' 'I will hasten to him now,' said his lordship, and casting a
significant glance at me, departed; leaving me quite astonished, both
at his story, and his motive for fabricating it. It was, however, my
business to support the deception. Wilkinson then told me that he discovered my place of residence in
London, from the discharged Butler, who, it seems, is not your son, but
your lover; and to whom you have shewn all my letters. He went to
Wilkinson, and made the disclosure for forty guineas. Sordid wretch! and Wilkinson says that he wants to marry you, merely for the sake of
your annuity. Biddy, Biddy! had you known as much of the world as I do
now, a fortune hunter would not have imposed upon you. As to your shewing him my letters, I cannot well blame you for a breach
of trust, which has answered the purpose of involving my life in a more
complicated labyrinth of entanglements. But to return. In the midst of our conversation, the maid brought me a
note. It was from Montmorenci, and as follows:

    'Will my soul's idol forgive the tale I told Wilkinson, since it
    was devised in order to save her from his fangs? This Doctor
    Merrick, whom I mentioned to him, instead of being a swindler, is a
    mad-doctor; and keeps a private madhouse. I have just seen him, and
    have informed him that I am about to put a lunatic gentleman, my
    honoured uncle, under his care. I told him, that this dear uncle
    (who, you may well suppose is Wilkinson) has lucid intervals; that
    his madness arose from grief at an unfortunate amour of his
    daughter's, and shews itself in his fancying that every man he sees
    wants to marry her, and has her written promise of marriage. 'I have already advanced the necessary fees, and now is your time
    to wheedle Wilkinson out of money, by pretending that you will
    return home with him. A true heroine, my sweet friend, ever shines
    in deception. Good now, play one scene
        Of excellent dissembling.--SHAKESPEARE. 'Ever, ever, ever,

                      'Your faithful

                                   'MONTMORENCI. 'P.S. Excuse tender language, as I am in haste.' This dear letter I placed in my bosom: and when I begged of the farmer
to let me have a little money, he took out his pocket-book. 'Here, my darling,' said he, 'here are notes to the tune of a hundred
pounds, that you may pay all you owe, and purchase whatever baubles and
finery you like. This is what you get for discarding that swindler, and
promising to return home with old dad.' Soon afterwards, our hero came back, and told us that his interview had
proved unsuccessful. It was therefore determined that we should all
repair to the Doctor's (for Wilkinson would not go without me), and off
we set in a hired coach. On our arrival, we were shewn into a parlour,
and after some minutes of anxious suspense, the Doctor, a thin little
figure, with a shrivelled face and bushy wig, came humming into the
room. Wilkinson being introduced, the Doctor commenced operations, by trying
the state of his brain. 'Any news to-day, Mr. Wilkinson?' said he. 'Very bad news for me, Sir,' replied Wilkinson, sullenly. 'I mean public news,' said the Doctor. 'A private grievance ought to be considered of public moment,' said
Wilkinson. 'Well remarked, Sir,' cried the Doctor, 'a clear-headed observation as
possible. Sir, I give you credit. There is a neatness in the turn of it
that argues a collected intellect.' 'Sir,' said Wilkinson, 'I hope that some other observations which I am
about to offer will please you as well.' 'I hope so for your own sake,' answered the Doctor; 'I shall certainly
listen to them with a favourable ear.' 'Thank you, Sir,' said the farmer: 'and such being the case, I make no
doubt that all will go well; for men seldom disagree, when they wish to
coincide.' 'Good again,' cried the Doctor. 'Apt and good. Sir, if you continue to
talk so rationally, I promise you that you will not remain long in my
house.' 'I am sorry,' replied Wilkinson, 'that talking rationally is the way to
get turned out of your house, because I have come for the purpose of
talking rationally.' 'And while such is your resolution,' said the Doctor, 'nothing shall be
left undone to make my house agreeable. You have only to hint your
wishes, and they shall be gratified.' 'Sir, Sir,' cried Wilkinson, grasping his hand, 'your kindness is
overpowering, because it is unexpected. However, I do not mean to
trespass any farther on your kindness than just to request, that you
will do me the favour of returning to my daughter the silly paper
written by her, containing her promise to marry you; and if you could
conveniently lay your hand on it now, you would add to the obligation,
as I mean to leave Town in an hour.' 'Mr. Wilkinson,' said the Doctor, 'I shall deal candidly with you. Probably you will not leave Town these ten years. And pardon me, if I
give you fair warning, that should you persist in asking for the paper,
a severe horse-whipping will be the consequence.' 'A horse-whipping!' repeated Wilkinson, as if he could not believe his
ears. 'You shall be cut from shoulder to flank,' said the Doctor. ''Tis my
usual way of beginning.' 'Any thing more, my fine fellow?' cried the farmer. 'Only that if you continue refractory,' said the Doctor, 'you shall be
lashed to the bed-post, and shall live on bread and water for a month.' 'Here is a proper ruffian for you!' cried Wilkinson. 'Now, by the
mother that bore me, I have a good mind to flay you within an inch of
your life!' 'Make haste then,' said the Doctor, ringing the bell; 'for you will be
handcuffed in half a minute.' 'Why you little creature,' cried Wilkinson, 'do you hope to frighten
me? Not ask for the paper, truly! Ay, ten thousand times over and over. Give me the paper, give me the paper; give me the paper, the paper, the
paper! What say you to that, old Hector?' 'The handcuffs!' cried the Doctor to the servant. 'Ay, first handcuff me, and then pick my pockets,' cried Wilkinson. 'You see I have found you out, sirrah! yes I have discovered that you
are a common shoplifter, tried five times for your life--and the very
fellow that swindled the Spanish ambassador out of a diamond
snuff-box.' 'A good deal deranged, indeed,' whispered the Doctor to his lordship. 'But how the deuce the girl could bring herself to fancy you,' cried
Wilkinson, 'that is what shocks me most. A fellow, by all that is
horrid, as ugly as if he were bespoke--an old fellow, too, and twice as
disgusting, and not half so interesting, as a monkey in a consumption.' 'Perfectly distracted, 'pon my conscience!' muttered the Doctor; 'the
maddest scoundrel, confound him, that ever bellowed in Bedlam!' Two servants entered with handcuffs. 'Look you,' cried Wilkinson, shaking his cane; 'dare to bring your
bullies here, and if I don't cudgel their carcases out of shape, and
your's into shape, may I be shot.' 'Secure his hands,' said the Doctor. Wilkinson instantly darted at the Doctor, and knocked him down. The
servants collared Wilkinson, who called to Montmorenci for assistance;
but in vain; and after a furious scuffle, the farmer was handcuffed. 'Dear uncle, calm these transports!' said his lordship. 'Your dutiful
and affectionate nephew beseeches you to compose yourself.' 'Uncle!--nephew!' cried the farmer. 'What do you mean, fellow? Who the
devil is this villain?' 'Are you so far gone, as not to know your own nephew?' said the Doctor,
grinning with anger. 'Never set eyes on the poltron till an hour ago!' cried Wilkinson. 'Merciful powers!' exclaimed Montmorenci. 'And when I was a baby, he
dandled me; and when I was a child, he gave me whippings and
sugar-plums; and when I came to man's estate, he cherished me in his
bosom, and was unto me as a father!' Here his lordship applied a
handkerchief to his face. 'The man is crazed!' cried Wilkinson. 'No, dear uncle,' said Montmorenci, ''tis you who are crazed; and to be
candid with you, this is a madhouse, and this gentleman is the
mad-doctor, and with him you must now remain, till you recover from
your complaint--the most afflicting instance of insanity, that,
perhaps, was ever witnessed.' 'Insanity!' faltered the farmer, turning deadly pale. 'Mercy, mercy on
my sinful soul, for I am a gone man!' 'Nay,' said his lordship, 'do not despair. The Doctor is the first in
his profession, and will probably cure you in the course of a few
years.' 'A few years? That bread and water business will dispatch me in a week! Mad? I mad? I vow to my conscience, Doctor, I was always reckoned the
quietest, easiest, sweetest--sure every one knows honest Gregory
Wilkinson. Don't they, Cherry? Dear child, answer for your father. Am I
mad? Am I, Cherry?' 'As butter in May,' said Montmorenci. 'You lie like a thief!' vociferated the farmer, struggling and kicking. 'You lie, you sneering, hook-nosed reprobate!' 'Why, my dear uncle,' said Montmorenci, 'do you not recollect the night
you began jumping like a grasshopper, and scolding the full-moon in my
deer-park?' 'Your deer-park? I warrant you are not worth a cabbage-garden! But now
I see through the whole plot. Ay, I am to be kept a prisoner here,
while my daughter marries that old knave before my face. It would kill
me, Cherry; I tell you I should die on the spot. Oh, my unfortunate
girl, are you too conspiring against me? Are you, Cherry? Dear Cherry,
speak. Only say you are not!' 'Indeed, my friend,' said I, 'you shall be treated with mildness. Doctor, I beg you will not act harshly towards him. With all his
faults, the man is goodnatured and well tempered, and to do him
justice, he has always used me kindly.' 'Have I not?' cried he. 'Sweet Cherry, beautiful Cherry, blessings on
you for that!' 'Come away,' said Montmorenci hastily. 'You know 'tis near dinner
time.' 'Farewell, Doctor,' said I. 'Adieu, poor Wilkinson.' 'What, leaving me?' cried he, 'leaving your old father a prisoner in
this vile house? Oh, cruel, cruel!' 'Come,' said Montmorenci, taking my hand: 'I have particular business
elsewhere.' 'For pity's sake, stay five minutes!' cried Wilkinson, struggling with
the servants. 'Come, my love!' said Montmorenci. 'Only one minute--one short minute!' cried the other. 'Well,' said I, stopping, 'one minute then.' 'Not one moment!' cried his lordship, and was hurrying me away. 'My child, my child!' cried Wilkinson, with a tone of such
indescribable agony, as made the blood curdle in my veins. 'Dear Sir,' said I, returning; 'indeed I am your friend. But you know,
you know well, I am not your child.' 'You are!' cried he, 'by all that is just and good, you are my own
child!' 'By all that is just and good,' exclaimed Montmorenci, 'you shall come
away this instant, or remain here for ever.' And he dragged me out of
the room. 'Now then,' said the poor prisoner, as the door was closing, 'now do
what you please with me, for my heart is quite broken!' On our way home, his lordship enjoined the strictest secrecy with
regard to this adventure. I shewed him the hundred pounds, and
reimbursed him for what he had paid the Doctor; and on our arrival, I
discharged my debt to the poet. Adieu. Soon after I had got into these lodgings, I sent the servant to
Grosvenor Square, with a message for Betterton, requesting him to let
me have back the bandbox, which I left at his house the night I fled
from him. In a short time she returned with it, and I found every
article safe. To my amazement and dismay, who should enter my apartment this morning
but Betterton himself! I dropped my book. He bowed to the dust. 'Your business, Sir?' said I, rising with a dignity, which, from my
being under the repeated necessity of assuming it, has now become
natural to me. 'To make a personal apology,' replied he, 'for the disrespectful and
inhospitable treatment which the loveliest of her sex experienced at my
house.' 'An apology for one insult,' said I, 'must seem insincere, when the
mode adopted for making it is another insult.' 'The retort is exquisitely elegant,' answered he, 'but I trust, not
true. For, granting, my dear Madam, that I offer a second insult by my
intrusion, still I may lessen the first insult so much by my apology
that the sum of both may be less than the first, as it originally
stood.' 'Really,' said I, 'you have blended politeness and arithmetic so
happily together; you have clothed multiplication and subtraction in
such polished phraseology----'

'Good!' cried he, 'that is real wit.' 'You have added so much algebra to so much sentiment,' continued I. 'Good, good!' interrupted he again. 'In short, you have apologized so gracefully by the rule of three, that
I know not which has assisted you the most--Chesterfield or Cocker.' 'Inimitable,' exclaimed he. 'Really your retorting powers are superior
to those of any heroine on record.' In short, my friend, I was so delighted with my repartee, that I could
not, for my life, continue vexed with the object of it; and before he
left me, I said the best things in nature, found him the most agreeable
old man in the world, shook hands with him at parting, and gave him
permission to visit me again. On calm consideration, I do not disapprove of my having allowed him
this liberty. Were he merely a good kind of good for nothing old
gentleman, it would only be losing time to cultivate an acquaintance
with him. But as the man is a reprobate, I may find account in
enlisting him amongst the other characters; particularly, since I am at
present miserably off for villains. Indeed, I augur auspiciously of his
powers, from the fact (which he confessed), of his having discovered my
place of abode, by following the maid, when she was returning with my
bandbox. But I have to inform you of another rencontre. Last night, the landlady, Higginson, and myself, went to see his
lordship perform in the new Spectacle. The first piece was called a
melodrama; a compound of horror and drollery, where scenery, dresses,
and decorations, prevailed over nature, genius, and moral. As to the
plot, I could make nothing of it; only that the hero and heroine were
in very great trouble about trifles, and quite at their ease in real
distress. For instance, when the heroine had arrived at the height of
her misery, she began to sing. Then the hero, resolving to revenge her
wrongs, falls upon one knee, turns up his eyes, and calls on the sacred
majesty of God to assist him. This invocation to the Divinity might,
perhaps, prove the hero's piety, but I am afraid it shewed the poet's
want of any. Certainly, however, it produced a powerful effect on my
feelings. I heard the glory of God made subservient to a theatrical
clap-trap, and my blood ran cold. So, I fancy, did the blood of six or
seven sweet little children behind the scenes, for they were presently
sent upon the stage, to warm themselves with a dance. After dancing,
came murder, and the hero gracefully advanced with a bullet in his
head. He falls; and many well-meaning persons suppose that the curtain
will fall with him. No such thing: Hector had a funeral, and so must
Kemble. Accordingly the corpse appears, handsomely dished up on an
escutcheoned coffin; while certain virgins of the sun (who, I am told,
support that character better than their own), chaunt a holy requiem
round it. When horror was exhausted, the poet tried disgust. After this piece came another, full of bannered processions, gilded
pillars, paper snows, and living horses, that were really far better
actors than the men who rode them. It concluded with a grand battle, in
which twenty men on horseback, and twenty on foot, beat each other
indiscriminately, and with the utmost good humour. Armour clashed,
sabres struck fire, a castle was burnt to the ground, horses fell dead,
the audience rose shouting and clapping, and a man just below me in the
pit, cried out in an ecstasy, 'I made their saddles! I made their
saddles!' As to Montmorenci's performance, nothing could equal it; for though his
character was the meanest in the piece, he contrived to make it the
most prominent. He had an emphasis for every word, an attitude for
every emphasis, and a look for every attitude. The people, indeed,
hissed him repeatedly, because they knew not, as I did, that his acting
a broken soldier in the style of a dethroned monarch, proceeded from
his native nobility of soul, not his want of talent. After the performance, we were pressing through the crowd in the lobby,
when I saw, as I thought, Stuart (Bob Stuart! ), at a short distance
from me, looking anxiously about him. On nearer inspection, I found I
was right, and it occurred to me, that I might extract a most
interesting scene from him, besides laying a foundation for future
incident. I therefore separated myself (like Evelina at the Opera) from
my party, and contrived to cross his path. At first he did not
recognize me, but I continued by his side till he did. 'Miss Wilkinson!' exclaimed he, 'how rejoiced I am to see you! Where is
your father?' 'Let us leave this place,' said I, 'they are searching for me, I know
they are.' 'Who?' said he. 'Hush!' whispered I. 'Conduct me in silence from the theatre.' He put my hand under his arm, and hurried me away. When we had gained
the street:

'You may perceive by my lameness,' said he, 'that I am not yet well of
the wound I received the night I met you on the Common. But I could not
refrain from accompanying your father to Town, in search of you; and as
I heard nothing of him since he went to your lodgings yesterday, I
called there myself this evening, and was told that you had gone to the
theatre. They could give me no information about your father, but of
course, you have seen him since he came to Town.' 'I have not, I assure you,' said I, an evasive, yet conscientious
answer, because Wilkinson is not my real father. 'That is most extraordinary,' cried he, 'for he left the hotel
yesterday, to call on you. But tell me candidly, Miss Wilkinson, what
tempted you to leave home? How are you situated at present? with whom? and what is your object?' 'Alas!' said I, 'a horrible mystery hangs over me, which I dare not now
develop. It is enough, that in flying from one misfortune, I have
plunged into a thousand others, that peace has fled from my heart, and
that I am RUINED.' 'Ruined!' exclaimed he, with a look of horror. 'Past redemption,' said I, hiding my face in my hands. 'This will be dreadful news for your poor father,' said he. 'But I beg
of you to tell me the particulars.' 'Then to be brief,' answered I, 'the first night I came to Town, a
gentleman decoyed me into his house, and treated me extremely ill.'

'The villain!' muttered Stuart. 'Afterwards I left him,' continued I, 'and walked the streets, till I
was taken up for a robbery, and put into the watchhouse.' 'Is this fact?' asked Stuart, 'or are you merely sporting with my
feelings?' ''Tis fact, on my honour,' said I, 'and to conclude my short, but
pathetic tale, a gentleman, a mysterious and amiable youth, met me by
mere accident, after my release; and I am, at present, under his
protection.' 'A shocking account indeed!' said he. 'But have you never considered
the consequences of continuing this abandoned course of life?' 'Now here is a pretty insinuation!' cried I; 'but such is always the
fate of us poor heroines. No, never can we get through an innocent
adventure in peace and quietness, without having our virtue called in
question. 'Tis always our virtue, our virtue. If we are caught coming
out of a young man's bed-room,--'tis our virtue. If we remain a whole
night in the streets,--'tis our virtue. If we make a nocturnal
assignation,--Oh! 'tis our virtue, our virtue. Such a rout as they
make.' 'I regret,' said Stuart, 'to see you treat the subject so lightly, but
I do beseech of you to recollect, that your wretched parent----'

''Tis a fine night, Sir.' 'That your wretched parent----'

'Sir,' said I, 'when spleen takes the form of remonstrance, a lecture
is only a scolding put into good language. This is my house, Sir.' And
I stopped at the door. 'At least,' said he, 'will you do me the favour of being at home for me
to-morrow morning?' 'Perhaps I may,' replied I. 'So good night, master Bobby!'