cried he. 'And pray to whom am I indebted for it?' No reply. 'At least, may I learn whether I can, in any manner, repay it?' No reply. 'You said, I think, that you had just escaped from confinement?' No reply. 'You will stain your beautiful locks,' said he: 'my blood should flow
to defend, but shall not flow to disfigure them. Permit me to collect
those charming tresses.' 'Oh! dear, thank you, Sir!' stammered I. 'And thank you, ten thousand times,' said he, as I finished my
disagreeable task; 'and now never will I quit you till I see you safe
to your friends.' 'You!' exclaimed I. 'Ah, traitor!' He gazed at me with a look of pity. 'Farewell then, my kind preserver,'
said he; ''tis a long way to the next habitation, and should my wound
open afresh and should I faint from loss of blood----'

'Dear me,' said I, 'let me assist you.' He smiled. 'We will assist each other,' answered he; 'and now let us
not lose a moment, for the robbers may return.' He took the lantern to search the cellar for his watch and money. However, we saw nothing there but a couple of portmanteaus, some rusty
pistols, and a small barrel, half full of gunpowder. We then left the
house; but had hardly proceeded twenty yards, when he began to totter. 'I can go no farther,' said he, sinking down. 'I have lost so much
blood, that my strength is entirely exhausted.' 'Pray Sir,' said I, 'exert yourself, and lean on me.' 'Impossible,' answered he; 'but fly and save your own life.' 'I will run for assistance,' said I, and flew towards the road, where I
had just heard the sound of an approaching carriage. But on a sudden it
stopped, voices began disputing, and soon after a pistol was fired. I
paused in great terror, for I judged that these were the robbers again. What was I to do? When a heroine is reduced to extremities, she always
does one of two things, either faints on the spot, or exhibits energies
almost superhuman. Faint I could not, so nothing remained for me, but energies almost
superhuman. I pondered a moment, and a grand thought struck me. Recollecting the gunpowder in the cellar, I flew for it back to the
ruin, carried it up to the hall, threw most of it on the floor, and
with the remainder, strewed a train, as I walked towards Stuart. When I was within a few paces of him, I heard quick steps; and a hoarse
voice vociferating, 'Who goes yonder with the light?' for I had brought
the lantern with me. 'Fly!' cried Stuart, 'or you are lost.' I snatched the candle from the lantern, applied it to the train, and
the next moment dropped to the ground at the shock of the tremendous
explosion that followed. A noise of falling timbers resounded through
the ruin, and the robbers were heard scampering off in all directions. 'There!' whispered I, after a pause; 'there is an original horror for
you; and all of my own contrivance. The villains have fled, the
neighbours will flock to the spot, and you will obtain assistance.' By this time we heard the people of the carriage running towards us. 'Stuart!' cried I, in an awful voice. 'My name indeed!' said he. 'This is completely inexplicable.' 'Stuart,' cried I, 'hear my parting words. _Never again_', (quoting
his own letter,) '_will I make you my playmate; never again climb your
shoulders, and gallop you round the lawn!_ Ten o'clock is past. Go not
to Sylvan Lodge to-night. She departed two hours ago. Look to your
steps.' I spoke this portentous warning, and fled across the common. Miss
Wilkinson! Miss Wilkinson! sounded on the blast; but the wretch had
discovered me too late. I ran about half a mile, and then looking
behind me, beheld the ruin in a blaze. Renovated by the sight of this
horror, I walked another hour, without once stopping; till, to my
surprise and dismay, I found myself utterly unable to proceed a step
farther. This was the more provoking, because heroines often perform
journies on foot that would founder fifty horses. I now knocked at a farm-house, on the side of the road; but the people
would not admit me. Soon after, I perceived a boy watching sheep in a
field, and begged earnestly that he would direct me to some romantic
cottage, shaded with vines and acacias, and inhabited by a lovely
little Arcadian family. 'There is no family of that name in these here parts,' said he. '_These here!_' cried I, 'Ah, my friend, that is not pastoral
language. I see you will never pipe madrigals to a Chloris or a
Daphne.' 'And what sort of nasty language is that?' cried he. 'Get along with
you, do: I warrant you are a bad one.' And he began pelting me with
tufts of grass. At last, I contrived to shelter myself under a haycock, where I
remained till day began to dawn. Then, stiff and chilled, I proceeded
on my journey; and in a short time, met a little girl with a pail of
milk, who consented to let me change my dress at her cottage, and
conducted me thither. It was a family of frights, flat noses and thick lips without mercy. No
Annettes and Lubins, or Amorets and Phyllidas, or Florimels and
Florellas; no little Cherubin and Seraphim amongst them. However, I
slipped on (for _slipping on_ is the heroic mode of dressing) my
spangled muslin, and joined their uglinesses at breakfast, resolving to
bear patiently with their features. They tell me that a public coach to
London will shortly pass this way, so I shall take a place in it. On the whole, I see much reason to be pleased with what has happened
hitherto. How fortunate that I went to the house on the common! I see
plainly, that if adventure does not come to me, I must go to adventure. And indeed, I am authorized in doing so by the example of my sister
heroines; who, with a noble disinterestedness, are ever the chief
artificers of their own misfortunes; for, in nine cases out of ten,
were they to manage matters like mere common mortals, they would avoid
all those charming mischiefs which adorn their memoirs. As for this Stuart, I know not what to think of him. I will, however,
do him the justice to say, that he has a pleasing countenance; and
although he neither kissed my hand, nor knelt to me, yet he had the
decency to talk of 'wounds,' and my 'charming tresses.' Perhaps, if he
had saved my life, instead of my having saved his; and if his name had
consisted of three syllables ending in i or o; and, in fine, were he
not an unprincipled profligate, the man might have made a tolerable
hero. At all events, I heartily hate him; and his smooth words went for
nothing. The coach is in sight. Adieu. 'I shall find in the coach,' said I, approaching it, 'some emaciated
Adelaide, or sister Olivia. We will interchange congenial looks--she
will sigh, so will I--and we shall commence a vigorous friendship on
the spot.' Yes, I did sigh; but it was at the huge and hideous Adelaide that
presented herself, as I got into the coach. In describing her, our
wittiest novelists would say, that her nose lay modestly retired
between her cheeks; that her eyes, which pointed inwards, seemed
looking for it, and that her teeth were

    'Like angels' visits; short and far between.' She first eyed me with a supercilious sneer, and then addressed a
diminutive old gentleman opposite, in whose face Time had ploughed
furrows, and Luxury sown pimples. 'And so, Sir, as I was telling you, when my poor man died, I so
bemoaned myself, that between swoons and hysterics, I got nervous all
over, and was obliged to go through a regiment.' I stared in astonishment. 'What!' thought I, 'a woman of her magnitude
and vulgarity, faint, and have nerves? Impossible!' 'Howsomdever,' continued she, 'my Bible and my daughter Moll are great
consolations to me. Moll is the dearest little thing in the world; as
straight as a popular; then such dimples; and her eyes are the very
squintessence of perfection. She has all her catechism by heart, and
moreover, her mind is uncontaminated by romances and novels, and such
abominations.' 'Pray, Ma'am,' said I, civilly, 'may I presume to ask how romances and
novels contaminate the mind?' 'Why, Mem,' answered she tartly, and after another survey: 'by teaching
little misses to go gadding, Mem, and to be fond of the men, Mem, and
of spangled muslin, Mem.' 'Ma'am,' said I, reddening, 'I wear spangled muslin because I have no
other dress: and you should be ashamed of yourself for saying that I am
fond of the men.' 'The cap fits you then,' cried she. 'Were it a fool's cap,' said I, 'perhaps I might return the
compliment.' I thought it expedient, at my first outset in life, to practise apt
repartee, and emulate the infatuating sauciness, and elegant
vituperation of Amanda, the Beggar Girl, and other heroines; who, when
irritated, disdain to speak below an epigram. 'Pray, Sir,' said she, to our fellow traveller, 'what is your opinion
of novels? Ant they all love and nonsense, and the most unpossible lies
possible?' 'They are fictions, certainly,' said he. 'Surely, Sir,' exclaimed I, 'you do not mean to call them fictions.' 'Why no,' replied he, 'not absolute fictions.' 'But,' cried the big lady, 'you don't pretend to call them true.' 'Why no,' said he, 'not absolutely true.' 'Then,' cried I, 'you are on both sides of the question at once.' He trod on my foot. 'Ay, that you are,' said the big lady. He trod on her foot. 'I am too much of a courtier,' said he, 'to differ from the ladies,'
and he trod on both our feet. 'A courtier!' cried I: 'I should rather have imagined you a musician.' 'Pray why?' said he. 'Because,' answered I, 'you are playing the pedal harp on this lady's
foot and mine.' 'I wished to produce harmony,' said he, with a submitting bow. 'At least,' said I, 'novels must be much more true than histories,
because historians often contradict each other, but novelists never
do.' 'Yet do not novelists contradict themselves?' said he. 'Certainly,' replied I, 'and there lies the surest proof of their
veracity. For as human actions are always contradicting themselves, so
those books which faithfully relate them, must do the same.' 'Admirable!' exclaimed he. 'And yet what proof have we that such
personages as Schedoni, Vivaldi, Camilla, or Cecilia ever existed?' 'And what proof have we,' cried I, 'that such personages as Alfred the
Great, Henry the Fifth, Elfrida, or Mary Queen of Scots, ever existed? I wonder at a man of sense like you. Why, Sir, at this rate you might
just as well question the truth of Guy Faux's attempt to blow up the
Parliament-House, or of my having blown up a house last night.' 'You blow up a house!' exclaimed the big lady with amazement. 'Madam,' said I, modestly, 'I scorn ostentation, but on my word and
honour, 'tis fact.' 'Of course you did it accidentally,' said the gentleman. 'You wrong me, Sir,' replied I; 'I did it by design.' 'You will swing for it, however,' cried the big lady. 'Swing for it!' said I; 'a heroine swing? Excellent! I presume, Madam,
you are unacquainted with the common law of romance.' 'Just,' said she, 'as you seem to be with the common law of England.' 'I despise the common law of England,' cried I. 'Then I fancy,' said she, 'it would not be much amiss if you were
hanged.' 'And I fancy,' retorted I, nodding at her big figure, 'it would not be
much amiss if you were quartered.' Instantly she took out a prayer-book, and began muttering over it with
the most violent piety and indignation. Meantime the gentleman coincided in every syllable that I said, praised
my parts and knowledge, and discovered evident symptoms of a
discriminating mind, and an amiable heart. That I am right in my good
opinion of him is most certain; for he himself assured me that it would
be quite impossible to deceive me, I am so penetrating. In short, I
have set him down as the benevolent guardian, whom my memoirs will
hereafter celebrate, for having saved me from destruction. Indeed he has already done so. For, when our journey was almost over,
he told me, that my having set fire to the ruin might prove a most
fatal affair; and whispered that the big lady would probably inform
against me. On my pleading the prescriptive immunities of heroines, and
asserting that the law could never lay its fangs on so ethereal a name
as Cherubina, he solemnly swore to me, that he once knew a
golden-haired, azure-eyed heroine, called Angelica Angela Angelina, who
was hanged at the Old Bailey for stealing a broken lute out of a
haunted chamber; and while my blood was running cold at the recital, he
pressed me so cordially to take refuge in his house, that at length, I
threw myself on the protection of the best of men. I now write from his mansion in Grosvenor Square, where we have just
dined. His name is Betterton; he has no family, and is possessed of a
splendid independence. Multitudes of liveried menials watch his nod;
and he does me the honour to call me cousin. My chamber too is
charming. The curtains hang quite in a new style, but I do not like the
pattern of the drapery. To-morrow I mean to go shopping; and I may, at the same time, pick up
some adventures on my way; for business must be minded. Adieu. Soon after my last letter, I was summoned to supper. Betterton appeared
much interested in my destiny, and I took good care to inspire him with
a due sense of my forlorn and unprotected state. I told him that I had
not a friend in the wide world, related to him my lamentable tale, and
as a proof of my veracity shewed him the parchment, the picture, and
the mole. To my great surprise, he said that he considered my high birth
improbable; and then began advising me to descend from my romantic
flights, as he called them, and to seek after happiness instead of
misery. 'In this town,' continued he, after a long preamble, 'your charms would
be despotic, if unchained by legal constraints. But for ever distant
from you be that cold and languid tie which erroneous policy invented. For you be the sacred community of souls, the mystic union, whose tie
of bondage is the sway of passion, the wish, the licence, and impulse
the law.' 'Pretty expressions enough,' said I, 'only I cannot comprehend them.' 'Charming girl!' cried he, while he conjured up a fiend of a smile, and
drew a brilliant from his finger, 'accept this ring, and the signature
of the hand that has worn it, securing to you five hundred a-year,
while you remain under my protection.' 'Ha, monster!' exclaimed I, 'and is this thy vile design?' So saying, I flung the ruffian from me, then rushed down stairs, opened
the door, and quick as lightning darted along the streets. At last, panting for breath, I paused underneath a portico. It was now
midnight. Not a wheel, not a hoof fatigued the pavement, or disturbed
the slumbering mud of the metropolis. But soon steps and soft voices
broke the silence, and a youth, encircling a maiden's waist with his
arm, and modulating the most mellifluent phraseology, passed by me. Another couple succeeded, and another, and another. The town seemed
swarming with heroes and heroines. 'Fortunate pairs!' ejaculated I, 'at
length ye enjoy the reward of your incomparable constancy and virtue. Here, after a long separation, meeting by chance, and in extreme
distress, ye pour forth the pure effusions of your souls. O blissful
termination of unexampled miseries!' I now perceived, on the steps of a house, a fair and slender form,
robed in white. She was sitting with her elbow in her lap, and her head
leaning on one side, within her hand. 'She seems a sister in misfortune,' said I; 'so, should she but have a
Madona face, and a name ending in a, we will live, we will die
together.' I then approached, and discovered a countenance so pale, so pensive, so
Roman, that I could almost have knelt and worshipped it. 'Fair unfortunate,' said I, taking her hand and pressing it;
'interesting unknown, say by what name am I to address so gentle a
sister in misery.' 'Eh? What?' cried she, in a tone somewhat coarser than I was prepared
to expect. 'May I presume on my sudden predilection,' said I, 'and inquire your
name?' 'Maria,' replied she, rising from her seat; 'and now I must be gone.' 'And where are you going, Maria?' said I. 'To the Devil,' said she. 'Alas! my love,' whispered I, 'sorrow hath bewildered thee. Impart to
me the cause of thy distress, and perhaps I can alleviate, if not
relieve it. I am myself a miserable orphan; but happy, thrice happy,
could I clasp a sympathetic bosom, in this frightful wilderness of
houses and faces, where, alas! I know not a human being.' 'Then you are a stranger here?' said she quickly. 'I have been here but a few hours,' answered I. 'Have you money?' she demanded. 'Only four guineas and a half,' replied I, taking out my purse. 'Perhaps you are in distress--perhaps--forgive this officiousness--not
for worlds would I wound your delicacy, but if you want assistance----'

'I have only this old sixpence upon earth,' interrupted she, 'and there
'tis for you, Miss.' So saying, she put sixpence into my purse, which I had opened while I
was speaking. 'Generous angel!' cried I. 'Now we are in partnership, a'nt we?' said she. 'Yes, sweet innocent,' answered I, 'we are partners in grief.' 'And as grief is dry,' cried she, 'we will go moisten it.' 'And where shall we moisten it, Maria?' said I. 'In a pothouse,' cried she. 'It will do us good.' 'O my Maria!' said I, 'never, never!' 'Why then give me back my sixpence,' cried she, snatching at my purse;
but I held it fast, and, springing from her, ran away. 'Stop thief, stop thief!' vociferated she. In an instant, I heard a sort of rattling noise from several quarters,
and an old fellow, called a watchman, came running out of a wooden box,
and seized me by the shoulder. 'She has robbed me of my purse,' exclaimed the wily wanton. ''Tis a
green one, and has four guineas and a half in it, besides a curious old
sixpence.' The watchman took it from me, and examined it. ''Tis my purse,' cried I, 'and I can swear it.' 'You lie!' said the little wretch; 'you know well that you snatched it
out of my hand, when I was going to give you sixpence, out of charity.' Horror and astonishment struck me dumb; and when I told my tale, the
watchman declared that both of us must remain in custody, till next
morning; and then be carried before the magistrate. Accordingly, he
escorted us to the watchhouse, a room filled with smoke and culprits;
where we stayed all night, in the midst of swearing, snoring, laughing
and crying. In the morning we were carried before a magistrate; and with step
superb, arms folded, and neck erect, I entered the room. 'Pert enough,' said the magistrate; and turning from me, continued his
examination of two men who stood near him. It appeared that one of them (whose name was Jerry Sullivan) had
assaulted the other, on the following occasion. A joint sum of money
had been deposited in Sullivan's hands, by this other, and a third man,
his partner, which sum Sullivan had consented to keep for them, and had
bound himself to return, whenever both should go together to him, and
demand it. Sometime afterwards, one of them went to him, and told him
that the other being ill, and therefore unable to come for the money,
had empowered him to get it. Sullivan, believing him, gave the money,
and when he next met the other, mentioned the circumstance. The other
denied having authorized what had been done, and demanded his own share
of the deposit from Sullivan, who refused it. Words ensued, and
Sullivan having knocked him down, was brought before the magistrate, to
be committed for an assault. 'Have you any defence?' said the magistrate to him. 'None that I know of,' answered he, 'only I would knock him down again,
if he touched my honour again.' 'And is this your defence?' said the magistrate. 'It is so,' replied Sullivan, 'and I hope your worship likes it, as
well as I like your worship.' 'So well,' said the magistrate, 'that I now mean to do you a signal
service.' 'Why then,' cried Sullivan, 'may the heavens smile on you.' 'And that service,' continued the magistrate, 'is to commit you
immediately.' 'Why then,' cried Sullivan, 'may the Devil inconvenience you!' 'By your insolence, you should be an Irishman,' said the magistrate. 'I was an Irishman forty years ago,' replied Sullivan, 'and I don't
suppose I am anything else now. Though I have left my country, I scorn
to change my birth-place.' 'Commit him,' said the magistrate. Just then, a device struck me, which I thought might extricate the poor
fellow; so, having received permission, I went across, and whispered it
to him. 'The heavens smile on you,' cried he, and then addressed his accuser:
'If I can prove to you that I have not broken our agreement about the
money, will you promise not to prosecute me for this assault?' 'With all my heart,' answered he; 'for if you have not broken our
agreement, you must have the money still, which is all I want.' 'And will your worship,' said Sullivan, 'permit this compromise, and
stand umpire between us?' 'I have not the least objection,' answered the magistrate; 'for I would
rather be the means of your fulfilling an agreement, than of your
suffering a punishment; and would rather recompense your accuser with
money than with revenge.' 'Well then,' said Jerry to his accuser; 'was not our agreement, that I
should return the money to yourself and your partner, whenever you came
together to me, and asked for it?' 'Certainly,' said the man. 'And did you both ever come together to me, and ask for it?' 'Never,' said the man. 'Then I have not broken our agreement,' cried Sullivan. 'But you cannot keep it,' said the other; 'for you have given away the
money.' 'No matter for that,' cried Sullivan, 'provided I have it when both of
you come to demand it. But I believe that will be never, for the fellow
who ran off will not much like to shew his face again. So now will your
worship please to decide.' The magistrate, after complimenting me upon my ingenuity, confessed, he
said, with much unwillingness, that Sullivan had made out his case
clearly. The poor accuser was therefore obliged to abide by his
promise, and Sullivan was dismissed, snapping his fingers, and offering
to treat the whole world with a tankard. My cause came after, and the treacherous Maria was ordered to state her
evidence. But what think you, Biddy, of my keeping you in suspense, till my next
letter? The practice of keeping in suspense is quite common among
novelists. Nay, there is a lady in the Romance of the Highlands, who
terminates, not her letter, but her life, much in the same style. For
when dying, she was about to disclose the circumstances of a horrid
murder, and would have done so too, had she not unfortunately expended
her last breath in a beautiful description of the verdant hills, rising
sun, all nature smiling, and a few streaks of purple in the east. Adieu. Maria being ordered to state her evidence, 'That I will,' said she,
'only I am so ashamed of having been out late at night--but I must tell
your worship how that happened.' 'You need not,' said the magistrate. 'Well then,' she continued, 'I was walking innocently home, with my
poor eyes fixed upon the ground, for fear of the fellors, when what
should I see, but this girl, talking on some steps, with a pickpocket,
I fancy, for he looked pretty decent. So I ran past them, for I was so
ashamed you can't think; and this girl runs after me, and says, says
she, "The fellor wouldn't give me a little shilling," says she, "so by
Jingo, you must," says she.' 'By Jingo! I say by Jingo?' cried I. 'St. Catherine guard me! Indeed,
your Excellenza, my only oath is Santa Maria.' 'She swore at me like a trooper,' continued the little imp, 'so I
pulled out my purse in a fright, and she snatched it from me, and ran
away, and I after her, calling stop thief; and this is the whole truth
'pon my honour and word, and as I hope to be married.' The watchman declared that he had caught me running away, that he had
found the purse in my hand, and that Maria had described it, and the
money contained in it, accurately. 'And will your worship,' said Maria, 'ask the girl to describe the
sixpence that is in it?' The magistrate turned to me. 'Really,' said I, 'as I never even saw it, I cannot possibly pretend to
describe it.' 'Then I can,' cried she. ''Tis bent in two places, and stamped on one
of its sides with a D and an H.'

The sixpence was examined, and answered her description of it. 'The case is clear enough,' said the magistrate, 'and now, Miss, try
whether you can advocate your own cause as well as Jerry Sullivan's.' Jerry, who still remained in the room, came behind me, and whispered,
'Troth, Miss, I have no brains, but I have a bit of an oath, if that is
of any use to you. I would sell my soul out of gratitude, at any time.' 'Alas! your Excellenza,' said I to the magistrate, 'frail is the tenure
of that character, which has Innocence for its friend, and Infamy for
its foe. Life is a chequered scene of light and shade; life is a jest,
a stage----'

'Talking of life is not the way to save it,' said the magistrate. 'Less
sentiment and more point, if you please.' I was silent, but looked anxiously towards the door. 'Are you meditating an escape?' asked he. 'No,' said I, 'but just wait a little, and you shall see what an
interesting turn affairs will take.' 'Come,' cried he, 'proceed at once, or say you will not.' 'Ah, now,' said I, 'can't you stop one moment, and not spoil everything
by your impatience. I am only watching for the tall, elegant young
stranger, with an oval face, who is to enter just at this crisis, and
snatch me from perdition.' 'Did he promise to come?'