That day, to his astonishment, a reconciliation took place between you and your younger
kinsman. The consequence was, your procuring for Kenrick a lieutenancy and adjutantship, and thus raising him at once into the receipt of a plentiful income. Gifford's
measures, for months

after, were directed to the repairing this miscarriage, and his inward animosity to his brother was heightened, by the recollection that, while he was pursuing
his ruin, he had unwittingly rendered him an important service. His present plan was, by infusions of jealousy to ruin Kenrick for ever in your esteem, at
the
same time that he should give me timely notice of the projected elopement, and, by the representations he should induce me to make to the lieutenant's
superiors, deprive him at once of his military appointments. Gifford was acquainted with the day and hour of Kenrick's arrival from Yorkshire, and himself contrived the interview between him and Mrs. Fleetwood in the
elm-walk on the right bank of the Kennet. He took care to prepare you with proper views of the affair, and to induce you to believe that the lieutenant came,

by mrs. Fleetwood's invitation, for the basest and

most unnatural purposes. The rest you know. An anonymous letter was brought to me at this time, informing me that my daughter was on the point of eloping to Scotland with lieutenant Kenrick, a kinsman
and dependent of my nearest neighbour. This letter was the contrivance of Gifford; it could come from no other quarter. I never felt so terrible an access of

rage as at that moment. I sought Louisa, my child, in the spirit of a murderer. It was perhaps happy for us both that she had already disappeared. The letter

by some accident had been brought too late. I ordered post-horses without a moment's delay, and set off in pursuit of the fugitives. I took the noble youth,
my
intended son-in-law, in the chaise with me. My daughter being no where to be found, left no doubt on my mind as to the authenticity of the intelligence I had

received;

and, though I could gain no intelligence of her at Newbury, I easily conceived that the ravisher might have procured the means of her flight from some other
quarter. I pursued the route of Scotland for upward of one hundred miles. But, though I was incessant in my enquiries, I could learn no tidings of the persons I sought,
at any one of the stages. I then began to believe that it was to no purpose to go in this direction any further. With a heavy heart I turned my face toward
home. By this time we happened to be near one of lord Lindsey's country-seats, and I gladly dropped my travelling companion. I was too disturbed in mind for

society. Now, for the first time, I felt toward my daughter like a father. If I had overtaken her on the road, nothing would have exceeded my fury. It would

then have been a question of rebellion to have been quelled,

and guilt to have been prevented. I now felt as if I had lost her for ever, and anger died away in my breast. To be thus left totally alone, wife, son and
daughter to be successively lost, and all by my own fault,---it was too much! When I returned to my own house, I enquired eagerly from every one of Louisa; they had no intelligence to give. I had not been at home half an hour, when
lieutenant Kenrick was announced. At the mention of that name all my blood boiled up at once; my rage returned in full force; the paternal feelings, which
had
begun to sway me, instantly vanished. He entered. His looks were expressive only of the deepest distress and anguish. Villain, I cried, what have you done with my daughter? I appear before you, answered the graceful youth, a criminal. But I repent of my fault; I will restore to you your daughter, pure and uncontaminated as she
came into my hands. But, sir, I also

come as a supplicant. You, and you only, can repair a thousand mischiefs, which I have undesigningly perpetrated. He then told me all that had passed at your house, that by equivocal appearances you had been induced to believe the existence of a criminal familiarity
between him and your wife, that you had insulted her in the most opprobrious terms, that even in such a moment she had heroically refused to betray the
secret
of her friend, that you had quitted your house with a determination not to return for years and gone nobody knew whither, and that you had since written to
your steward, ordering that mrs. Fleetwood should instantly be expelled from your home. Do you think, sir, added my visitor, that on such an occasion, when I have been the cause of so vast a series of calamities, I can aim at any gratification to
myself? Do you think, that while my patron and his amiable wife are plunged

in the depths of distress, I can engage in the festivities of marriage? No; take back your daughter! I love her with an imperishable affection. But I have no
heart, even for Louisa, while I witness this desolation of all that ought to be most dear to me. I never till in this instance engaged in a plan of
dissimulation; and see to what it has led me! Do you believe I will ever repeat it? No; I will never wed your daughter, unless it pleases heaven that I shall

wed her in the face of day. My soul yearned toward the boy. There is a contagion in virtue and ingenuousness, that not the hardest heart in nature, not even my heart, can resist. The
paternal feelings, which had so auspiciously begun to influence me in my journey home, revived as he spoke. I said to myself, This is the husband for my
daughter!---I was never mercenary. I had always been an admirer of virtue, though, alas! from a

distance. My stubborn nature bowed before the integrity of Kenrick. I locked his hand in mine. I said, You are an honest fellow! I forgive you the past; I will
find a time to settle accounts with you. I will be the protector of mrs. Fleetwood; I will not rest, till I have cleared the misunderstanding between her and

her husband. Let us then, said Kenrick, set out hand in hand on this pious expedition! I have no fears for our success, if I am supported by a man of mr. Scarborough's
fortune and consequence. I took mrs. Fleetwood into my own house.---
I interrupted my neighbour in his narration. ---Into your own house! Oh, if I had known that single circumstance, how much anguish should I have been saved! I
should instantly have commenced a new and temperate investigation of the whole affair. Mr. Scarborough resumed.---That and every other particular were solicitously concealed from you by the villain who held you his prisoner. It is his
characteristic, wherever he goes, to scatter darkness around him, and every man who comes within his circle, is smitten with blindness. I left mrs. Fleetwood and Louisa together, and proceeded with Kenrick to Brighthelmstone. You were gone. We crossed to Dieppe, and went on to Paris. You were
not to be found. I employed my agents in England to discover the place of your abode; but to no purpose. Sometimes I imagined I had gained a clue; I pursued

it; always without success. I have now no doubt that these false intimations were supplied to my people by Gifford. At length I learned, by letters from
home,
that a prosecution for adultery and divorce was commenced on your part against your wife. When

we received this information, we were already in Poland, lured on by the false intelligence that had been supplied to us. We instantly set out for England; we
met with some unavoidable delays; and, when arrived, we found that the trial had been pushed on with extraordinary exertions, that a solemn adjudication had

been pronounced at midnight, just seven hours before we reached London, and a verdict, with ten thousand pounds damages, had been given against your
kinsman. For our regale at our first breakfast in the metropolis, the newspaper was brought to us, seven columns of which were filled with the trial for criminal
conversation, Fleetwood versus Kenrick. It is impossible to conceive the astonishment with which we perused it. First came the speech of an eloquent counsellor, who detailed the case with all its
aggravations before the court. He said, that so strong and complicated a charge

had never been submitted to that bench. That the defendant, a mere pauper, a very distant relation, had been taken up by the plaintiff out of charity. That,
while he had been receiving hourly benefits from your hands, he had gone on for months polluting the wife of your bosom under the roof of his benefactor. He

mentioned the evidences he had of the criminal conversation in Merionethshire, who would state such particulars, as would leave no doubt in the minds of any
of
his hearers. He added, that he could further establish the charge, by a witness, a discarded servant, who had heard the confession of the illegitimacy of the

child just born, from the mouth of the adultress. The counsellor is mad! said I. What does he mean? These allegations, he proceeded, are all in my instructions. I looked on to the report of the evidence: they stated and swore specifically

to every thing the pleader had described. The paper dropped from my hand. Kenrick! The lieutenant fell upon his knees.---By the great God that made me, he said, all this is utterly false! For a moment, prepared as I was with a knowledge of the truth, I believed the examinations on the trial. Kenrick at length succeeded---what is impossible to
ingenuousness like his?---in restoring himself to my good opinion. If you had witnessed his earnestness, his agitation, his vehemence, his broken
exclamations
of surprise, and his tears, you would have been convinced, as rapidly as I was. I sent instantly for the lawyers whom I had retained for the defence, and we settled measures for the prosecution of the perjurers. Kenrick knew them all, and
was able to supply such a clue for their detection, as bore with it every promise of success. If we had arrived in London a

week sooner, my lawyers assured me the cause would have taken a very different turn. Having occasion to go out about some business in the evening, I saw from the window of my coach the figure of Gifford gliding along by the light of the lamps. I had now no doubt that he was the secret spring of all these machinations. I stopped the carriage. I was in the street in a moment. I no longer saw him. I
glanced a figure that seemed to be his. At the corner of a street I lost it. Of two directions I did not know which the person had taken. I suppose I took
the
wrong first; but I saw him no more. The next morning, as Kenrick and I sat at breakfast, to our exceeding surprise mr. Gifford was announced. We consulted for a moment. I said, Kenrick, he is
come with a warrant to arrest you for the damages awarded; you had better

withdraw.---This seemed infinitely improbable; Kenrick could not resist the desire he felt to face his brother; he was admitted. This accomplished hypocrite succeeded in convincing us that he had no concern in the plot, which had advanced thus far triumphantly against us. He owned that
he had almost constantly attended upon you; but he protested that his motive had been the desire to mitigate your resentment against mrs. Fleetwood and his
brother. He said, that after encountering much resistance and obstinacy, he had in a great degree subdued you, and had come over for the express purpose of
postponing the trial. But unfortunately he had come too late; the diligence of the lawyers had outstripped his. He called Kenrick aside; he enquired
particularly into the situation of mrs. Fleetwood, and gave him a draft of two hundred pounds for her use. He furnished us with the address of the place where he said you at present were, and advised Kenrick by all means to repair to you, and to improve upon the
measures of reconciliation which he had so happily begun. At the city in Italy which Gifford pointed out to us, we learned, that you had lately been there, but were gone, and had left no clue by which we could pursue
you. We made an appointment on our return, to meet mrs. Fleetwood and Louisa at Paris, whither a relation of mrs. Fleetwood's mother, whom I had waited upon

when, a few months before, I came to that metropolis, and to whom I had explained the unhappy situation of her kinswoman, invited her, to come and lie in. This
seems to be the only circumstance that escaped the vigilance of Gifford. He had improved the period of our absence, to complete the ecclesiastical
proceedings,

and the act of divorce. He contrived at the same time to put off the trials for perjury. Reviewing the whole affair, I have now no doubt that he succeeded in
corrupting our lawyers, the solicitors, if not the pleaders, as well as made use of extraordinary applications to accelerate his own. At Paris we received an account of the conclusion of the whole proceedings, and certainly now saw the conduct of Gifford in a very different light, from that
in which he had persuaded us to view it in London. It would have been madness any longer to doubt. The veil which hid from us the truth was demolished, even

beyond the skill of that arch-deceiver to repair it. Not the generous confidence and fraternal sentiments of Kenrick himself could delude him. Gifford in the

mean time came over to Paris, pursuant to his appointment with you. We were once more within the walls of the same city. Two days since, Kenrick and Gifford met each other in the Palais Royal . They were mutually surprised, neither having the least idea that the other was in
Paris. The behaviour of Gifford on this occasion, was very different from what it had been a few months before in London. Kenrick went up to him with a fixed

brow, and said,
Whence do you come, sir? Who is it that has been so diligent in procuring the decree of the ecclesiastical court, and the act of parliament, against my aunt? Appearances are grievously against you! Have a care, my friend! retorted Gifford. I will not be suspected for nothing! Gifford, Gifford, if in reality you have been playing a traitor's part, it is time you should drop the mask! You discredit then the professions I have made you? Every thing that I have done to save you from ruin you regard with a malignant eye? Another time you shall
know whether I am your friend! The next service I render you, be sure of it, shall have your thanks! Where is my uncle? Is he in Paris? Your uncle, and your aunt! Lay aside these fopperies, which so ill become you! Talk, if you can, like a man!---If mr. Fleetwood persists in believing you
perfidious, am I to blame? If he is able to prove it to the satisfaction of the whole world, whose fault, pray, is that? Where is mr. Fleetwood? He is not in Paris.---I will answer no more questions.---Kenrick, I do not understand the tone you assume. I have stuck by you too long. Henceforth be no
brother of mine! Then as enemies! Then as enemies! In that character I shall find a time, and shall call you to account! When you please. I am to be found. Gifford, it appears, was now so near the accomplishment of all his objects, that he thought it unnecessary to practise disguise any further. The devil himself
sometimes grows tired of the character of a deceiver, and appears in his true colours. In imagination already the possessor of all your estates, Gifford was
in
haste to shake off his brother as a useless incumbrance. He had in reality no time to lose. You had expressed repeatedly a desire to elucidate the truth in person, and by a temperate discussion with the parties
themselves. Gifford found that we were in Paris, and perhaps suspected that mrs. Fleetwood might be so too. One unlucky hour might overturn the fabric which

he

had erected at the expence of such a world of guilt. He touched the goal. Kenrick had the next day, yesterday, an engagement with a young French nobleman to proceed to Fontainebleau. They were attended each with a servant. They met
you on the road. You know the rest. I listened to the narrative of mr. Scarborough, with emotions of shame and horror against myself. It was a wonderful story; but I was perfectly convinced. I had scarcely had time to utter a few incoherent exclamations it drew from me, when Kenrick burst into the room. It was he I had heard in the night conferring
with my nurse. He had constantly kept watch at my chamber-door; but he had not ventured to intrude, till mr. Scarborough had prepared the way by a full
explanation. He flew to my knees! Uncle, uncle, said he, will you forgive? It was all my fault. How could I dare to deceive, to have a secret from, a benefactor I so
loved? This is too much! I exclaimed; and fell back upon my pillow. I thought that, if Mary and Kenrick were proved innocent, it would be all joy. It is the reverse. It is a feeling without a name. It is worse than remorse; it is hell. Kenrick, I dare not look upon you. Kill me, my friends, in pity kill me! I am unworthy
to
live. Kenrick exerted himself to soothe me; and never did male of the human species enjoy so great powers for the purpose. Martha understood what was going on, and
would come in. She had a child in her arms. Oh, sir, you asked me whose servant I was, and I would not tell you. I am my mistress's, your lady's, servant. She brought me over to France. She would have me
to be with her in her lying in. And there is her child, the dear boy, that so much harm has been brewed about. Look at him! He has exactly your

mouth; nothing can be more like than his brow; I will take my death, that he is as like you, as if you had spit him out of your mouth. Oh, my dear master, my
benefactor, will you acknowledge him? Kiss him! I die to see you kiss him. I took the child in my arms. I willingly believed all that Martha said of him; my eyes were too much dimmed with tears to see any thing distinctly. I pressed
him to my bosom. I felt that he was the pledge of the most injured of women. I experienced a hundred times the joy that the tenderest-hearted man in the
world
ever felt, when his first-born son was presented to him; because I had believed---what had not infernal villainy induced me to believe? Mary, my wife, the mother of my child, only was absent. I enquired for her with a faltering tongue. Ah, sir! she lives---said Martha. Do not think I enquire for her, as wishing to see her! Dear, injured saint! I could not look at her. What had I to do to marry? to choose the most accomplished
and admirable of her sex? I, that had done wrong, and miscarried, in every station and stage of my life! Would God my eyes were closed for ever! that
recollection were at an end in my mind! that mountains pressed down in peace this hand that has acted, and these lips that have spoken, so much evil!---Yet
tell me, I intreat you, Martha, how your mistress is? It will do you little good, sir, to hear of that! Dear uncle, interrupted Kenrick, compose yourself! You appear scarcely glad to have all your suspicions removed. That which should elevate you with the highest
pleasure, seems only to torment you. True, true, Kenrick! Can I do otherwise

than lament, that the woman I have lost for ever, is so excellent,---would have made me inexpressibly happy, had I not been the wickedest of men? She can never
approach me, never condescend to speak to me, more. Have not you heard her say so? They were silent. The period at which I quitted her, had been to Mary a terrible crisis. What I did appeared to my own mind sufficiently justified, for I regarded her as guilty
of the most enormous of all social crimes, a complicated, a studious, a shameless delusion put upon the husband of her bosom, an elaborate pretence to the
purest faith, when all was false and hollow. But as it appeared to her,---let me speak plainly,--- as it was in itself, as it appeared in the eyes of heaven

and earth,---my conduct was the most cruel and atrocious that ever was perpetrated. Poor Mary! her heart, that heart which had "grown with her growth, and

strengthened with her strength," was buried in the caverns of the ocean. Fifteen months before the period at which I deserted her, she no longer held to the
great mass of living existences but by a single thread. For my sake, with great difficulty and anguish, she had formed to herself a new scheme of being, and

had come back into the world from which she was broken off. And now I, the man for whom she had done this, left her without a home, without reputation,
without
bread. I had "delighted myself with the hope that she would perish in misery." How had all this happened? Mary had never, till within a few minutes of our final parting, heard her name coupled disreputably with that of Kenrick. Kenrick,
half an hour before, when I flew toward him, bursting with abhorrence and revenge, did not understand me, was unable to conceive the slightest idea of what
it
was that had roused me to this tumult. However

strong were the grounds that I thought I had for condemning my kinsman and my wife, she could discern none; to her it must appear the most infamous caprice
that the heart of man ever harboured. Mary was turned out, like Lear in the old chronicles, to the fury of the elements. Had not mr. Scarborough taken the generous resolution to shelter her, she
must have died. At the time when she found herself treated with this inconceivable barbarity, was that a moment when she could devise schemes to support
existence? She would not have had the spirits to ask one human creature for a morsel of bread. Speechless she would have sunk into the arms of death. And she

was several months gone with child! Louisa did every thing in her power to support her languishing friend. Alas, poor Mary abhorred the light of heaven! She detested the idea of taking nutriment
within her lips. Her state of pregnancy

co-operated with the disorder of her mind. For the first two days she was almost continually in fainting fits. Her life was not expected. It seemed scarcely
less than a miracle, that her condition did not at least produce a miscarriage. Indignation, I believe, in this situation served her for her daily bread. Though her nature was gentle, and her manners bland and unassuming, she had pride at
the bottom of her heart, a pride that perhaps towered the higher, in proportion as it was slow to be awaked. She remembered the scene in the garden when I
had
so brutally insulted her; she remembered the dialogue in which I had interrogated her, Who was the father of the child she bore in her womb? She sat down
under
this treatment without any manifestations of violence and rage. But she said to herself, The daughter of Macneil shall never forgive this! She reflected, as

was but natural, upon the desolate condition in which her family

misfortunes had left her, and she regarded these as so many aggravations of the cruelty she had experienced.---Fleetwood, if I had had patrons and protectors
still living, if I had not come dowerless to your bed, you could not have used me thus ungenerously. No; I could live at a distance from the abodes of my
species on the fruits of the earth; I could labour among peasants for my bread; this I should not feel as humiliation; but I cannot stoop ever again to hold

intercourse with the husband that has wronged me. If Mary recollected these aggravations of my offence, they did not present themselves with less bitterness to my mind. I dwelt upon her innocence, her merits,
her defenceless situation, her extinguished race, her embezzled fortune. It seemed as if, now that what the vulgar mind would call the obstacles to our
reunion
were removed, we were more certainly divided than ever. While charges, and accusations, and

historical details, were the mountains that separated us, the case was not altogether hopeless. These might be cleared away and refuted. Now we were separated
by sentiments, that must for ever twine themselves with the vitals of every honourable individual, and that can only be exterminated by the blow which lays
the
head that has conceived them in the dust. Once, as we have seen, Mary so far mastered her feelings as to write me a letter. The purport of that letter was to reinstate the injured Kenrick in my good
opinion, and to claim my justice for the child, my own child, which was shortly to be born: even in that letter she recited the decree that she had herself
pronounced between us, that we were never to see, that we were mutually to be dead to each other. When she saw that letter producing no effect, the horror
she
had conceived against me changed, from a passion, into

a habit of her soul. She never thought of me, but as a man resolutely unjust, to whom the most earnest appeals of eternal truth might be addressed with as much
hope as to the Great Wall of China. Kenrick and Scarborough were indefatigable in their endeavours to restore me to her good opinion and favour. They assured her that the letter upon which she
laid so much stress had never reached me: they described to her the complicated machinations of the villain Gifford, which might have succeeded with the most

clear-sighted and cold-blooded husband in the world. She listened to all this with an unattending ear. Very well! said she. Do not you perceive, that one
dispassionate question, one five minutes of tranquil investigation, would have brushed away in a moment the cobweb intrenchments of Gifford? Did I deserve no

more than this? Kenrick was now become my confident. I related to him all that had happened from the evening that I burst away from him on the banks of the Kennet. These
things he faithfully repeated to my wife. He described to her my sufferings, my insanity, my despair. He spoke of the supper I had celebrated on the
fifteenth
of July. On this she seemed to ponder. Poor Fleetwood! she said. My wife and I had now been four weeks in Paris with only the length of a street between us. I thought of her continually: but I knew the integrity and
elevation of her sentiments, and I felt as if I should die, if I met her even by chance. One evening I sat alone in my hotel. I had had a long and affecting conversation with Kenrick. I had settled the arrangements of my future existence, and had
been acquainting him with the particulars. I was resolved to retire to a strange, wild, despairing situation, which had formerly

left a deep impression upon me, in the midst of the Pyrenees. I found that this little estate was to be sold. I reserved to myself an annuity of four hundred
pounds a year upon my property in England. The rest of my possessions I made over in full to my wife and child, except one agreeable manor, worth about
eighteen thousand pounds, which I settled on Kenrick; a testimony that, of all the men living on the face of the earth, he was the one that most deserved my

love. I demanded of him that he should visit me in my retreat once in two years, bringing my child with him, and should remain each time a few weeks under my

roof. It was dusk. Miss Scarborough and another lady entered the room where I sat. The apartment was large; they withdrew to a distant corner of it; and, upon the
terms on which we lived, it was not necessary for me to derange myself. If it were a Frenchwoman of fashion and high

spirits, she would be told, It was only the melancholy Englishman; and that would be deemed a sufficient apology. I was buried in my own thoughts. They seated
themselves, and continued in a dead silence. I know not how it was, but this silence disturbed me. It was so unlike what I had been accustomed to expect. I
looked toward them. Just at this moment lights were brought in, and placed silently upon the table. The strange lady was clad in black, and a veil covered
her
face. It struck me that her figure was the most beautiful that was ever seen. Her attitude was expressive of dejection and melancholy. She seemed, so far as
I
could judge, again and again to steal a glance at me, and then turn away. I felt my heart thump at my bosom, and my sight grow dizzy. She wrung her hands,
and
put them to her head. She rose as if to go, and leaned on miss Scarborough. Her legs tottered, and she sat down again upon another chair. Fleetwood! said she.---Oh, that voice! Contending emotions, hope, fear, transport and shame, held me motionless. She threw back her veil, and I saw the godlike irradiations of innocence: pale she was, and emaciated with all she had suffered. She looked the less like an
inhabitant of this terrestrial globe. Take my hand! she said; and stretched it out. Take my heart. She fell into my arms. You shall not make your next wedding supper like the last! It is impossible for any one to imagine what I felt at that moment. Whenever I recollect it, I am astonished that I did not expire on the spot. Remorse, while
the party against whom we have offended, still retains its resentment, and regards us with disdain, scarcely raises the outermost cuticle of the heart.