It is
     necessary, therefore, that I should tell you, as an excuse in
     their eyes for presuming to address your daughter, that, by the
     accident of birth, I am descended from an ancient family, and
     nearly allied to a noble one; and that my paternal inheritance,
     though not large enough for splendour and luxury, is sufficient
     for all the purposes of comfort and genteel affluence. I would
     say more on this subject, but I am impatient to remove from
     your mind the prejudice which you seem to have imbibed against
     me. I do not perfectly understand the last paragraph in your
     letter. If you will be so kind as to explain it to me, you may
     depend on my being perfectly ingenuous: indeed, I have no
     difficulty in declaring, that I have neither encouraged a
     feeling, nor uttered a word, capable of giving the lie to the
     declaration which I am now going to make--That I am,

         'With respect and esteem,

            'Your obedient servant,

                       'F. GLENMURRAY.' This letter had an effect on Mrs Mowbray's feelings so much in favour
of Glenmurray, that she was almost determined to let him marry Adeline. She felt that she owed her some amends for contracting a marriage so
suddenly, and without either her knowledge or approbation; and she
thought that, by marrying her to the man of her heart, she should make
her peace both with Adeline and herself. But, unfortunately, this
design, as soon as it began to be formed, was communicated to Sir
Patrick. 'So then!' exclaimed he, 'you have forgotten and forgiven the
impertinent things which the puppy said! things which obliged me to wear
this little useless appendage in a sling thus (pointing to his wounded
arm).' 'O! no, my dear Sir Patrick! But though what Mr Glenmurray said might
alarm the scrupulous tenderness of a lover, perhaps it was a remark
which might only suit the sincerity of a friend. Perhaps, if Mr
Glenmurray had made it to me, I should have heard it with thanks, and
with candour have approved it.' 'My sweet soul!' replied Sir Patrick, 'you may be as candid and amiable
as ever you please, but, 'by St. Patrick!' never shall Sir Patrick
O'Carrol be father-in-law to the notorious and infamous Glenmurray--that
subverter of all religion and order, and that scourge of civilized
society!' So saying, he stalked about the room; and Mrs Mowbray, as she gazed on
his handsome person, thought it would be absurd for her to sacrifice her
own happiness to her daughter's, and give up Sir Patrick as her husband
in order to make Glenmurray her son. She therefore wrote another letter
to Glenmurray, forbidding him any further intercourse with Adeline, on
any pretence whatever; and delayed not a moment to send him her final
decision. 'That is acting like the sensible woman I took you for,' said Sir
Patrick: 'the fellow has now gotten his quietus, I trust, and the dear
little Adeline is reserved for happier fate. Sweet soul! you do not know
how fond she will be of me! I protest that I shall be so kind to her, it
will be difficult for people to decide which I love best, the daughter
or the mother.' 'But I hope _I_ shall always know, Sir Patrick,' said Mrs Mowbray
gravely. 'You!--O yes, to be sure. But I mean that my fatherly attentions shall
be of the warmest kind. But now do me the favour of telling me what hour
tomorrow I may appoint the clergyman to bring the license?' The conversation that followed, it were needless and tedious to describe. Suffice, that eight o'clock the next morning was fixed for the marriage;
and Mrs Mowbray, either from shame or compassion, resolved that Adeline
should not accompany her to church, nor even know of the ceremony till
it was over. Nor was this a difficult matter. Adeline remained in her own apartment
all the preceding day, endeavouring, but in vain, to reconcile herself
to what she justly termed the degradation of her mother. She felt, alas! the most painful of all feelings, next to that of self-abasement, the
consciousness of the abasement of one to whom she had all her life
looked up with love and veneration. To write to Glenmurray while
oppressed by such contending emotions she knew to be impossible; she
therefore contented herself with sending a verbal message, importing
that he should hear from her the next day: and poor Glenmurray passed
the rest of that day and the night in a state little better than her
own. The next morning Adeline, who had not closed her eyes till daylight,
woke late, and from a sound but unrefreshing sleep. The first object she
saw was her maid, smartly dressed, sitting by her bed-side; and she also
saw that she had been crying. 'Is my mother ill, Evans?' she exclaimed. 'O! no, Miss Adeline, quite well,' replied the girl, sighing. 'But why are you so much dressed?' demanded Adeline. 'I have been out,' answered the maid. 'Not on unpleasant business?' 'That's as it may be,' she cried, turning away; and Adeline, from
delicacy, forebore to press her further. ''Tis very late--is it not?' asked Adeline, 'and time for me to rise!' 'Yes, miss--I believe you had better get up.' Adeline immediately rose.--'Give me the dark gown I wore yesterday,'
said she. 'I think, miss, you had better put on your new white one,' returned the
maid. 'My new white one!' exclaimed Adeline, astonished at an interference so
new. 'Yes, miss--I think it will be taken kinder, and look better.' At these words Adeline's suspicions were awakened. 'I see, Evans,' she
cried, 'you have something extraordinary to tell me:--I partly guess;
I,--my mother--' Here, unable to proceed, she lay down on the bed which
she had just quitted. 'Yes, Miss Adeline--'tis very true; but pray compose yourself, I am sure
I have cried enough on your account, that I have.' 'What is true, my good Evans?' said Adeline faintly. 'Why, miss, my lady was married this morning to Sir Patrick
O'Carrol!--Mercy on me, how pale you look! I am sure I wish the villain
was at the bottom of the sea, so I do.' 'Leave me,' said Adeline faintly, struggling for utterance. 'No--that I will not,' bluntly replied Evans; 'you are not fit to be
left; and they are rejoicing below with Sir Pat's great staring servant. But, for my part, I had rather stay here and cry with you than laugh
with them.' Adeline hid her face in the pillow, incapable of further resistance, and
groaned aloud. 'Who should ever have thought my lady would have done so!' continued the
maid.--'Only think, miss! they say, and I doubt it is too true, that
there have been no writings, or settlements, I think they call them,
drawn up; and so Sir Pat have got all, and he is over head and ears in
debt, and my lady is to pay him out on't! At this account, which Adeline feared was a just one, as she had seen no
preparations for a wedding going on, and had observed no signs of deeds,
or any thing of the kind, she started up in an agony of grief--'Then
has my mother given me up, indeed!' she exclaimed, clasping her hands
together, 'and the once darling child may soon be a friendless outcast!' 'You want a friend, Miss Adeline!' said the kind girl, bursting into
tears.--'Never, while I live, or any of my fellow-servants.' And
Adeline, whose heart was bursting with a sense of forlornness and
abandonment, felt consoled by the artless sympathy of her attendant;
and, giving way to a violent flood of tears, she threw her arms round
her neck, and sobbed upon her bosom. Having thus eased her feelings, she recollected that it was incumbent on
her to exert her fortitude; and that it was a duty which she owed her
mother not to condemn her conduct openly herself, nor suffer any one else
to do it in her presence: still, at that moment, she could not find in
her heart to reprove the observations by which, in spite of her sense of
propriety, she had been soothed and gratified; but she hastened to dress
herself as became a bridal dinner, and dismissed, as soon as she could,
the affectionate Evans from her presence. She then walked up and down
her chamber, in order to summon courage to enter the drawing-room.--'But
how strange, how cruel it was,' said she, 'that my mother did not come
to inform me of this important event herself!' In this respect, however, Mrs Mowbray had acted kindly. Reluctant, even
more than she was willing to confess to her own heart, to meet Adeline
alone, she had chosen to conclude that she was still asleep, and had
desired she might not be disturbed; but soon after her return from
church, being assured that she was in a sound slumber, she had stolen to
her bed-side and put a note under her pillow, acquainting her with what
had passed: but this note Adeline in her restlessness had, with her
pillow, pushed on the floor, and there unseen it had remained. But, as
Adeline was pacing to and fro, she luckily observed it; and, by proving
that her mother had not been so very neglectful of her, it tended to
fortify her mind against the succeeding interview. The note began:--

    'My dearest child! to spare you, in your present weak state, the
    emotion which you would necessarily feel in attending me to the
    altar, I have resolved to let the ceremony be performed unknown
    to you. But, my beloved Adeline, I trust that your affection for
    me will make you rejoice in a step, which you may, perhaps, at
    present disapprove, when convinced that it was absolutely
    necessary to my happiness, and can, in no way, be the means of
    diminishing yours. 'I remain

                 'Your ever affectionate mother.' 'She loves me still then!' cried Adeline, shedding tears of tenderness,
'and I accused her unjustly.--O my dear mother, if this event should
indeed increase your happiness, never shall I repine at not having been
able to prevent it.' And then, after taking two or three hasty turns
round the room, and bathing her eyes to remove in a degree the traces of
her tears, she ventured into the drawing-room. But the sight of her mother seated by Sir Patrick, his arm encircling
her waist, in that very room which had so lately witnessed his
profligate attempts on herself, deprived her of the little resolution
which she had been able to assume, and pale and trembling she sunk
speechless with emotion on the first chair near her. Mrs Mowbray, or, as we must at present call her, Lady O'Carrol, was
affected by Adeline's distress, and, hastening to her, received the
almost fainting girl in her arms; while even Sir Patrick, feeling
compassion for the unhappiness which he could more readily understand
than his bride, was eager to hide his confusion by calling for water,
drops, and servants. 'I want neither medicine nor assistance now,' said Adeline, gently
raising her head from her mother's shoulder: 'the shock is over, and I
shall, I trust, behave in future with proper self-command.' 'Better late than never,' muttered Lady O'Carrol, on whom the word
_shock_ had not made a pleasant impression; while Sir Patrick,
approaching Adeline, exclaimed, 'If you have not self-command, Miss
Mowbray, it is the only command which you cannot boast; for your power
of commanding others no one can dispute, who has ever had the happiness
of beholding you.' So saying, he took her hand; and, as her mother's husband, claimed the
privilege of saluting her,--a privilege which Adeline, though she almost
shrunk with horror from his touch, had _self-command_ enough not to
deny him: immediately after he claimed the same favour from his bride;
and they resumed their position on the sofa. But so embarrassing was the situation of all parties that no
conversation took place; and Adeline, unable any longer to endure the
restraint to which she was obliged, rose, to return to her own room, in
order to hide the sorrow which she was on the point of betraying, when
her mother in a tone of reproach exclaimed, 'It grieves me to the soul,
Miss Mowbray, to perceive that you appear to consider as a day of
mourning the day which I consider as the happiest of my life.' 'Oh! my dearest mother!' replied Adeline, returning and approaching her,
'it is the dread of your deceiving yourself, only, that makes me sad at
a time like this: if this day in its consequences prove a happy one--'

'And wherefore should you doubt that it will, Miss Mowbray?' 'Miss Mowbray, do you doubt my honour?' cried Sir Patrick hastily. Adeline instantly fixed her fine eyes on his face with a look which he
knew how to interpret, but not how to support: and he cast his to the
ground with painful consciousness. She saw her triumph, and it gave her courage to proceed:--'O sir!' she
cried, 'it is in your power to convert all my painful doubts into joyful
certainties; make but my mother happy, and I will love and bless you
ever.--Promise me, sir,' she continued, her enthusiasm and affection
kindling as she spoke, 'promise me to be kind and indulgent to her;--she
has never known contradiction; she has been through life the darling
object of all who surrounded her; the pride of her parents, her husband,
and her child: neglect, injury, and unkindness she would inevitably sink
under: and I conjure you (here she dropped on her knees and extended her
arms in an attitude of entreaty) by all your hopes of happiness
hereafter, to give her reason to continue to name this the happiest day
of her life.' Here she ceased, overcome by the violence of her emotions; but continued
her look and attitude of entreaty, full of such sweet earnestness,
that the baronet could hardly conceal the variety of feelings which
assailed him; amongst which, passion for the lovely object before him
predominated. To make a jest of Adeline's seriousness he conceived to be
the best way to conceal what he felt; and while Mrs Mowbray, overcome
with Adeline's expressions of tenderness, was giving way to them by a
flood of tears, and grasping in both hers the clasped hands of Adeline,
he cried, in an ironical tone,--'You are the most extraordinary motherly
young creature that I ever saw in my life, my dear girl! Instead of your
mother giving the nuptial benediction to you, the order of nature is
reversed, and you are giving it to her. Upon my word I begin to think,
seeing you in that posture, that you are my bride begging a blessing of
mamma on our union, and that I ought to be on my knees too.' So saying, he knelt beside Adeline at Lady O'Carrol's feet, and in a
tone of mock solemnity besought her to bless both her affectionate
children: and as he did this, he threw his arm round the weeping girl,
and pressed her to his bosom. This speech, and this action, at once
banished all self-command from the indignant Adeline, and in an instant
she sprung from his embrace; and forgetting how much her violence must
surprise, if not alarm and offend, her mother, she rushed out of the
room, and did not stop till she had reached her own chamber. When there, she was alarmed lest her conduct should have occasioned
both pain and resentment to Lady O'Carrol; and it was with trembling
reluctance that she obeyed the summons to dinner; but her fears were
groundless. The bride had fallen into one of her reveries during Sir
Patrick's strange speech, from which she awakened only at the last words
of it, viz. 'affectionate children:' and seeing Sir Patrick at her
feet, with a very tender expression on his face, and hearing the words
'affectionate children,' she conceived that he was expressing his hopes
of their being blest with progeny, and that a selfish feeling of fear at
such a prospect had hurried Adeline out of the room. She was therefore
disposed to regard her daughter with pity, but not with resentment, when
she entered the dinner-room, and Adeline's tranquillity in a degree
returned: but when she retired for the night she could not help owning
to herself, that that day, her mother's wedding day, had been the most
painful of her existence--and she literally sobbed herself to sleep. The next morning a new trial awaited her; she had to write a final
farewell to Glenmurray. Many letters did she begin, many did she finish,
and many did she tear; but recollecting that the longer she delayed
sending him one, the longer she kept him in a state of agitating
suspense, she resolved to send the last written, even though it appeared
to her not quite so strong a transcript of her feelings as the former
ones. Whether it was so or not, Glenmurray received it with alternate
agony and transport;--with agony because it destroyed every hope of
Adeline's being his,--and with transport, because every line breathed
the purest and yet most ardent attachment, and convinced him that,
however long their separation, the love of Adeline would experience no
change. Many days elapsed before Glenmurray could bear any companion but the
letter of Adeline; and during that time she was on the road with the
bride and bridegroom to a beautiful seat in Berkshire, called the
Pavilion, hired by Sir Patrick, the week before his marriage, of one of
his profligate friends. As the road lay through a very fine country,
Adeline would have thought the journey a pleasant one, had not the idea
of Glenmurray ill and dejected continually haunted her. Sir Patrick
appeared to be engrossed by his bride, and she was really wholly wrapt
up in him; and at times the beauties of the scenery around had power to
engage Adeline's attention: but she immediately recollected how much
Glenmurray would have participated in her delight, and the contemplation
of the prospect ended in renewed recollections of him. At length they arrived at the place of their destination; and Sir
Patrick, warmly embracing his bride, bade her welcome to her new abode;
and immediately approaching Adeline, he bestowed on her an embrace no
less cordial:--or, to say the truth, so ardent seemed the welcome, even
to the innocent Adeline, that she vainly endeavoured to persuade herself
that, as her father-in-law, Sir Patrick's tenderness was excusable. Spite of her efforts to be cheerful she was angry and suspicious, and
had an indistinct feeling of remote danger; which though she could not
define even to herself, it was new and painful to her to experience. But as the elastic mind of eighteen soon rebounds from the pressure of
sorrow, and forgets in present enjoyment the prospect of evil, Adeline
gazed on the elegant apartment she was in with joyful surprise; while,
through folding doors on either side of it, she beheld a suite of rooms,
all furnished with a degree of tasteful simplicity such as she had never
before beheld: and through the windows, which opened on a lawn that
sloped to the banks of a rapid river, she saw an amphitheatre of wooded
hills, which proved that, how great soever had been the efforts of art
to decorate their new habitation, the hand of Nature had done still more
to embellish it; and all fear of Sir Patrick was lost in gratitude for
his having chosen such a retirement. With eager curiosity Adeline hurried from room to room; admired in the
western apartments the fine effect of the declining sun shining through
rose-coloured window curtains; gazed with delight on the statues and
pictures that every where met the eye, and reposed with unsuspecting
gaiety on the couches of eider down which were in profusion around. Every thing in the house spoke it to be the temple of Pleasure: but the
innocent Adeline and her unobservant mother saw nothing but elegant
convenience in an abode in which the disciples of Epicurus might have
delighted; and while Æolian harps in the windows, and perfumes of all
kinds, added to the enchantment of the scene, the bride only beheld in
the choice of the villa a proof of her husband's desire of making her
happy; and Adeline sighed for virtuous love and Glenmurray, as all that
was wanting to complete her fascination. Sir Patrick, meanwhile, was not blind to the impressions made on Adeline
by the beauty of the spot which he had chosen, though he was far from
suspecting the companion she had pictured to herself as most fitted
to enjoy and embellish it; and pleased because she was pleased, and
delighted to be regarded by her with such unusual looks of complacency,
he gave himself up to his natural vivacity; and Adeline passed a merry,
if not a happy, evening with the bride and bridegroom. But the next morning she arose with the painful conviction as fresh as
ever on her mind, that day would succeed to day; and yet she should not
behold Glenmurray: and that day would succeed to day, and still should
she see O'Carrol, still be exposed to his noisy mirth, to his odious
familiarities, which, though she taught herself to believe they
proceeded merely from the customs of his country, and the nearness of
their relationship, it was to her most painful to endure. Her only resource, therefore, from unpleasant thoughts was reading;
and she eagerly opened the cases of books in the library, which were
unlocked. But, on taking down some of the books, she was disappointed to
find none of the kind to which she had been accustomed. Mrs Mowbray's
peculiar taste had led her, as we have before observed, to the perusal
of nothing but political tracts, systems of philosophy, and Scuderi's
and other romances. Scarcely had the works of our best poets found their
way to her library; and novels, plays, and works of a lighter kind she
was never in the habit of reading herself, and consequently had not put
in the hands of her daughter. Adeline had, therefore, read Rousseau's
_Contrat Social_, but not his _Julie_; Montesquieu's _Esprit des Loix_,
but not his _Lettres Persanes_; and had glowed with republican ardour
over the scenes of Voltaire's _Brutus_, but had never had her mind
polluted by the pages of his romances. Different had been the circumstances, and consequently the practice,
of the owner of Sir Patrick's new abode. Of all Rousseau's works, he
had in his library only the _New Heloise_ and his _Confessions_; of
Montesquieu, none but the glowing letters above-mentioned; and while
Voltaire's chaste and moral tragedies were excluded, his profligate
tales attracted the eye by the peculiar elegance of their binding, while
dangerous French novels of all descriptions met the view under the downy
pillows of the inviting sofas around, calculated to inflame the fancy
and corrupt the morals. But Adeline, unprepared by any reading of the kind to receive and
relish the poison contained in them, turned with disgust from pages so
uncongenial to her feelings; nor did her eye dwell delighted on any of
the stores which the shelves contained. Disappointment in her hopes of finding amusement in reading, Adeline had
recourse to walking; and none of the beautiful scenes around remained
long unexplored by her. In her rambles she but too frequently saw
scenes of poverty and distress, which ill contrasted with the beauty of
the house which she inhabited; scenes, which even a small portion of
the money expended there in useless decoration would have entirely
alleviated: and they were scenes, too, which Adeline had been accustomed
to relieve. The extreme of poverty in the cottage did not disgrace, on
the Mowbray estate, the well-furnished mansion-house; but Adeline, as
we have observed before, was allowed to draw on her mother for money
sufficient to prevent industrious labour from knowing the distress of
want. 'And why should I not draw on her here for money for the same purposes?' cried Adeline to herself, as she beheld one spectacle of peculiar
hardships.--'Surely my mother is not dependent on her husband? and even
if she were, Sir Patrick has not a hard heart, and will not refuse my
prayer': and therefore, promising the sufferers instant relief, she left
them, saying she should soon reach the Pavilion and be back again; while
the objects of her bounty were silent with surprise at hearing that
their relief was to come from the Pavilion, a place hitherto closed to
the solicitations of poverty, though ever open to the revels and the
votaries of pleasure. Adeline found her mother alone; and with a beating heart and a flushed
cheek, she described the scene which she had witnessed, and begged to be
restored to her old office of almoner on such occasions. 'A sad scene, indeed, my dear Adeline!' replied the bride in evident
embarrassment, 'and I will speak to Sir Patrick about it.' 'Speak to Sir Patrick, madam! cannot you follow the impulse of humanity
without consulting him?' 'I can't give the relief you ask without his assistance,' replied her
mother; 'for, except a guinea or so, I have no loose cash about me for
my own uses.--Sir Patrick's benevolence has long ago emptied his purse,
and I gladly surrendered mine to him.' 'And shall you in future have no money for the purposes of charity but
that you must claim from Sir Patrick?' asked Adeline mournfully. 'O dear! yes,--I have a very handsome allowance settled on me; but then
at present he wants it himself (Adeline involuntarily clasped her hands
together in an agony, and sighed deeply.) But, however, child,' added
the bride, 'as you seem to make such a point of it, take this guinea to
the cottage you mention, _en attendant_!' Adeline took the guinea: but it was very insufficient to pay for medical
attendance, to discharge the rent due to a clamorous landlord, and to
purchase several things necessary for the relief of the poor sufferers:
therefore she added another guinea to it, and, not liking to relate her
disappointment, sent the money to them, desiring the servant to say that
she would see them the next morning, when she resolved to apply to Sir
Patrick for the relief which her mother could not give; feeling at the
same time the mournful conviction, that she herself, as well as her
mother, would be in future dependent on his bounty. Though disposed to give way to mournful reflections on her own account,
Adeline roused herself from the melancholy abstraction into which she
was falling, by reflecting that she had still to plead the cause of the
poor cottagers with Sir Patrick; and hearing he was in the house, she
hastened to prefer her petition. Sir Patrick listened to her tone of voice, and gazed on her expressive
countenance with delight; but when she had concluded her narration a
solitary half-guinea was all he bestowed on her, saying, 'I am never
roused to charity by the descriptions of others; I must always see the
distress which I am solicited to relieve.' 'Then go with me to the cottage,' exclaimed Adeline; but to her great
mortification he only smiled, bowed, and disappeared: and when he
returned to supper, Adeline could scarcely prevail on herself to look at
him without displeasure, and could not endure the unfeeling vivacity of
his manner. Mortified and unhappy, she next morning went to the cottage, reluctant
to impart to its expecting inhabitants the ill success she had
experienced. But what was her surprise when they came out joyfully to
meet her, and told her that a gentleman had been there that morning
very early, had discharged their debts, and given them a sum of money
for their future wants! 'His name, his name?' eagerly inquired Adeline: but that they said he
refused to give; and as he was in a horseman's large coat, and held a
hankerchief to his face, they were sure they should not know him again. A pleasing suspicion immediately came across Adeline's mind that this
benevolent unknown might be Glenmurray: and the idea that he was perhaps
unseen hovering round her, gave her one of the most exquisite feelings
which she had ever known. But this agreeable delusion was soon
dissipated by one of the children's giving her a card which the kind
stranger had dropped from his pocket; and this card had on it 'Sir
Patrick O'Carrol.' At first it was natural for her to be hurt and disappointed at finding
that her hopes concerning Glenmurray had no foundation in truth; but her
benevolence, and indeed regard for her mother's happiness as well as her
own, led her to rejoice in this unexpected proof of excellence in Sir
Patrick.--He had evidently proved that he loved to do good by stealth,
and had withdrawn himself even from her thanks. In a moment, therefore, she banished from her mind every trace of his
unworthiness. She had done him injustice, and she sought refuge from the
remorse which this consciousness inflicted on her, by going into the
opposite extreme. From that hour, indeed, her complaisance to his
opinions, and her attentions to him, were so unremitting and evident,
that Sir Patrick's passion became stronger than ever, and his hopes of a
return to it seemed to be built on a very strong foundation. Adeline had given all her former suspicions to the wind; daily instances
of his benevolence came to her knowledge, and threw such a charm over
all he said and did, that even the familiarity in his conduct, look, and
manner towards her, appeared to her now nothing more than the result of
the free manners of his countrymen:--and she sometimes could not help
wishing Sir Patrick to be known to, and intimate with, Glenmurray. But
the moment was now at hand that was to unveil the real character of Sir
Patrick, and determine the destiny of Adeline. One day Sir Patrick proposed taking his bride to see a beautiful
_ferme ornee_ at about twelve miles' distance; and if it answered the
expectations which he had formed of it, they were determined to spend
two or three days in the neighbourhood to enjoy the beauty of the
grounds;--in that case he was to return in the evening to the Pavilion,
and drive Adeline over the next morning to partake in their pleasure. To this scheme both the ladies gladly consented, as it was impossible
for them to suspect the villainous design which it was intended to aid. The truth was, that Sir Patrick, having, as he fondly imagined, gained
Adeline's affections, resolved to defer no longer the profligate attempt
which he had long meditated; and had contrived this excursion in order
to insure his wife's absence from home, and a tête-à-tête with her
daughter. At an early hour the curricle was at the door, and Sir Patrick, having
handed his lady in, took leave of Adeline. He told her that he should
probably return early in the evening, pressed her hand more tenderly
than usual, and, springing into the carriage, drove off with a
countenance animated with expected triumph. Adeline immediately set out on a long walk to the adjoining villages,
visited the cottages near the Pavilion, and, having dined at an early
hour, determined to pass the rest of the day in reading, provided it was
possible for her to find any book in the house proper for her perusal. With this intention she repaired to an apartment called the library, but
what in these times would be denominated a _boudoir_, and this, even in
Paris, would have been admired for its voluptuous elegance.--On the
table lay several costly volumes, which seemed to have been very lately
perused by Sir Patrick, as some of them were open, some turned down
at particular passages: but as soon as she glanced her eye over their
contents, Adeline indignantly threw them down again; and, while her
cheek glowed with the blush of offended modesty she threw herself on
a sofa, and fell into a long and mournful reverie on the misery which
awaited her mother, in consequence of her having madly dared to unite
herself for life to a young libertine, who could delight in no other
reading but what was offensive to good morals and to delicacy. Nor could
she dwell upon this subject without recurring to her former fears for
herself; and so lost was she in agonizing reflections, that it was some
time before she recollected herself sufficiently to remember that she
was guilty of an indecorum, in staying so long in an apartment which
contained books that she ought not even to be suspected of having had an
opportunity to peruse. Having once entertained this consciousness, Adeline hastily arose, and
had just reached the door when Sir Patrick himself appeared at it. She started back in terror when she beheld him, on observing in his
countenance and manner evident marks not only of determined profligacy,
but of intoxication. Her suspicions were indeed just. Bold as he was in
iniquity, he dared not in a cool and sober moment put his guilty purpose
in execution; and he shrunk with temporary horror from an attempt on the
honour of the daughter of his wife, though he believed that she would be
a willing victim. He had therefore stopped on the road to fortify his
courage with wine; and, luckily for Adeline, he had taken more than he
was aware of; for when, after a vehement declaration of the ardour of
his passion, he dared irreverently to approach her, Adeline, strong
in innocence, aware of his intention, and presuming on his situation,
disengaged herself from his grasp with ease; and pushing him with
violence from her, he fell with such force against the brass edge of one
of the sofas, that, stunned and wounded by the fall, he lay bleeding on
the ground. Adeline involuntarily was hastening to his assistance: but
recollecting how mischievous to her such an exertion of humanity might
be, she contented herself with ringing the bell violently to call the
servants to his aid. Then, in almost frantic haste, she rushed out of
the house, ran across the park, and when she recovered her emotion she
found herself, she scarcely knew how, sitting on a turf seat by the road
side. 'What will become of me!' she wildly exclaimed: 'my mother's roof is
no longer a protection to me;--I cannot absent myself from it without
alleging a reason for my conduct, which will ruin her peace of mind
for ever. Wretch that I am! whither can I go, and where can I seek for
refuge?' At this moment, as she looked around in wild dismay, and raised her
streaming eyes to heaven, she saw a man's face peeping from between the
branches of a tree opposite to her, and observed that he was gazing on
her intently. Alarmed and fluttered, she instantly started from her
seat, and was hastening away, when the man suddenly dropped from his
hiding-place, and, running after her, called her by her name, and
conjured her to stop; while, with an emotion of surprise and delight,
she recognized in him Arthur, the servant of Glenmurray! Instantly, scarcely knowing what she did, she pressed the astonished
Arthur's rough hand in hers; and by this action confused and confounded
the poor fellow so much, that the speech which he was going to make
faltered on his tongue. 'Oh! where is your master?' eagerly inquired Adeline. 'My master has sent you this, miss,' replied Arthur, holding out a
letter, which Adeline joyfully received; and, spite of her intended
obedience to her mother's will, Glenmurray himself could not have met
with a more favourable reception, for the moment was a most propitious
one to his love: nor, as it happened, was Glenmurray too far off to
profit by it.