She remembered that he had yet to learn to be
laughed at, and it was rather too early to begin. In anticipating the happiness of Bingley, which of
course was to be inferior only to his own, he continued the conversation till they reached the house. In the hall they parted. "My dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?" was a question which Elizabeth received from
Jane as soon as she entered their room, and from all the others when they sat down to table. She
had only to say in reply, that they had wandered about, till she was beyond her own knowledge. She
coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor anything else, awakened a suspicion of the truth. The evening passed quietly, unmarked by anything extraordinary. The acknowledged lovers talked
and laughed, the unacknowledged were silent. Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness
overflows in mirth; and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather knew that she was happy
than felt herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment, there were other evils before
her. She anticipated what would be felt in the family when her situation became known; she was
aware that no one liked him but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a dislike which not
all his fortune and consequence might do away. At night she opened her heart to Jane. Though suspicion was very far from Miss Bennet's general
habits, she was absolutely incredulous here. "You are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be!-engaged to Mr. Darcy! No, no, you shall not deceive me. I
know it to be impossible." "This is a wretched beginning indeed! My sole dependence was on you; and I am sure nobody else
will believe me, if you do not. Yet, indeed, I am in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves
me, and we are engaged." Jane looked at her doubtingly. "Oh, Lizzy! it cannot be. I know how much you dislike him." "You know nothing of the matter. That is all to be forgot. Perhaps I did not always love him so well as
I do now. But in such cases as these, a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall ever
remember it myself." Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more seriously assured her of its truth. "Good Heaven! can it be really so! Yet now I must believe you," cried Jane. "My dear, dear Lizzy, I
would-I do congratulate you-but are you certain? forgive the question-are you quite certain that
you can be happy with him?" "There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already, that we are to be the happiest
couple in the world. But are you pleased, Jane? Shall you like to have such a brother?" "Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more delight. But we considered it, we
talked of it as impossible. And do you really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! do anything
rather than marry without affection. Are you quite sure that you feel what you ought to do?" "Oh, yes! You will only think I feel more than I ought to do, when I tell you all." "What do you mean?" "Why, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. I am afraid you will be angry." "My dearest sister, now be serious. I want to talk very seriously. Let me know every thing that I am to
know, without delay. Will you tell me how long you have loved him?" "It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it began. But I believe I must date it
from my first seeing his beautiful grounds at Pemberley." Another entreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the desired effect; and she soon
satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances of attachment. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet
had nothing further to wish. "Now I am quite happy," said she, "for you will be as happy as myself. I always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his love of you, I must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley's
friend and your husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me. But Lizzy, you have
been very sly, very reserved with me. How little did you tell me of what passed at Pemberley and
Lambton! I owe all that I know of it to another, not to you." Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been unwilling to mention Bingley; and the
unsettled state of her own feelings had made her equally avoid the name of his friend. But now she
would no longer conceal from her his share in Lydia's marriage. All was acknowledged, and half the
night spent in conversation. "Good gracious!" cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the next morning, "if that disagreeable
Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so tiresome as
to be always coming here? I had no notion but he would go a-shooting, or something or other, and
not disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him? Lizzy, you must walk out with him
again, that he may not be in Bingley's way." Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal; yet was really vexed that her
mother should be always giving him such an epithet. As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and shook hands with such warmth,
as left no doubt of his good information; and he soon afterwards said aloud, "Mrs. Bennet, have you
no more lanes hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-day?" "I advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty," said Mrs. Bennet, "to walk to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Mr. Darcy has never seen the view." "It may do very well for the others," replied Mr. Bingley; "but I am sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won't it, Kitty?" Kitty owned that she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great curiosity to
see the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently consented. As she went up stairs to get ready,
Mrs. Bennet followed her, saying:
"I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that disagreeable man all to yourself. But I
hope you will not mind it: it is all for Jane's sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking to
him, except just now and then. So, do not put yourself to inconvenience." During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet's consent should be asked in the course of the
evening. Elizabeth reserved to herself the application for her mother's. She could not determine how
her mother would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur would be enough
to overcome her abhorrence of the man. But whether she were violently set against the match, or
violently delighted with it, it was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to
her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear the first raptures of her joy, than
the first vehemence of her disapprobation. In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, she saw Mr. Darcy rise also and follow
him, and her agitation on seeing it was extreme. She did not fear her father's opposition, but he was
going to be made unhappy; and that it should be through her means-that she, his favourite child,
should be distressing him by her choice, should be filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of
her-was a wretched reflection, and she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when, looking at
him, she was a little relieved by his smile. In a few minutes he approached the table where she was
sitting with Kitty; and, while pretending to admire her work said in a whisper, "Go to your father, he
wants you in the library." She was gone directly. Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious. "Lizzy," said he, "what are you
doing? Are you out of your senses, to be accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?" How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more reasonable, her
expressions more moderate! It would have spared her from explanations and professions which it
was exceedingly awkward to give; but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some
confusion, of her attachment to Mr. Darcy. "Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be sure, and you may have more
fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane. But will they make you happy?" "Have you any other objection," said Elizabeth, "than your belief of my indifference?" "None at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but this would be nothing if you
really liked him." "I do, I do like him," she replied, with tears in her eyes, "I love him. Indeed he has no improper pride. He is perfectly amiable. You do not know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of
him in such terms." "Lizzy," said her father, "I have given him my consent. He is the kind of man, indeed, to whom I
should never dare refuse anything, which he condescended to ask. I now give it to you, if you are
resolved on having him. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know your disposition, Lizzy. I
know that you could be neither happy nor respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband;
unless you looked up to him as a superior. Your lively talents would place you in the greatest danger
in an unequal marriage. You could scarcely escape discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the
grief of seeing you unable to respect your partner in life. You know not what you are about." Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply; and at length, by repeated
assurances that Mr. Darcy was really the object of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which
her estimation of him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that his affection was not the
work of a day, but had stood the test of many months' suspense, and enumerating with energy all his
good qualities, she did conquer her father's incredulity, and reconcile him to the match. "Well, my dear," said he, when she ceased speaking, "I have no more to say. If this be the case, he
deserves you. I could not have parted with you, my Lizzy, to anyone less worthy." To complete the favourable impression, she then told him what Mr. Darcy had voluntarily done for
Lydia. He heard her with astonishment. "This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did every thing; made up the match, gave the
money, paid the fellow's debts, and got him his commission! So much the better. It will save me a
world of trouble and economy. Had it been your uncle's doing, I must and would have paid him; but
these violent young lovers carry every thing their own way. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow; he will
rant and storm about his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter." He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before, on his reading Mr. Collins's letter; and
after laughing at her some time, allowed her at last to go-saying, as she quitted the room, "If any
young men come for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure." Elizabeth's mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after half an hour's quiet reflection
in her own room, she was able to join the others with tolerable composure. Every thing was too
recent for gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer anything material to
be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time. When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she followed her, and made the important
communication. Its effect was most extraordinary; for on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still,
and unable to utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, many minutes that she could comprehend
what she heard; though not in general backward to credit what was for the advantage of her family,
or that came in the shape of a lover to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in
her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself. "Good gracious! Lord bless me! only think! dear me! Mr. Darcy! Who would have thought it! And is it
really true? Oh! my sweetest Lizzy! how rich and how great you will be! What pin-money, what
jewels, what carriages you will have! Jane's is nothing to it-nothing at all. I am so pleased-so
happy. Such a charming man!-so handsome! so tall!-Oh, my dear Lizzy! pray apologise for my
having disliked him so much before. I hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in town! Every thing that is charming! Three daughters married! Ten thousand a year! Oh, Lord! What will
become of me. I shall go distracted." This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted: and Elizabeth, rejoicing that
such an effusion was heard only by herself, soon went away. But before she had been three minutes
in her own room, her mother followed her. "My dearest child," she cried, "I can think of nothing else! Ten thousand a year, and very likely more! 'Tis as good as a Lord! And a special licence. You must and shall be married by a special licence. But
my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of, that I may have it to-morrow." This was a sad omen of what her mother's behaviour to the gentleman himself might be; and
Elizabeth found that, though in the certain possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her
relations' consent, there was still something to be wished for. But the morrow passed off much
better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood in such awe of her intended son-in-law that
she ventured not to speak to him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her
deference for his opinion. Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get acquainted with him; and Mr.
Bennet soon assured her that he was rising every hour in his esteem. "I admire all my three sons-in-law highly," said he. "Wickham, perhaps, is my favourite; but I think I
shall like your husband quite as well as Jane's. Elizabeth's spirits soon rising to playfulness again, she wanted Mr. Darcy to account for his having
ever fallen in love with her. "How could you begin?" said she. "I can comprehend your going on
charmingly, when you had once made a beginning; but what could set you off in the first place?" "I cannot fix on the hour, or the spot, or the look, or the words, which laid the foundation. It is too
long ago. I was in the middle before I knew that I had begun." "My beauty you had early withstood, and as for my manners-my behaviour to you was at least
always bordering on the uncivil, and I never spoke to you without rather wishing to give you pain
than not. Now be sincere; did you admire me for my impertinence?" "For the liveliness of your mind, I did." "You may as well call it impertinence at once. It was very little less. The fact is, that you were sick of
civility, of deference, of officious attention. You were disgusted with the women who were always
speaking, and looking, and thinking for your approbation alone. I roused, and interested you, because
I was so unlike them. Had you not been really amiable, you would have hated me for it; but in spite of
the pains you took to disguise yourself, your feelings were always noble and just; and in your heart,
you thoroughly despised the persons who so assiduously courted you. There-I have saved you the
trouble of accounting for it; and really, all things considered, I begin to think it perfectly reasonable. To be sure, you knew no actual good of me-but nobody thinks of that when they fall in love." "Was there no good in your affectionate behaviour to Jane while she was ill at Netherfield?" "Dearest Jane! who could have done less for her? But make a virtue of it by all means. My good
qualities are under your protection, and you are to exaggerate them as much as possible; and, in
return, it belongs to me to find occasions for teasing and quarrelling with you as often as may be; and
I shall begin directly by asking you what made you so unwilling to come to the point at last. What
made you so shy of me, when you first called, and afterwards dined here? Why, especially, when you
called, did you look as if you did not care about me?" "Because you were grave and silent, and gave me no encouragement." "But I was embarrassed." "And so was I." "You might have talked to me more when you came to dinner." "A man who had felt less, might." "How unlucky that you should have a reasonable answer to give, and that I should be so reasonable
as to admit it! But I wonder how long you would have gone on, if you had been left to yourself. I
wonder when you would have spoken, if I had not asked you! My resolution of thanking you for your
kindness to Lydia had certainly great effect. Too much, I am afraid; for what becomes of the moral, if
our comfort springs from a breach of promise? for I ought not to have mentioned the subject. This
will never do." "You need not distress yourself. The moral will be perfectly fair. Lady Catherine's unjustifiable
endeavours to separate us were the means of removing all my doubts. I am not indebted for my
present happiness to your eager desire of expressing your gratitude. I was not in a humour to wait
for any opening of yours. My aunt's intelligence had given me hope, and I was determined at once to
know every thing." "Lady Catherine has been of infinite use, which ought to make her happy, for she loves to be of use. But tell me, what did you come down to Netherfield for? Was it merely to ride to Longbourn and be
embarrassed? or had you intended any more serious consequence?" "My real purpose was to see you, and to judge, if I could, whether I might ever hope to make you
love me. My avowed one, or what I avowed to myself, was to see whether your sister were still
partial to Bingley, and if she were, to make the confession to him which I have since made." "Shall you ever have courage to announce to Lady Catherine what is to befall her?" "I am more likely to want more time than courage, Elizabeth. But it ought to be done, and if you will
give me a sheet of paper, it shall be done directly." "And if I had not a letter to write myself, I might sit by you and admire the evenness of your writing,
as another young lady once did. But I have an aunt, too, who must not be longer neglected." From an unwillingness to confess how much her intimacy with Mr. Darcy had been over-rated,
Elizabeth had never yet answered Mrs. Gardiner's long letter; but now, having that to communicate
which she knew would be most welcome, she was almost ashamed to find that her uncle and aunt
had already lost three days of happiness, and immediately wrote as follows:
"I would have thanked you before, my dear aunt, as I ought to have done, for your long, kind,
satisfactory, detail of particulars; but to say the truth, I was too cross to write. You supposed more
than really existed. But now suppose as much as you choose; give a loose rein to your fancy, indulge
your imagination in every possible flight which the subject will afford, and unless you believe me
actually married, you cannot greatly err. You must write again very soon, and praise him a great deal
more than you did in your last. I thank you, again and again, for not going to the Lakes. How could I
be so silly as to wish it! Your idea of the ponies is delightful. We will go round the Park every day. I
am the happiest creature in the world. Perhaps other people have said so before, but not one with
such justice. I am happier even than Jane; she only smiles, I laugh. Mr. Darcy sends you all the love in
the world that he can spare from me. You are all to come to Pemberley at Christmas. Yours, etc." Mr. Darcy's letter to Lady Catherine was in a different style; and still different from either was what
Mr. Bennet sent to Mr. Collins, in reply to his last. "DEAR SIR,
"I must trouble you once more for congratulations. Elizabeth will soon be the wife of Mr. Darcy. Console Lady Catherine as well as you can. But, if I were you, I would stand by the nephew. He has
more to give. "Yours sincerely, etc." Miss Bingley's congratulations to her brother, on his approaching marriage, were all that was
affectionate and insincere. She wrote even to Jane on the occasion, to express her delight, and
repeat all her former professions of regard. Jane was not deceived, but she was affected; and though
feeling no reliance on her, could not help writing her a much kinder answer than she knew was
deserved. The joy which Miss Darcy expressed on receiving similar information, was as sincere as her brother's
in sending it. Four sides of paper were insufficient to contain all her delight, and all her earnest desire
of being loved by her sister. Before any answer could arrive from Mr. Collins, or any congratulations to Elizabeth from his wife,
the Longbourn family heard that the Collinses were come themselves to Lucas Lodge. The reason of
this sudden removal was soon evident. Lady Catherine had been rendered so exceedingly angry by
the contents of her nephew's letter, that Charlotte, really rejoicing in the match, was anxious to get
away till the storm was blown over. At such a moment, the arrival of her friend was a sincere
pleasure to Elizabeth, though in the course of their meetings she must sometimes think the pleasure
dearly bought, when she saw Mr. Darcy exposed to all the parading and obsequious civility of her
husband. He bore it, however, with admirable calmness. He could even listen to Sir William Lucas,
when he complimented him on carrying away the brightest jewel of the country, and expressed his
hopes of their all meeting frequently at St. James's, with very decent composure. If he did shrug his
shoulders, it was not till Sir William was out of sight. Mrs. Phillips's vulgarity was another, and perhaps a greater, tax on his forbearance; and though Mrs.
Phillips, as well as her sister, stood in too much awe of him to speak with the familiarity which
Bingley's good humour encouraged, yet, whenever she did speak, she must be vulgar. Nor was her
respect for him, though it made her more quiet, at all likely to make her more elegant. Elizabeth did
all she could to shield him from the frequent notice of either, and was ever anxious to keep him to
herself, and to those of her family with whom he might converse without mortification; and though
the uncomfortable feelings arising from all this took from the season of courtship much of its
pleasure, it added to the hope of the future; and she looked forward with delight to the time when
they should be removed from society so little pleasing to either, to all the comfort and elegance of
their family party at Pemberley. Happy for all her maternal feelings was the day on which Mrs. Bennet got rid of her two most
deserving daughters. With what delighted pride she afterwards visited Mrs. Bingley, and talked of
Mrs. Darcy, may be guessed. I wish I could say, for the sake of her family, that the accomplishment of
her earnest desire in the establishment of so many of her children produced so happy an effect as to
make her a sensible, amiable, well-informed woman for the rest of her life; though perhaps it was
lucky for her husband, who might not have relished domestic felicity in so unusual a form, that she
still was occasionally nervous and invariably silly. Mr. Bennet missed his second daughter exceedingly; his affection for her drew him oftener from
home than anything else could do. He delighted in going to Pemberley, especially when he was least
expected. Mr. Bingley and Jane remained at Netherfield only a twelvemonth. So near a vicinity to her mother
and Meryton relations was not desirable even to his easy temper, or her affectionate heart. The
darling wish of his sisters was then gratified; he bought an estate in a neighbouring county to
Derbyshire, and Jane and Elizabeth, in addition to every other source of happiness, were within thirty
miles of each other. Kitty, to her very material advantage, spent the chief of her time with her two elder sisters. In society
so superior to what she had generally known, her improvement was great. She was not of so
ungovernable a temper as Lydia; and, removed from the influence of Lydia's example, she became,
by proper attention and management, less irritable, less ignorant, and less insipid. From the further
disadvantage of Lydia's society she was of course carefully kept, and though Mrs. Wickham
frequently invited her to come and stay with her, with the promise of balls and young men, her
father would never consent to her going. Mary was the only daughter who remained at home; and she was necessarily drawn from the pursuit
of accomplishments by Mrs. Bennet's being quite unable to sit alone. Mary was obliged to mix more
with the world, but she could still moralize over every morning visit; and as she was no longer
mortified by comparisons between her sisters' beauty and her own, it was suspected by her father
that she submitted to the change without much reluctance. As for Wickham and Lydia, their characters suffered no revolution from the marriage of her sisters. He bore with philosophy the conviction that Elizabeth must now become acquainted with whatever
of his ingratitude and falsehood had before been unknown to her; and in spite of every thing, was
not wholly without hope that Darcy might yet be prevailed on to make his fortune. The
congratulatory letter which Elizabeth received from Lydia on her marriage, explained to her that, by
his wife at least, if not by himself, such a hope was cherished. The letter was to this effect:
"MY DEAR LIZZY,
"I wish you joy. If you love Mr. Darcy half as well as I do my dear Wickham, you must be very happy. It is a great comfort to have you so rich, and when you have nothing else to do, I hope you will think
of us. I am sure Wickham would like a place at court very much, and I do not think we shall have
quite money enough to live upon without some help. Any place would do, of about three or four
hundred a year; but however, do not speak to Mr. Darcy about it, if you had rather not. "Yours, etc." As it happened that Elizabeth had much rather not, she endeavoured in her answer to put an end to
every entreaty and expectation of the kind. Such relief, however, as it was in her power to afford, by
the practice of what might be called economy in her own private expences, she frequently sent
them. It had always been evident to her that such an income as theirs, under the direction of two
persons so extravagant in their wants, and heedless of the future, must be very insufficient to their
support; and whenever they changed their quarters, either Jane or herself were sure of being applied
to for some little assistance towards discharging their bills. Their manner of living, even when the
restoration of peace dismissed them to a home, was unsettled in the extreme. They were always
moving from place to place in quest of a cheap situation, and always spending more than they ought.