











    There was a king, and a courteous king,
      And he had a daughter sae bonnie;
    And he lo'ed that maiden aboon a' thing
      I' the bonnie, bonnie halls o' Binnorie. *       *       *       *       *

    But wae be to thee, thou warlock wight,
      My malison come o'er thee,
    For thou hast undone the bravest knight,
      That ever brak bread i' Binnorie! _Old Song._

The days of the Stuarts, kings of Scotland, were the days of
chivalry and romance. The long and bloody contest that the nation
maintained against the whole power of England, for the recovery of its
independence,--of those rights which had been most unwarrantably wrested
from our fathers by the greatest and most treacherous sovereign of that
age, with the successful and glorious issue of the war, laid the
foundation for this spirit of heroism, which appears to have been at its
zenith about the time that the Stuarts first acquired the sovereignty of
the realm. The deeds of the Douglasses, the Randolphs, and other border
barons of that day, are not to be equalled by any recorded in our
annals; while the reprisals that they made upon the English, in
retaliation for former injuries, enriched both them and their followers,
and rendered their appearance splendid and imposing to a degree that
would scarcely now gain credit. It was no uncommon thing for a Scottish
earl then to visit the Court at the head of a thousand horsemen, all
splendidly mounted in their military accoutrements; and many of these
gentlemen of rank and family. In court and camp, feats of arms were the
topic of conversation, and the only die that stamped the character of a
man of renown, either with the fair, the monarch, or the chiefs of the
land. No gentleman of noble blood would pay his addresses to his
mistress, until he had broken a spear with the knights of the rival
nation, surprised a strong-hold, or driven a prey from the kinsmen of
the Piercies, the Musgraves, or the Howards. As in all other things that
run to a fashionable extremity, the fair sex took the lead in
encouraging these deeds of chivalry, till it came to have the appearance
of a national mania. There were tournaments at the castle of every
feudal baron and knight. The ploughmen and drivers were often
discovered, on returning from the fields, hotly engaged in a tilting
bout with their goads and plough-staves; and even the little boys and
maidens on the village green, each well mounted on a crooked stick, were
daily engaged in the combat, and riding rank and file against each
other, breaking their tiny weapons in the furious onset, while the mimic
fire flashed from their eyes. Then was the play of _Scots and English_
begun, a favourite one on the school green to this day. Such was the
spirit of the age, not only in Scotland, but over all the countries of
southern Europe, when the romantic incidents occurred on which the
following tale is founded. It was taken down from the manuscript of an
old Curate, who had spent the latter part of his life in the village of
Mireton, and was given to the present Editor by one of those tenants who
now till the valley where stood the richest city of this realm. There were once a noble king and queen of Scotland, as many in that land
have been.--In this notable tell-tale manner, does old Isaac, the
curate, begin his narrative. It will be seen in the sequel, that this
king and queen were Robert the Second and his consort.--They were
beloved by all their subjects, (continues he,) and loved and favoured
them in return; and the country enjoyed happiness and peace, all save a
part adjoining to the borders of England. The strong castle of Roxburgh,
which was the key of that country, had been five times taken by the
English, and three times by the Scots, in less than seventeen months,
and was then held by the gallant Lord Musgrave for Richard king of
England. Our worthy king had one daughter, of exquisite beauty and
accomplishments; the flower of all Scotland, and her name was Margaret. This princess was courted by many of the principal nobility of the land,
who all eagerly sought an alliance with the royal family, not only for
the additional honour and power which it conferred on them and their
posterity, but for the personal charms of the lady, which were of that
high eminence, that no man could look on her without admiration. This
emulation of the lords kept the court of King Robert full of bustle,
homage, and splendour. All were anxious to frustrate the designs of
their opponents, and to forward their own; so that high jealousies were
often apparent in the sharp retorts, stern looks, and nodding plumes of
the rival wooers; and as the princess had never disclosed her partiality
for one above another, it was judged that Robert scarcely dared openly
to give the preference to any of them. A circumstance, however, soon
occurred, which brought the matter fairly to the test. It happened on a lovely summer day, at the end of July, that three and
twenty noble rivals for the hand of the beauteous princess were all
assembled at the palace of Linlithgow; but the usual gaiety, mirth, and
repartee did not prevail; for the king had received bad tidings that
day, and he sat gloomy and sad. Musgrave had issued from the castle of Roxburgh, had surprised the
castle of Jedburgh, and taken prisoner William, brother to the lord of
Galloway; slain many loyal Scottish subjects, and wasted Teviotdale with
fire and sword. The conversation turned wholly on the state of affairs
on the border, and the misery to which that country was exposed by the
castle of Roxburgh remaining in the hands of the English; and at length
the king enquired impatiently, how it came that Sir Philip Musgrave had
surprised the castle this last time, when his subjects were so well
aware of their danger. The earl of Hume made answer, that it was wholly an affair of chivalry,
and one of the bravest and noblest acts that ever was performed. Musgrave's mistress, the lady Jane Howard, of the blood royal, and the
greatest heiress of the north of England, had refused to see him, unless
he gained back his honour by the retaking of that perilous castle, and
keeping it against all force, intercession, or guile, till the end of
the Christmas holidays. That he had accomplished the former in the most
gallant stile; and, from the measures that he had adopted, and the
additional fortifications that he had raised, there was every
possibility that he would achieve the latter. "What," said the king, "must the spirit of chivalry then be confined to
the country of our enemies? Have our noble dames of Scotland less
heroism in their constitutions than those of the south? Have they fewer
of the charms of beauty, or have their lovers less spirit to fulfil
their commands? By this sceptre in my right hand, I will give my
daughter, the princess Margaret, to the knight who shall take that
castle of Roxburgh out of the hands of the English before the expiry of
the Christmas holidays." Every lord and knight was instantly on his feet to accept the proposal,
and every one had his hand stretched towards the royal chair for
audience, when Margaret arose herself, from the king's left hand, where
she was seated, and flinging her left arm backward, on which swung a
scarf of gold, and stretching her right, that gleamed with bracelets of
rubies and diamonds, along the festive board, "Hold, my noble lords,"
said she; "I am too deeply interested here not to have a word to say. The grandchild of the great Bruce must not be given away to every
adventurer without her own approval. Who among you will venture his
honour and his life for me?" Every knight waved his right hand aloft and
dashed it on the hilt of his sword, eyeing the graceful attitude and
dignified form of the princess with raptures of delight. "It is well,"
continued she, "the spirit of chivalry _has not_ deserted the Scottish
nation--hear me then: My father's vow shall stand; I will give my hand
in marriage to the knight who shall take that castle for the king, my
father, before the expiry of the Christmas holidays, and rid our border
of that nest of reavers; but with this proviso only, that, in case of
his attempting and failing in the undertaking, he shall forfeit all his
lands, castles, towns, and towers to me, which shall form a part of my
marriage-portion to his rival. Is it fit that the daughter of a king
should be given up or won as circumstances may suit, or that the risk
should all be on one side? Who would be so unreasonable as expect it? This, then, with the concurrence of my lord and father, is my
determination, and by it will I stand." The conditions were grievously hard, and had a damping and dismal effect
on the courtly circle. The light of every eye deadened into a dim and
sullen scowl. It was a deed that promised glory and renown to adventure
their blood for such a dame,--to win such a lady as the Princess of
Scotland: But, to give up their broad lands and castles to enrich a
hated rival, was an obnoxious consideration, and what in all likelihood
was to be the issue. When all the forces of the land had been unable to
take the castle by storm, where was the probability that any of them was
now to succeed? None accepted the conditions. Some remained silent; some
shook their heads, and muttered incoherent mumblings; others strode
about the room, as if in private consultation. "My honoured liege," said Lady Margaret, "none of the lords or knights
of your court have the spirit to accept of my conditions. Be pleased
then to grant me a sufficient force. I shall choose the officers for
them myself, and I engage to take the castle of Roxburgh before
Christmas. I will disappoint the bloody Musgrave of his bride; and the
world shall see whether the charms of Lady Jane Howard or those of
Margaret Stuart shall rouse their admirers to deeds of the most
desperate valour. Before the Christmas bells have tolled, that shall be
tried on the rocks, in the rivers, in the air, and the bowels of the
earth. In the event of my enterprise proving succesful, all the guerdon
that I ask is, the full and free liberty of giving my hand to whom I
will. It shall be to no one that is here." And so saying she struck it
upon the table, and again took her seat at the king's left hand. Every foot rung on the floor with a furious tramp, in unison with that
stroke of the princess's hand. The taunt was not to be brooked. Nor was
it. The haughty blood of the Douglasses could bear it no longer. James,
the gallant earl of Douglas and Mar, stepped forward from the circle. "My honoured liege, and master," said he, "I have not declined the
princess's offer,--beshrew my heart if ever it embraced such a purpose. But the stake is deep, and a moment's consideration excusable. I have
considered, and likewise decided. I accept the lady's proposals. With my
own vassals alone, and at my own sole charge, will I rescue the castle
from the hands of our enemies, or perish in the attempt. The odds are
high against me. But it is now a Douglas or a Musgrave: God prosper the
bravest!" "Spoken like yourself, noble Douglas," said the king, "The higher the
stake the greater the honour. The task be yours, and may the issue add
another laurel to the heroic name." "James of Douglas," said Lady Margaret, "dost thou indeed accept of
these hard conditions for my sake? Then the hand of thy royal mistress
shall buckle on the armour in which thou goest to the field, but never
shall unloose it, unless from a victor or a corse!" And with that she
stretched forth her hand, which Douglas, as he kneeled with one knee on
the ground, took and pressed to his lips. Every one of the nobles shook Douglas by the hand, and wished him
success. Does any man believe that there was one among them that indeed
wished it? No, there was not a chief present that would not have
rejoiced to have seen him led to the gallows. His power was too high
already, and they dreaded that now it might be higher than ever; and,
moreover, they saw themselves outdone by him in heroism, and felt
degraded by the contract thus concluded. The standard of the Douglas was reared, and the bloody heart flew far
over many a lowland dale. The subordinate gentlemen rose with their
vassals, and followed the banner of their chief; but the more powerful
kept aloof, or sent ambiguous answers. They deemed the service
undertaken little better than the frenzy of a madman. There was at that time a powerful border baron, nicknamed Sir Ringan
Redhough, by which name alone he was distinguished all the rest of his
life. He was warden of the middle marches, and head of the most warlike
and adventurous sept in all that country. The answer which this hero
gave to his own cousin, Thomas Middlemas, who came to expostulate with
him from Douglas, is still preserved verbatim: "What, man, are a' my
brave lads to lie in bloody claes that the Douglas may lie i' snaw-white
sheets wi' a bonny bedfellow? Will that keep the braid border for the
king, my master? Tell him to keep their hands fu', an' their haunches
toom, an' they'll soon be blythe to leave the lass an' loup at the
ladle; an' the fient ae cloot shall cross the border to gar their pots
play brown atween Dirdan-head and Cocket-fell. Tell him this, an' tell
him that Redhough said it. If he dinna work by wiles he'll never pouch
the profit. But if he canna do it, an' owns that he canna do it, let him
send word to me, an' I'll tak' it for him." With these words he turned his back, and abruptly left his cousin, who
returned to Douglas, ill satisfied with the success of his message, but,
nevertheless, delivered it faithfully. "That curst carle," said the
Douglas, "is a thorn in my thigh, as well as a buckler on my arm. He's
as cunning as a fox, as stubborn as an oak, and as fierce as a lion. I
must temporize for the present, as I cannot do without his support, but
the time may come that he may be humbled, and made to know his betters;
since one endeavour has failed, we must try another, and, if that do not
succeed, another still." The day after that, as Sir Ringan was walking out at his own gate, an
old man, with a cowl, and a long grey beard, accosted him. "May the
great spirit of the elements shield thee, and be thy protector,
knight," said he. "An' wha may he be, carle, an it be your will?" said Ringan; "An' wha
may ye be that gie me sic a sachless benediction? As to my shield and
protection, look ye here!" and with that he touched his two-handed
sword, and a sheaf of arrows that was swung at his shoulder; "an' what
are all your saints and lang nebbit spirits to me?" "It was a random salutation, knight," said the old man, seeing his mood
and temper; "I am not a priest but a prophet. I come not to load you
with blessings, curses, nor homilies, all equally unavailing, but to
tell you what shall be in the times that are to come. I have had visions
of futurity that have torn up the tendrils of my spirit by the roots. Would you like to know what is to befal you and your house in the times
that are to come?" "I never believe a word that you warlocks say," replied the knight;
"but I like aye to hear what you _will_ say about matters; though
it is merely to laugh at ye, for I dinna gie credit to ane o' your
predictions. Sin' the Rhymer's days, the spirit o' true warlockry is
gane. He foretauld muckle that has turned out true; an' something that I
hope _will_ turn out true: But ye're a' bairns to him." "Knight," said the stranger, "I can tell you more than ever the Rhymer
conceived, or thought upon; and, moreover, I can explain the words of
True Thomas, which neither you nor those to whom they relate in the
smallest degree comprehend. Knowest thou the prophecy of the Hart and
the Deer, as it is called? 'Quhere the hearte heavit in het blude over hill and howe,
    There shall the dinke deire droule for the dowe:
    Two fleite footyde maydenis shall tredde the greine,
    And the mone and the starre shall flashe betweine. Quhere the proude hiche halde and heveye hande beire
    Ane frenauch shall feide on ane faderis frene feire,
    In dinging at the starris the D shall doupe down,
    But the S shall be S quhane the heide S is gone.'" "I hae heard the reide often and often," said the knight, "but the man's
unborn that can understand that. Though the prophecies and the legends
of the Rhymer take the lead i' my lear, I hae always been obliged to
make that a passover." "There is not one of all his sayings that relates as much to you and
your house, knight. It foretels that the arms of your family shall
supersede those of Douglas, which you know are the bloody heart; and
that in endeavouring to exalt himself to the stars, the D, that is the
Douglas, shall fall, but that your house and name shall remain when the
Stuarts are no more." "By the horned beasts of Old England, my father's portion, and my son's
undiminished hope," exclaimed the knight,--"Thou art a cunning man! I
now see the bearing o' the prophecy as plainly as I see the hill of
Mountcomyn before my e'e; and, as I know Thomas never is wrong, I
believe it. Now is the time, auld warlock,--now is the time; he's
ettling at a king's daughter, but his neck lies in wad, and the forfeit
will be his undoing." "The time is not yet come, valiant knight; nevertheless the prophecy is
true. Has thy horse's hoof ever trode, or thine eye journeyed, over the
Nine Glens of Niddisdale?" "I hae whiles gotten a glisk o' them." "They are extensive, rich, and beautiful." "They're nae less, auld carle; they're nae less. They can send nine
thousand leel men an' stout to the field in a pinch." "It is recorded in the book of fate,--it is written there--"

"The devil it is, auld carle; that's mair than I thought o'." "Hold thy peace: lay thine hand upon thy mouth, and be silent till I
explain: I say I have seen it in the visions of the night,--I have seen
it in the stars of heaven"--

"What? the Nine Glens o' Niddisdale amang the starns o' heaven! by hoof
and horn, it was rarely seen, warlock." "I say that I have seen it,--they are all to belong to thy house." "Niddisdale a' to pertain to my house!" "All." "Carle, I gie nae credit to sic forbodings; but I have heard something
like this afore. Will ye stay till I bring my son Robin, the young
Master of Mountcomyn, and let him hear it? For aince a man takes a mark
on his way, I wadna hae him to tine sight o't. Mony a time has the tail
o' the king's elwand pointed me the way to Cumberland; an' as often has
the ee o' the Charlie-wain blinkit me hame again.