Close behind me lay one of the
most romantic cottages that I had ever seen, and at its back was a
small garden, encompassed by green paling. The stream, bordered with
wild-flowers, prattled prettily; save here and there, where a jutting
stone shattered its crystal, and made its music hoarse. It purled and
murmured a little too, but no where could it be said either to tinkle
or gurgle, to chide or brawl. Flinging off my bonnet, I shook my narcissine locks over my shoulders,
and began braiding them in the manner of a simple shepherdess. Stuart came up the first. I plucked a daisy that was half dipt into the
brook; and instead of shaking off its moisture, I quaffed the liquid
fragrance with my lip, and then held the flower to him. 'What am I to do with it?' said he. 'To pledge me,' replied I. 'To drink Nature's nectar, that trembles on
the leaves which my lip has consecrated.' He laughed and kissed the flower. That moment a lambkin began its
pretty bleat. 'Now,' said I, 'make me a simple tripping little ditty on a lambkin.' 'You shall have it,' answered he, 'and such as an attorney's clerk
would read to a milliner's apprentice.' Dear sensibility, O la! I heard a little lamb cry, ba;
    Says I, so you have lost mamma? Ah! The little lamb, as I said so,
    Frisking about the field did go,
    And frisking, trod upon my toe. Oh! 'Neat enough,' said I, 'only that it wants the word LOVE in it.' 'True,' cried Stuart; 'for all modern poems of the kind abound in the
word, though they seldom have much of the feeling.' 'And pray, my good friend,' asked I archly, as I bound up my golden
ringlets--'WHAT IS LOVE?' 'Nay,' said he, 'they say that talking of love is making it.' Plucking a thistle that sprang from the bank, I blew away its down with
my balmy breath, merely to hide my confusion. Surely I am the most sensitive of all created beings! Betterton had now reached us, out of breath after his race, and utterly
unable to articulate. 'Betterton,' cried I, 'what is love?' ''Tis,' said he, gasping, ''tis--'tis----'

'The gentleman,' cried Stuart, 'gives as good a description of it as
most of our modern poets; who make its chief ingredients panting and
broken murmurs.' 'Now in my opinion,' said I, 'love is a mystical sympathy, which
unfolds itself in the glance that seeks the soul,--the sentiment that
the soul embodies--the tender gaiety--the more delicious sadness--the
stifled sigh--the soft and malicious smile--the thrill, the hope, the
fear--each in itself a little bliss. In a word, it is the swoon of the
soul, the delirium of the heart, the elegant inebriety of
unsophisticated sentiment.' 'If such be love,' said Stuart, 'I fear I shall never bring myself to
make it.' 'And pray,' said I, 'how would you make love?' 'There are many modes,' answered he, 'and the way to succeed with one
girl is often the way to fail with another. Girls may be divided into
the conversable and inconversable. He who can talk the best, has
therefore the best chance of the former; but would a man make a
conquest of one of the beautiful Inutilities, who sits in sweet
stupidity, plays off the small simpers, and founds her prospects in
life on the shape of her face, he has little more to do than call her a
goddess and make himself a monkey. Or if that should fail, as he cannot
apply to her understanding, he must have recourse to her feeling, and
try what the touch can do for him. The touch has a thousand virtues. Only let him establish a lodgment on the first joint of her little
finger, he may soon set out on his travels, and make the grand tour of
her waist. This is, indeed, to have wit at his fingers' ends; and this,
I can assure you, is the best and shortest way to gain the hearts of
those demure misses, who think that all modesty consists in silence,
that to be insipid is to be innocent, and that because they have not a
word for a young man in public, they may have a kiss for him in
private.' 'Come,' said I, 'let us talk of love in poetry, not prose. I want some
pretty verses to fill up my memoirs; so, Betterton, now for an amorous
ode to your mistress.' Betterton bowed and began:

    TO FANNY

    Say, Fanny, why has bounteous heaven,
      In every end benign and wise,
    Perfection to your features given? Enchantment to your witching eyes? Was it that mortal man might view
      Thy charms at distance, and adore? Ah, no! the man who would not woo,
      Were less than mortal, or were more. The mossy rose that scents the sky,
      By bee, by butterfly caress'd,
    We leave not on the stalk to die,
      But fondly snatch it to the breast

    There, unsurpassed in sweets, it dwells;--
      Unless the breast be Fanny's own:
    There blooming, every bloom excels;--
      Except of Fanny's blush alone. O Fanny, life is on the wing,
      And years, like rivers, glide away:
    To-morrow may misfortune bring,
      Then, gentle girl, enjoy to-day

    And while a lingering kiss I sip,
      Ah, start not from these ardent arms;
    Nor think the printure of my lip
      Will rob your own of any charms. For see, we crush not, though we tread,
      The cup and primrose. Fanny smiled. Come then and press the cup, she said,
      Come then and press the primrose wild. 'Now,' cried Stuart, 'I can give you a poem, with just as much love in
it, and twice as much kissing.' 'That,' said I, 'would be a treasure indeed.' He then began thus:

    TO SALLY

    Dawn with stains of ruddy light,
      Streaks her grey and fragrant fingers,
    While the Ethiop foot of night,
      Envious of my Sally, lingers. Upward poplars, downward willows,
      Rustle round us; zephyrs sprinkle
    Leaves of daffodillies, lilies,
      Pennyroyal, periwinkle. Rosy, balmy, honied, humid,
      Biting, burning, murmuring kisses,
    Sally, I will snatch from you, mid
      Looks demure that tempt to blisses. If your cheek grow cold, my dear,
      I will kiss it, till it flushes,
    Or if warm, my raptured tear,
      Shall extinguish all its blushes. Yes, that dimple is a valley,
      Where sports many a little true love,
    And that glance you dart, my Sally,
      Might melt diamonds into dew love. But while idle thus I chat,
      I the war of lips am missing. This, this, this, and that, that, that,
      These make kissing, kissing, kissing. The style of this poem reminded me of Montmorenci, and at the same
moment I heard a rustling sound behind me. I started. ''Tis
Montmorenci!' cried I.

Agitated in the extreme, I turned to see.--It was only a cock-sparrow. 'I deserve the disappointment,' said I to myself, 'for I have never
once thought of that amiable youth since I last beheld him. 'Sweetest
and noblest of men,' exclaimed I, aloud, 'say, dost thou mourn my
mysterious absence? Perhaps the draught of air that I now inhale is the
same which thou hast breathed forth, in a sigh for the far distant
Cherubina!' 'That cannot well be,' interrupted Stuart, 'or at least the sigh of
this unknown must have been packed up in a case, and hermetically
sealed, to have come to you without being dispersed on the way.' 'There you happen to be mistaken,' answered I. 'For in the Hermit of
the Rock, the heroine, while sitting on the coast of Sardinia, seemed
to think it highly probable, that the billow at her feet might be the
identical billow which had swallowed up her lover, about a year before,
off the coast of Martinique.' 'That was not at all more improbable than Valancourt's theory,' said
Stuart. 'What was it?' asked I. 'Why,' said he, 'that the sun sets, in different longitudes, at the
same moment. For when his Emily was going to Italy, while he remained
in France, he begged of her to watch the setting of the sun every
evening, that both their eyes might be fixed upon the same object at
once. Now, as the sun would set, where she was in Italy, much earlier
than where he was in France, he certainly took the best of all possible
methods to prevent their looking at it together.' 'But, Sir,' said Betterton, 'heroes and heroines are not bound to
understand astronomy.' 'And yet,' answered Stuart, 'they are greater star-gazers than the
ancient Egyptians. To form an attachment for the moon, and write a
sonnet on it, is the principal test of being a heroine.' As he spoke, a painted butterfly came fluttering about me. To pursue it
was a classical amusement, for Caroline of Lichfield made a
butterfly-hunt her pastime; so springing on my feet, I began the chace. The nimble insect eluded me for a long time, and at last got over the
paling, into the little garden. I followed it through a small gate, and
caught it; but alas! bruised it in the capture, and broke one of its
wings. The poor thing sought refuge in a lily, where it lay struggling
a few moments, and then its little spirit fled for ever. What an opportunity for a sonnet! I determined to compose one under the
willow. A beautiful rose-bush was blushing near the lily, and reminded
me how pastoral I should look, could I recline on roses, during my
poetical ecstasy. But would it be proper to pick them? Surely a few
could do no harm. I glanced round--Nobody was in sight--I picked a few. But what signified a few for what I wanted? I picked a few more. The
more I picked, the more I longed to pick--'Tis human nature; and was
not Eve herself tempted in a garden? So from roses I went to lilies,
from lilies to carnations, thence to jessamine, honey-suckle,
eglantine, sweet-pea; till, in short, I had filled my bonnet, and
almost emptied the beds. I then hurried to the willow with my prize;
sentenced Stuart and Betterton to fifty yards banishment, and
constructed a charming couch of flowers, which I damasked and inlaid
with daisies, butter-flowers, and moss. Enraptured with my paradisaical carpet, I flung myself upon it, and my
recumbent form, as it pressed the perfumes, was indeed that of
Mahomet's Houri. Exercise and agitation had heightened the glow of my
cheeks, and the wind had blown my yellow hair about my face, like
withered leaves round a ripened peach. I never looked so lovely. In a short time I was able to repeat this sonnet aloud. SONNET

    Where the blue stream reflected flowerets pale,
      A fluttering butterfly, with many a freak,
    Dipped into dancing bells, and spread its sail
      Of azure pinions, edged with jetty streak. I snatched it passing; but a pinion frail,
      Ingrained with mealy gold, I chanced to break. The mangled insect, ill deserving bane,
      Falls in the hollow of a lily new. My tears drop after it, but drop in vain. The cup, embalmed with azure airs and dew,
    And flowery dust and grains of fragrant seed,
    Can ne'er revive it from the fatal deed. So guileless nymphs attract some traiterous eye,
    So by the spoiler crushed, reject all joy and die. Now that the pomp of composition was over, I began to think I had
treated the owner of the garden extremely ill. I felt myself guilty of
little less than theft, and was deliberating on what I ought to do,
when an old, grey-headed peasant came running towards me from the
garden. 'Miss!' cried he, 'have you seen any body pass this way with a parcel
of flowers; for some confounded thief has just robbed me of all I had?' I raised myself a little to reply, and he perceived the flowers
underneath. 'Odd's life!' cried he, 'so you are the thief, are you? How dare you,
hussey, commit such a robbery?' 'I am no hussey, and 'tis no robbery,' cried I; 'and trust me, you
shall neither have apology nor compensation. Hussey, indeed! Sir, it
was all your own fault for leaving that uncouth gate of your's open. I
am afraid, Sir, that you are a shockingly ignorant old man.' The peasant was just about to seize me, when Stuart ran up, and
prevented him. They had then some private conversation together, and I
saw Stuart give him a guinea. The talismanic touch of gold struck
instant peace, and a compact of amity followed. Indeed, I have ever
found, that even my face, though a heroine's, and with all its dimples,
blushes, and glances, could never do half so much for me as the royal
face on a bit of gold. The peasant was now very civil, and invited us to rest in his cottage. Thither we repaired, and found his daughter, a beautiful young woman,
just preparing the dinner. I felt instantly interested in her fate. I
likewise felt hungry; so calling her aside, I told her that I would be
happy to have a dinner, and, if possible, a bed, at the cottage; and
that I would recompense her liberally for them, as I was a lady of
rank, but at present in great affliction. She said she would be very glad to accommodate me, if her father would
permit her; and she then went to consult him. After a private
conference between them and Stuart, she told me that her father was
willing to let me remain. So we soon agreed upon the terms, and a
village was at hand, where Stuart and Betterton might dine and sleep. Before they left me, they made me give a solemn promise not to quit the
cottage, till both of them should return, the next morning. Stuart took an opportunity of asking me, whether he could speak to me
in private, that evening. 'At ten o'clock to-night,' answered I, 'I will be sitting at the
casement of my chamber. Trill a lamenting canzonet beneath it, as a
signal, and I will admit you to a stolen interview.' Betterton and he then departed, but not in company with each other. Dinner is announced. Adieu





At dinner, a young farmer joined us; and I soon perceived that he and
the peasant's daughter, Mary, were born for each other. They betrayed
their mutual tenderness by a thousand little innocent stratagems, that
passed, as they thought, unobserved. After dinner, when Mary was about accompanying me to walk, the youth
stole after us, and just as I had got into the garden, he drew her
back, and I heard him kiss her. She came to me with her face a little
flushed, and her ripe lips ruddier than before. 'Well, Mary,' said I, 'what was he doing to you?' 'Doing, Ma'am? Nothing, I am sure.' 'Nothing, Mary?' 'Why, Ma'am, he only wanted to be a little rude, and kiss me, I
believe.' 'And you would not allow him, Mary?' 'Why should I tell a falsehood about it, Ma'am?' said she. 'To be sure
I did not hinder him; for he is my sweetheart, and we are to be married
next week.' 'And do you love him, Mary?' 'Better than my life, Ma'am. There never was such a good lad; he has
not a fault in the wide world, and all the girls are dying of envy that
I have got him.' 'Well, Mary,' said I, 'I foresee we shall spend a most delicious
evening. We will take a rural repast down to the brook, and tell our
loves. The contrast will be beautiful;--mine, the refined, sentimental,
pathetic story; your's the pretty, simple, little, artless tale. Come,
my friend; let us return, and prepare the rustic banquet. No souchong,
or bohea; (blessed names these!) no hot or cold cakes--Oh! no, but
creams, berries, and fruits; goat's milk, figs, and honey--Arcadian,
pastoral, primeval dainties!' We then went back to the cottage, but could get nothing better than
currants, gooseberries, and a maple bowl of cream. Mary, indeed, cut a
large slice of bread and butter for her private amusement; and with
these we returned to the streamlet. I then threw myself on my flowery
couch, and my companion sat beside me. We helped ourselves. I took rivulet to my cream, and scooped the brook
with my rosy palm. Innocent nymph! ah, why couldst thou not sit down in
the lap of content here, and dance, and sing, and say thy prayers, and
go to heaven with this nut-brown maid? I picked up a languishing rose, and sighed as I inhaled its perfume,
and gazed on its decay. 'Such, Mary,' said I, 'such will be the fate of you and me. How soft,
how serene this evening. It is a landscape for a Claud. But how much
more charming is an Italian or a French than an English landscape. O! to saunter over hillocks, covered with lavender, wild thyme, juniper
and tamarise, while shrubs fringe the summits of the rocks, or patches
of meagre vegetation tint their recesses! Plantations of almonds,
cypresses, palms, olives, and dates stretch along; nor are the larch
and ilex, the masses of granite, and dark forests of fir wanting; while
the majestic Garonne wanders, descending from the Pyrenees, and winding
its blue waves towards the Bay of Biscay. 'Is not all this exquisite, Mary?' 'It must, Ma'am, since you say so,' replied she. 'Then,' continued I, 'though your own cottage is tolerable, yet is it,
as in Italy, covered with vine leaves, fig-trees, jessamine, and
clusters of grapes? Is it tufted with myrtle, or shaded with a grove of
lemon, orange, and bergamot?' 'But Ma'am,' said Mary, ''tis shaded by some fine old elms.' 'True,' cried I, with the smile of approaching triumph. 'But do the
flowers of the spreading agnus castus mingle with the pomegranate of
Shemlek? Does the Asiatic andrachne rear its red trunk? Are the
rose-coloured nerit, and verdant alia marina imbost upon the rocks? And
do the golden clusters of Eastern spartium gleam amidst the fragrant
foliage of the cedrat, the most elegant shrub of the Levant? Do they,
Mary?' 'I believe not, Ma'am,' answered she. 'But then our fields are all over
daisies, butterflowers, clover-blossoms, and daffodowndillies.' 'Daffodowndillies!' cried I. 'Ah, Mary, Mary, you may be a very good
girl, but you do not shine in description. Now I leave it to your own
taste, which sounds better,--Asiatic andrachne, or daffodowndillies? If
you knew any thing of novels, you would describe for the ear, not for
the eye. Oh, my young friend, never, while you live, say
daffodowndillies.' 'Never, if I can help it, Ma'am,' said Mary. 'And I hope you are not
offended with me, or think the worse of me, on account of my having
said it now; for I could safely make oath that I never heard, till this
instant, of its being a naughty word.' 'I am satisfied,' said I. 'So now let us tell our loves, and you shall
begin.' 'Indeed, Ma'am,' said she, 'I have nothing to tell.' 'Impossible,' cried I. 'Did William never save your life?' 'Never, Ma'am.' 'Well then, he had a quarrel with you?' 'Never, in all his born days, Ma'am.' 'Shocking! Why how long have you known him?' 'About six months, Ma'am. He took a small farm near us; and he liked me
from the first, and I liked him, and both families wished for the
match; and when he asked me to marry him, I said I would; and so we
shall be married next week; and that is the whole history, Ma'am.' 'A melancholy history, indeed!' said I. 'What a pity that an
interesting pair, like you, who, without flattery, seem born for one of
Marmontel's tales, should be so cruelly sacrificed.' I then began to consider whether any thing could yet be done in their
behalf, or whether the matter was indeed past redemption. I reflected
that it would be but an act of common charity,--hardly deserving
praise--to snatch them awhile from the dogged and headlong way they
were setting about matrimony, and introduce them to a few of the
sensibilities. Surely with very little ingenuity, I might get up an
incident or two between them;--a week or a fortnight's torture,
perhaps;--and afterwards enjoy the luxury of reuniting them. Full of this laudable intention, I sat meditating awhile; and at length
hit upon an admirable plan. It was no less than to make Mary (without
her own knowledge) write a letter to William, dismissing him for ever! This appears impossible, but attend. 'My story,' said I, to the unsuspecting girl, 'is long and lamentable,
and I fear, I have not spirits to relate it. I shall merely tell you,
that I yesterday eloped with the younger of the gentlemen who were here
this morning, and married him. I was induced to take this step, in
consequence of my parents having insisted that I should marry my first
cousin; who, by the by, is a namesake of your William's. Now, Mary, I
have a favour to beg of you. My cousin William must be made acquainted
with my marriage; though I mean to keep it a secret from my family, and
as I do not wish to tell him such unhappy tidings in my own
hand-writing--and in high life, my fair rustic, young ladies must not
write to young gentlemen, your taking the trouble to write out the
letter for me, would bind me to you for ever.' 'That I will, and welcome,' said the simple girl; 'only Ma'am, I fear I
shall disgrace a lady like you, with my bad writing. I am, out and out,
the worst scribbler in our family; and William says to me but
yesterday, ah, Mary, says he, if your tongue talked as your pen writes,
you might die an old maid for me. Ah, William, says I, I would bite off
my tongue sooner than die an old maid. So, to be sure, Willy laughed
very hearty.' We then returned home, and retired to my chamber, where I dictated, and
Mary wrote as follows:

    'Dear William,

    'Prepare your mind for receiving a great and unexpected shock. To
    keep you no longer in suspense, learn that I am MARRIED. 'Before I had become acquainted with you, I was attached to another
    man, whose name I must beg leave to conceal. About a year since,
    circumstances compelled him to go abroad, and before his departure,
    he procured a written promise from me, to marry him on the first
    day of his return. You then came, and succeeded in rivalling him. 'As he never once wrote, after he had left the country, I concluded
    that he was dead. Yesterday, however, a letter from him was put
    into my hand, which announced his return, and appointed a private
    interview. I went. He had a clergyman in waiting to join our hands. I prayed, entreated, wept--all in vain. 'I BECAME HIS WIFE. 'O William, pity, but do not blame me. If you are a man of honour
    and of feeling, never shew this letter, or tell its contents to one
    living soul. Do not even speak to myself on the subject of it. 'You see I pay your own feelings the compliment of not signing the
    name that I now bear. 'Adieu, dear William: adieu for ever.' We then returned to the sitting-room, and found William there. While we
were conversing, I took an opportunity to slip the letter, unperceived,
into his hand, and to bid him read it in some other place. He retired
with it, and we continued talking. But in about half an hour he hurried
into the room, with an agitated countenance; stopped opposite to Mary,
and looked at her earnestly. 'William!' cried she, 'William! For shame then, don't frighten one so.' 'No, Mary,' said he, 'I scorn to frighten you, or injure you either. I
believe I am above that. But no wonder my last look at you should be
frightful. There is your true-lover's knot--there is your hair--there
are your letters. So now, Mary, good-bye, and may you be for ever
happy, is what I pray Providence, from the bottom of my broken heart!' With these words, and a piteous glance of anguish, he rushed from the
room. Mary remained motionless a moment; then half rose, sat down, rose
again; and grew pale and red by turns. ''Tis so--so laughable,' said she at length, while her quivering lip
refused the attempted smile. 'All my presents returned too. Sure--my
heavens!--Sure he cannot want to break off with me? Well, I have as
good a spirit as he, I believe. The base man; the cruel, cruel man!' and she burst into a passion of tears. I tried to sooth her, but the more I said, the more she wept. She was
sure, she said, she was quite sure that he wanted to leave her; and
then she sobbed so piteously, that I was on the point of undeceiving
her; when, fortunately, we heard her father returning, and she ran into
her own room. He asked about her; I told him that she was not
well;--the old excuse of a fretting heroine; so the good man went to
her, and with some difficulty gained admittance. They have remained
together ever since. How delicious will be the happy denouement of this pathetic episode,
this dear novellette; and how sweetly will it read in my memoirs! Adieu. The night was so dark when I repaired to the casement, that I have been
trying to compose a description of it for you, in the style of the best
romances. But after having summoned to my mind all the black articles
of value that I can recollect--ebony, sables, palls, pitch, and even
coal, I find I have nothing better to say, than, simply, that it was a
dark night. Having opened the casement, I sat down at it, and repeated these lines
aloud. SONNET

    Now while within their wings each feather'd pair,
      Hide their hush'd heads, thy visit, moon, renew,
    Shake thy pale tresses down, irradiate air,
      Earth, and the spicy flowers that scent the dew. The lonely nightingale shall pipe to thee,
    And I will moralize her minstrelsy. Ten thousand birds the sun resplendent sing,
      One only warbles to the milder moon. Thus for the great, how many wake the string,
      Thus for the good, how few the lyre attune. As soon as I had finished the sonnet, a low and tremulous voice, close
to the casement, sung these words:

    SONG

    Haste, my love, and come away;
      What is folly, what is sorrow? 'Tis to turn from, joys to-day,
      Tis to wait for cares to-morrow. O'er the river,
          Aspens shiver
    Thus I tremble at delay. Light discovers,
          Vowing lovers:
    See the stars with sharpened ray,
          Gathering thicker,
          Glancing quicker;
      Haste, my love, and come away. I sat enraptured, and heaved a sigh. 'Enchanting sigh!' cried the singer, as he sprang through the window;
but it was not the voice of Stuart. I screamed loudly. 'Hush!' cried the mysterious unknown, and advanced towards me; when, to
my great relief, the door was thrown open, and the old peasant entered,
with Mary behind him, holding a candle. In the middle of the room, stood a man, clad in a black cloak, with
black feathers in his hat, and a black mask on his face. The peasant, pale as death, ran forward, knocked him to the ground, and
seized a pistol and carving-knife, that were stuck in a belt about his
waist. 'Unmask him!' cried I. The peasant, kneeling on his body, tore off the mask, and I
beheld--Betterton! 'Alarm the neighbours, Mary!' cried the peasant. Mary put down the candle, and went out. 'I must appear in an unfavourable light to you, my good man,' said this
terrifying character; 'but the young lady will inform you that I came
hither at her own request.' 'For shame!' cried I. 'What a falsehood!' 'Falsehood!' said he. 'I have your own letter, desiring me to come.' 'The man is mad,' cried I. 'I never wrote him a letter.' 'I can produce it to your face,' said he, pulling a paper from his
pocket, and to my great amazement reading these lines. 'Cherubina begs that Betterton will repair to her window, at ten
o'clock to-night, disguised like an Italian assassin, with dagger,
cloak, and pistol. The signal is to be his singing an air under the
casement, which she will then open, and he may enter her chamber.' 'I will take the most solemn oath,' cried I, 'that I never wrote a line
of it. But this unhappy wretch, who is a ruffian of the first
pretensions, has a base design upon me, and has followed me from
London, for the purpose of effecting it; so I suppose, he wrote the
letter himself, as an excuse, in case of discovery.' 'Then he shall march to the magistrate's,' said the peasant, 'and I
will indict him for house-breaking!' A man half so frantic as Betterton I never beheld. He foamed, he
grinned, he grinded the remnants of his teeth; and swore that Stuart
was at the bottom of the whole plot. By this time, Mary having returned with two men, we set forward in a
body to the magistrate's, and delivered our depositions before him. I
swore that I did not write the letter, and that, to the best of my
belief, Betterton harboured bad designs against me. The peasant swore that he had found the culprit, armed with a knife and
pistol, in his house. The magistrate, therefore, notwithstanding all that Betterton could
say, committed him to prison without hesitation.