Dr Swapkirk, in whom the spark of life was long fading, closed his eyes,
and it went utterly out, as to this world, on a Saturday night, between
the hours of eleven and twelve. We had that afternoon got an inkling
that he was drawing near to his end. At the latest, Mrs Pawkie herself
went over to the manse, and stayed till she saw him die. "It was a
pleasant end," she said, for he was a godly, patient man; and we were
both sorely grieved, though it was a thing for which we had been long
prepared; and indeed, to his family and connexions, except for the loss
of the stipend, it was a very gentle dispensation, for he had been long a
heavy handful, having been for years but, as it were, a breathing lump of
mortality, groosy, and oozy, and doozy, his faculties being shut up and
locked in by a dumb palsy. Having had this early intimation of the doctor's removal to a better
world, on the Sabbath morning when I went to join the magistrates in the
council-chamber, as the usage is to go to the laft, with the
town-officers carrying their halberts before us, according to the ancient
custom of all royal burghs, my mind was in a degree prepared to speak to
them anent the successor. Little, however, passed at that time, and it
so happened that, by some wonder of inspiration, (there were, however,
folk that said it was taken out of a book of sermons, by one Barrow an
English Divine,) Mr Pittle that forenoon preached a discourse that made
an impression, in so much, that on our way back to the council-chamber I
said to Provost Vintner, that then was--

"Really Mr Pittle seems, if he would exert himself, to have a nerve. I
could not have thought it was in the power of his capacity to have given
us such a sermon." The provost thought as I did, so I replied--"We canna, I think, do better
than keep him among us. It would, indeed, provost, no be doing justice
to the young man to pass another over his head." I could see that the provost wasna quite sure of what I had been saying;
for he replied, that it was a matter that needed consideration. When we separated at the council-chamber, I threw myself in the way of
Bailie Weezle, and walked home with him, our talk being on the subject of
vacancy; and I rehearsed to him what had passed between me and the
provost, saying, that the provost had made no objection to prefer Mr
Pittle, which was the truth. Bailie Weezle was a man no overladen with worldly wisdom, and had been
chosen into the council principally on account of being easily managed. In his business, he was originally by trade a baker in Glasgow, where he
made a little money, and came to settle among us with his wife, who was a
native of the town, and had her relations here. Being therefore an idle
man, living on his money, and of a soft and quiet nature, he was for the
reason aforesaid chosen into the council, where he always voted on the
provost's side; for in controverted questions every one is beholden to
take a part, and he thought it was his duty to side with the chief
magistrate. Having convinced the bailie that Mr Pittle had already, as it were, a
sort of infeoffment in the kirk, I called in the evening on my old
predecessor in the guildry, Bailie M'Lucre, who was not a hand to be so
easily dealt with; but I knew his inclinations, and therefore I resolved
to go roundly to work with him. So I asked him out to take a walk, and I
led him towards the town-moor, conversing loosely about one thing and
another, and touching softly here and there on the vacancy. When we were well on into the middle of the moor, I stopped, and, looking
round me, said, "Bailie, surely it's a great neglec of the magistrates
and council to let this braw broad piece of land, so near the town, lie
in a state o' nature, and giving pasturage to only twa-three of the poor
folk's cows. I wonder you, that's now a rich man, and with eyne worth
pearls and diamonds, that ye dinna think of asking a tack of this land;
ye might make a great thing o't." The fish nibbled, and told me that he had for some time entertained a
thought on the subject; but he was afraid that I would be overly
extortionate. "I wonder to hear you, bailie," said I; "I trust and hope no one will
ever find me out of the way of justice; and to convince you that I can do
a friendly turn, I'll no objec to gie you a' my influence free gratis, if
ye'll gie Mr Pittle a lift into the kirk; for, to be plain with you, the
worthy young man, who, as ye heard to-day, is no without an ability, has
long been fond of Mrs Pawkie's cousin, Miss Lizy Pinky; and I would fain
do all that lies in my power to help on the match." The bailie was well pleased with my frankness, and before returning home
we came to a satisfactory understanding; so that the next thing I had to
do, was to see Mr Pittle himself on the subject. Accordingly, in the
gloaming, I went over to where he stayed: it was with Miss Jenny
Killfuddy, an elderly maiden lady, whose father was the minister of
Braehill, and the same that is spoken of in the chronicle of Dalmailing,
as having had his eye almost put out by a clash of glaur, at the stormy
placing of Mr Balwhidder. "Mr Pittle," said I, as soon as I was in and the door closed. "I'm come
to you as a friend; both Mrs Pawkie and me have long discerned that ye
have had a look more than common towards our friend, Miss Lizy, and we
think it our duty to enquire your intents, before matters gang to greater
length." He looked a little dumfoundered at this salutation, and was at a loss for
an answer, so I continued--

"If your designs be honourable, and no doubt they are, now's your time;
strike while the iron's hot. By the death of the doctor, the kirk's
vacant, the town-council have the patronage; and, if ye marry Miss Lizy,
my interest and influence shall not be slack in helping you into the
poopit." In short, out of what passed that night, on the Monday
following Mr Pittle and Miss Lizy were married; and by my dexterity,
together with the able help I had in Bailie M'Lucre, he was in due season
placed and settled in the parish; and the next year more than fifty acres
of the town-moor were inclosed on a nine hundred and ninety-nine years'
tack at an easy rate between me and the bailie, he paying the half of the
expense of the ditching and rooting out of the whins; and it was
acknowledged by every one that saw it, that there had not been a greater
improvement for many years in all the country side. But to the best
actions there will be adverse and discontented spirits; and, on this
occasion, there were not wanting persons naturally of a disloyal
opposition temper, who complained of the inclosure as a usurpation of the
rights and property of the poorer burghers. Such revilings, however, are
what all persons in authority must suffer; and they had only the effect
of making me button my coat, and look out the crooser to the blast. The attainment of honours and dignities is not enjoyed without a portion
of trouble and care, which, like a shadow, follows all temporalities. On
the very evening of the same day that I was first chosen to be a bailie,
a sore affair came to light, in the discovery that Jean Gaisling had
murdered her bastard bairn. She was the daughter of a donsie mother,
that could gie no name to her gets, of which she had two laddies, besides
Jean. The one of them had gone off with the soldiers some time before;
the other, a douce well-behaved callan, was in my lord's servitude, as a
stable boy at the castle. Jeanie herself was the bonniest lassie in the
whole town, but light-headed, and fonder of outgait and blether in the
causey than was discreet of one of her uncertain parentage. She was, at
the time when she met with her misfortune, in the service of Mrs
Dalrymple, a colonel's widow, that came out of the army and settled among
us on her jointure. This Mrs Dalrymple, having been long used to the loose morals of camps
and regiments, did not keep that strict hand over poor Jeanie, and her
other serving lass, that she ought to have done, and so the poor
guileless creature fell into the snare of some of the ne'er-do-weel
gentlemen that used to play cards at night with Mrs Dalrymple. The
truths of the story were never well known, nor who was the father, for
the tragical issue barred all enquiry; but it came out that poor Jeanie
was left to herself, and, being instigated by the Enemy, after she had
been delivered, did, while the midwife's back was turned, strangle the
baby with a napkin. She was discovered in the very fact, with the bairn
black in the face in the bed beside her. The heinousness of the crime can by no possibility be lessened; but the
beauty of the mother, her tender years, and her light-headedness, had won
many favourers; and there was a great leaning in the hearts of all the
town to compassionate her, especially when they thought of the ill
example that had been set to her in the walk and conversation of her
mother. It was not, however, within the power of the magistrates to
overlook the accusation; so we were obligated to cause a precognition to
be taken, and the search left no doubt of the wilfulness of the murder. Jeanie was in consequence removed to the tolbooth, where she lay till the
lords were coming to Ayr, when she was sent thither to stand her trial
before them; but, from the hour she did the deed, she never spoke. Her trial was a short procedure, and she was cast to be hanged--and not
only to be hanged, but ordered to be executed in our town, and her body
given to the doctors to make an atomy. The execution of Jeanie was what
all expected would happen; but when the news reached the town of the
other parts of the sentence, the wail was as the sough of a pestilence,
and fain would the council have got it dispensed with. But the Lord
Advocate was just wud at the crime, both because there had been no
previous concealment, so as to have been an extenuation for the shame of
the birth, and because Jeanie would neither divulge the name of the
father, nor make answer to all the interrogatories that were put to
her--standing at the bar like a dumbie, and looking round her, and at the
judges, like a demented creature, and beautiful as a Flanders' baby. It
was thought by many, that her advocate might have made great use of her
visible consternation, and pled that she was by herself; for in truth she
had every appearance of being so. He was, however, a dure man, no doubt
well enough versed in the particulars and punctualities of the law for an
ordinary plea; but no of the right sort of knowledge and talent to take
up the case of a forlorn lassie, misled by ill example and a winsome
nature, and clothed in the allurement of loveliness, as the judge himself
said to the jury. On the night before the day of execution, she was brought over in a
chaise from Ayr between two town-officers, and placed again in our hands,
and still she never spoke. Nothing could exceed the compassion that every one had for poor Jeanie,
so she wasna committed to a common cell, but laid in the council-room,
where the ladies of the town made up a comfortable bed for her, and some
of them sat up all night and prayed for her; but her thoughts were gone,
and she sat silent. In the morning, by break of day, her wanton mother, that had been
trolloping in Glasgow, came to the tolbooth door, and made a dreadful
wally-waeing, and the ladies were obligated, for the sake of peace, to
bid her be let in. But Jeanie noticed her not, still sitting with her
eyes cast down, waiting the coming on of the hour of her doom. The
wicked mother first tried to rouse her by weeping and distraction, and
then she took to upbraiding; but Jeanie seemed to heed her not, save only
once, and then she but looked at the misleart tinkler, and shook her
head.