Pate looked from under his bonnet at the hough of beef.--"The Cheviot
hills hae turned weel out for the warden," continued Dan; "Redhough an'
his lads hae been as weel scrieving o'er law and dale as lying getting
hard pelts round the stane wa's o' Roxburgh, an' muckle mair gude has he
done; for gin they dinna hunger them out o' their hauddin, they'll keep
it. Ye'll draw an Englishman by the gab easier than drive him wi' an
airn gaud. I wad ride fifty miles to see ony ane o' the bonny dames that
a' this pelting an' peching is about." "Twa wanton glaikit gillies, I'll uphaud," said Pate, looking at the
restless hough; "o'er muckle marth i' the back, an' meldar i' the
brusket. Gin I had the heffing o' them, I sude tak a staup out
o' their bickers.--Whisht, I thought I heard the clanking o' horse
heels.--Callant, clap the lid down on the pat; what hae they't hinging
geaving up there for?" The clattering of the horses approached, but apparently with caution;
and at length a voice called at the door in an English accent, "Hollo,
who holds here?" "Leel men, an' for the Scots," answered Dan, starting
to his feet, and laying his hand on his sword. "For the knight of
Mountcomyn, the Scottish warden?" --inquired the horseman without. "For
the same," was the answer. "It is toward his castle that we are bound. Can any of you direct us the way?" "Troth, that I can," said old Pate, groping to satisfy himself that the
lid was close down on the pot, and then running to the door; "I can tell
you every fit o' the road, masters: You maun gang by the Fanesh,
you see; it lies yon way, you see; an' then up the Brown rig, as
straight as a line through Philhope-head, an' into Borthwick; then up
Aitas-burn,--round the Crib-law,--an' wheel to the right; then the burn
that ye come to there, ye maun cross that, and three miles farther on
you come to the castle of Mountcomyn.--Braw cheer there lads!" "I am afraid, friend," said the English trooper, "we will make nothing
of this direction. Is it far to this same castle of the Scottish
warden?" "O no, naething but a step, some three Scots miles." "And how is the road?" "A prime road, man; no a step in't a' wad tak your horse to the brusket;
only there's nae track; ye maun just take an ettle. Keep an ee on the
tail o' Charlie's wain, an' ye'll no gang far wrang." "Our young lord and master is much fatigued," said the trooper; "I am
afraid we shall scarcely make it out. Pray, sir, could you spare us a
guide?" Dan, who was listening behind, now stepped forward, and addressed them:
"My masters, as the night is o' darkness, I could hardly ride to
Mountcomyn mysel, an', far or near, I couldna win there afore day. Gin
ye dought accept o' my father's humble cheer the night--"

"The callant's bewiddied, an' waur than bewiddied," said Pate: "We haena
cheer for oursels, let abe for a byking o' English lords an' squires!" "I would gladly accept of any accommodation," said a sweet delicate
voice, like that of a boy; "for the path has been so dreadful that I am
almost dead, and unable to proceed further. I have a safe-conduct to the
Scottish court, signed by all the wardens of the marches, and every
knight, yeoman, and vassal is obliged to give me furtherance." "I dinna ken muckle about conducks an' signatures," said Pate, "but I
trow there winna be mony syllables in some o' the names if a' the
wardens hae signed your libelt; for I ken weel there's ane o' them whase
edication brak aff at the letter G, an' never gat farrer. But I'm no
ca'ing ye a leear, southron lord, ye may be a vera honest man; an' as
your errand may be something unco express, ye had better post on." "It sal never be casten up to me neither in camp nor ha," said Dan,
"that a stranger was cawed frae my auld father's door at this time o'
the night. Light down, light down, southron lord, ye are a privileged
man; an', as I like to see the meaning o' things, I'll ride wi' ye mysel
the morn, fit for fit, to the castle o' Mountcomyn." The strangers were soon all on their feet, and ushered into the family
circle, for there was no fire-place in the house but that one. They
consisted of five stout troopers, well armed, a page, and a young
nobleman, having the appearance of a youth about seventeen or eighteen
years of age. Every eye was instantly turned on him, there was something
so extraordinary in his appearance. Instead of a steel helmet, he wore a
velvet cap, shaped like a crown, striped with belts, bars, and crosses
of gold wire, and manifestly more for ornament than use. His fair
ringlets were peeping in curls out from below his cap, and his face
and bright blue eyes were lovely as the dawn of a summer's morning. They were not well seated till a noise of the tread of horses was again
heard. "The warld be a-wastle us!" cried old Pate, "wha's that now? I think
fouk will be eaten up wi' fouk, an' naething for folk's pains but dry
thanks;--thanks winna feed the cat--"

He was stopped in his regretful soliloquy by a rough voice at the door:
"Ho, wha bauds the house?" The same answer was given as to the former
party, and in a minute the strangers entered without law or leave. "Ye travel unco late, maisters," said old Pate: "How far may ye be for
the night?" "We meant to have reached the tower of Gorranberry to-night," said one
of the strangers, "but we have been benighted, and were drawn hither by
the light in your hole. I fear we must draw on your hospitality till
day." "Callant Peter, gang an' stap a wisp i' that bole," said Pate; "it
seems to be the beacon light to a' the clanjaumphry i' the hale country. I tauld ye aye to big it up; but no ane o' ye heeds what I say. I hae
seen houses that _some_ fouk whiles gaed by. But, my maisters, its nae
gate ava to Gorranberry,--a mere haut-stride-and-loup. I'll send a guide
to Bilhope-head wi' ye; for troth we hae neither meat nor drink,
house-room nor stabling, mair about the toun. We're but poor yeomen, an'
haud our mailin for hard service. We hae tholed a foray the night
already, an' a double ane wad herrie us out o' house an' hauld. The
warld be a' wastle us! I think a' the mosstroopers be abraid the night! Bairns, swee that bouking o' claes aff the fire; ye'll burn it i' the
boiling." The new comers paid little attention to this address of the old man;
they saw that he was superannuated, and had all the narrow selfishness
that too generally clings to that last miserable stage of human
exisence; but drawing nigh they began to eye the southron party with
looks of dark suspicion, if not of fierceness. "I see what maks ye sae frightet at our entrance here," said the first
Scots trooper, ye hae some southron spies amang ye--Gudeman, ye sal
answer to the king for this, an' to the Douglas too, whilk ye'll find a
waur job." "Ken where ye are, an' wha ye're speaking to," said Dan, stepping
forward and browing the last speaker face to face: "If either the ae
party or the ither be spies, or aught else but leel men, ye shall find,
ere ye gang far, whase land ye are on, an' whase kipples ye are under. That auld man's my father, an,' doitet as he is, the man amang ye that
says a saucy word to him I'll gar sleep in his shoon a fit shorter than
he rase i' the morning. Wha are ye, sir, or where do you travel by night
on my master the warden's bounds?" "Sir," answered another trooper, who seemed to be rather a more polished
man, "I applaud your spirit, and will answer your demand. We go with our
lord and master, Prince Alexander Stuart of Scotland, on a mission to a
noble English family. Here is the king's seal as well as a pass signed
by the English warden. We are leel men and true." "Where is the prince?" said Dan: "A prince of Scotland i' my father's
house? Which is he?" A slender elegant stripling stept forward. "Here he is, brave yeoman,"
said the youth: "No ceremony--Regard me as your fellow and companion for
this night." Dan whipped off his bonnet and clapped his foot upon it, and bowing low
and awkwardly to his prince he expressed his humble respect as well as
he could, and then presented the prince to his father. The title sounded
high in the old man's ears, he pulled off his bonnet and looked with an
unsteady gaze, as if uncertain on whom to fix it--"A prince! Eh?--Is he
a prince o' Scotland? Ay, ay!" said he, "Then he'll maybe hae some say
wi' our head men--Dan--I say, Dan"--and with that he pulled Dan's
sleeve, and said in a whisper loud enough to be heard over all the
house,--"I say, Dan, man, gin he wad but speak to the warden to let us
hae a' the land west the length o' the Frosty lair. O it wad lie weel
into ours." "It wad, father, and I daresay we may get it; but hush just
now." "Eh? do you think we may get it?" enquired the old man eagerly in
the same whispering tremulous voice, "O man, it wad lie weel in; an' sae
wad Couter's-cleuch. It's no perfect wanting that too. An' we wad be a
great deal the better o' twa or three rigs aff Skelfhill for a bit
downfa' to the south--See if ye can speak to the lad." Dan shook his father's hand, and nodded to him by way of acquiescence. The old man brightened up: "Whar is your titty Bessy, Dan? Whar are a'
the idle hizzies? Gar them get something set down to the princely lad:
I'se warrant he's e'en hungry. Ye'll no be used til siccan roads as
thir, Sir? Na, na. They're unco roads for a prince.--Dan, I say, come
this way; I want to speak to you--I say," (whispering very low aside) "I
wadna let them ken o' the beef, or they'll just gang wi't. Gie them milk
an' bread, an' cheese, an' a drap o' the broo; it will do weel aneuch. Hunger's good sauce. But, Dan,--I say, could ye no contrive to get quat
o' thae English? I doubt there will be little made of them:--They're but
a wheen gillie-gaupies at the best, an nae freends to us.--Fouk sude ay
bow to the bush they get bield frae." "It's a' true that ye say, father; but we surely needna grudge an
Englishman a piece o' an English cow's hip.--The beef didna cost you
dear, an' there's mair where it cam frae." The old man would not give up his point, but persisted in saying it was
a dangerous experiment, and an unprofitable waste. However, in spite of
his remonstrances, the board was loaded with six wooden bickers filled
with beef broth, plenty of bear-meal bannocks, and a full quarter of
English ox beef, to which the travellers did all manner of justice. The
prince, as he called himself, was placed at the head of the table, and
the young English nobleman by his side. Their eyes were scarcely ever
turned from one another's faces, unless in a casual hasty glance to see
how others were regarding the same face. The prince had dark raven hair
that parted on a brow of snow, a black liquid eye, and round lips,
purer than the cherry about to fall from the tree with ripeness. He was
also a degree taller than the English lord; but both of them, as well as
their two pages, were lovelier than it became men to be. The troopers
who attended them seemed disposed to contradict every thing that came
from the adverse party, and, if possible, to broach a quarrel, had it
not been for the two knights, who were all suavity, good breeding, and
kindness to each other, and seemed to have formed an attachment at first
sight. At length Prince Alexander inquired of his new associate his
name, and business at the Scottish court, provided, he said, that it did
not require strict secrecy. The other said, he would tell him every
thing truly, on condition that he would do the same: which being agreed
to, the young English nobleman proceeded as follows:

"My name is Lord Jasper Tudor, second son to the Earl of Pembroke. I am
nearly related to the throne of England, and in high favour with the
king. The wars on the Borders have greatly harassed the English
dalesmen for these many years, and matters being still getting worse
between the nations, the king, my cousin, has proposed to me to
marry the Princess Margaret of Scotland, and obtain as her dowry a
confirmation of these border lands and castles, so that a permanent
peace may be established between the nations, and this bloody and
desperate work cease. I am on my way to the Scottish court to see
the princess, your sister; and if I find her to be as lovely and
accomplished as fame speaks her, I intend to comply with the king's
request, and marry her forthwith." This speech affected the prince so much that all the guests wondered. He
started to his feet, and smiling in astonishment said, "What, you? you
marry m--m--my sister Margaret? She is very much beholden to you, and on
my word she will see a becoming youth. But are you sure that she will
accept of you for a husband?" "I have little to fear on that head," said
the Lord Jasper Tudor jeeringly; "Maids are in general not much averse
to marriage; and, if I am well informed, your lovely sister is as
little averse to it as any of her contemporaries." The prince blushed deep at this character of his sister, but had not a
word to say. "Pray," continued Tudor, "is she like you? If she is, I think I shall
love her,--I would not have her just like you neither." "I believe," said the prince, "there is a strong family likeness; but
tell me in what features you would wish her to differ from me, and I
will describe her minutely to you." "In the first place," said the amorous and blue-ey'd Tudor, "I should
like her to be a little stouter, and more manly of frame than you, and,
at least, to have some appearance of a beard." All the circle stared. "The devil you would, my lord," said Dan; "Wad ye
like your wife to hae a beard, in earnest? Gude faith, an your ain war
like mine, ye wad think ye had eneuch o't foreby your wife's." The
prince held up his hands in astonishment, and the young English lord
blushed deeper than it behoved a knight to do; but at length he tried to
laugh it by, pretending that he had unwittingly said one thing when he
meant the very contrary, for he wished her to be more feminine, and have
less beard." --"I think that will hardly be possible," said Dan; "but
perhaps there may be a hair here an' there on my lord the prince's chin,
when ane comes near it. I wadna disparage ony man, far less my king's
son." "Well, my noble lord," said the prince, "your tale has not a little
surprised me, as well it may. Our meeting here in like circumstances is
the most curious rencounter I ever knew; for, to tell you the plain
truth, I am likewise on an errand of the same import, being thus far on
my way to see and court the lady Jane Howard, in order that all her wide
domains may be attached to my father's kingdom, and peace and amity
thereby established on the border." "Gracious heaven!" said young Lord Tudor, "can this that I hear be true? You? Are you on your way to my cousin, the lady Jane Howard? Why, do you
not know that she is already affianced to Lord Musgrave?" "Yes, it is certain I do; but that is one of my principal inducements to
gain her from him; that is quite in the true spirit of gallantry; but,
save her great riches, I am told she has little else to recommend her,"
said the prince. "And, pray, how does fame report of my cousin Jane?" said Tudor. "As of a shrew and a coquette," answered the prince; "a wicked minx,
that is intemperate in all her passions." "It is a manifest falsehood," said Tudor, his face glowing with
resentment, "I never knew a young lady so moderate and chastened in
every passion of the female heart.