"How was it possible that such an idea should enter our brains? I felt a little uneasy-a little fearful of
my sister's happiness with him in marriage, because I knew that his conduct had not been always
quite right. My father and mother knew nothing of that; they only felt how imprudent a match it
must be. Kitty then owned, with a very natural triumph on knowing more than the rest of us, that in
Lydia's last letter she had prepared her for such a step. She had known, it seems, of their being in
love with each other, many weeks." "But not before they went to Brighton?" "No, I believe not." "And did Colonel Forster appear to think well of Wickham himself? Does he know his real character?" "I must confess that he did not speak so well of Wickham as he formerly did. He believed him to be
imprudent and extravagant. And since this sad affair has taken place, it is said that he left Meryton
greatly in debt; but I hope this may be false." "Oh, Jane, had we been less secret, had we told what we knew of him, this could not have
happened!" "Perhaps it would have been better," replied her sister. "But to expose the former faults of any
person without knowing what their present feelings were, seemed unjustifiable. We acted with the
best intentions." "Could Colonel Forster repeat the particulars of Lydia's note to his wife?" "He brought it with him for us to see." Jane then took it from her pocket-book, and gave it to Elizabeth. These were the contents:
"MY DEAR HARRIET,
"You will laugh when you know where I am gone, and I cannot help laughing myself at your surprise
to-morrow morning, as soon as I am missed. I am going to Gretna Green, and if you cannot guess
with who, I shall think you a simpleton, for there is but one man in the world I love, and he is an
angel. I should never be happy without him, so think it no harm to be off. You need not send them
word at Longbourn of my going, if you do not like it, for it will make the surprise the greater, when I
write to them and sign my name 'Lydia Wickham.' What a good joke it will be! I can hardly write for
laughing. Pray make my excuses to Pratt for not keeping my engagement, and dancing with him to-
night. Tell him I hope he will excuse me when he knows all; and tell him I will dance with him at the
next ball we meet, with great pleasure. I shall send for my clothes when I get to Longbourn; but I
wish you would tell Sally to mend a great slit in my worked muslin gown before they are packed up. Good-bye. Give my love to Colonel Forster. I hope you will drink to our good journey. "Your affectionate friend,
"LYDIA BENNET." "Oh! thoughtless, thoughtless Lydia!" cried Elizabeth when she had finished it. "What a letter is this,
to be written at such a moment! But at least it shows that she was serious on the subject of their
journey. Whatever he might afterwards persuade her to, it was not on her side a scheme of infamy. My poor father! how he must have felt it!" "I never saw anyone so shocked. He could not speak a word for full ten minutes. My mother was
taken ill immediately, and the whole house in such confusion!" "Oh! Jane," cried Elizabeth, "was there a servant belonging to it who did not know the whole story
before the end of the day?" "I do not know. I hope there was. But to be guarded at such a time is very difficult. My mother was in
hysterics, and though I endeavoured to give her every assistance in my power, I am afraid I did not
do so much as I might have done! But the horror of what might possibly happen almost took from
me my faculties." "Your attendance upon her has been too much for you. You do not look well. Oh that I had been with
you! you have had every care and anxiety upon yourself alone." "Mary and Kitty have been very kind, and would have shared in every fatigue, I am sure; but I did not
think it right for either of them. Kitty is slight and delicate; and Mary studies so much, that her hours
of repose should not be broken in on. My aunt Phillips came to Longbourn on Tuesday, after my
father went away; and was so good as to stay till Thursday with me. She was of great use and
comfort to us all. And Lady Lucas has been very kind; she walked here on Wednesday morning to
condole with us, and offered her services, or any of her daughters', if they should be of use to us." "She had better have stayed at home," cried Elizabeth; "perhaps she meant well, but, under such a
misfortune as this, one cannot see too little of one's neighbours. Assistance is impossible; condolence
insufferable. Let them triumph over us at a distance, and be satisfied." She then proceeded to inquire into the measures which her father had intended to pursue, while in
town, for the recovery of his daughter. "He meant I believe," replied Jane, "to go to Epsom, the place where they last changed horses, see
the postilions and try if anything could be made out from them. His principal object must be to
discover the number of the hackney coach which took them from Clapham. It had come with a fare
from London; and as he thought that the circumstance of a gentleman and lady's removing from one
carriage into another might be remarked he meant to make inquiries at Clapham. If he could anyhow
discover at what house the coachman had before set down his fare, he determined to make inquiries
there, and hoped it might not be impossible to find out the stand and number of the coach. I do not
know of any other designs that he had formed; but he was in such a hurry to be gone, and his spirits
so greatly discomposed, that I had difficulty in finding out even so much as this." The whole party were in hopes of a letter from Mr. Bennet the next morning, but the post came in
without bringing a single line from him. His family knew him to be, on all common occasions, a most
negligent and dilatory correspondent; but at such a time they had hoped for exertion. They were
forced to conclude that he had no pleasing intelligence to send; but even ofthat they would have
been glad to be certain. Mr. Gardiner had waited only for the letters before he set off. When he was gone, they were certain at least of receiving constant information of what was going
on, and their uncle promised, at parting, to prevail on Mr. Bennet to return to Longbourn, as soon as
he could, to the great consolation of his sister, who considered it as the only security for her
husband's not being killed in a duel. Mrs. Gardiner and the children were to remain in Hertfordshire a few days longer, as the former
thought her presence might be serviceable to her nieces. She shared in their attendance on Mrs.
Bennet, and was a great comfort to them in their hours of freedom. Their other aunt also visited
them frequently, and always, as she said, with the design of cheering and heartening them up-
though, as she never came without reporting some fresh instance of Wickham's extravagance or
irregularity, she seldom went away without leaving them more dispirited than she found them. All Meryton seemed striving to blacken the man who, but three months before, had been almost an
angel of light. He was declared to be in debt to every tradesman in the place, and his intrigues, all
honoured with the title of seduction, had been extended into every tradesman's family. Everybody
declared that he was the wickedest young man in the world; and everybody began to find out that
they had always distrusted the appearance of his goodness. Elizabeth, though she did not credit
above half of what was said, believed enough to make her former assurance of her sister's ruin more
certain; and even Jane, who believed still less of it, became almost hopeless, more especially as the
time was now come when, if they had gone to Scotland, which she had never before entirely
despaired of, they must in all probability have gained some news of them. Mr. Gardiner left Longbourn on Sunday; on Tuesday his wife received a letter from him; it told them
that, on his arrival, he had immediately found out his brother, and persuaded him to come to
Gracechurch Street; that Mr. Bennet had been to Epsom and Clapham, before his arrival, but without
gaining any satisfactory information; and that he was now determined to inquire at all the principal
hotels in town, as Mr. Bennet thought it possible they might have gone to one of them, on their first
coming to London, before they procured lodgings. Mr. Gardiner himself did not expect any success
from this measure, but as his brother was eager in it, he meant to assist him in pursuing it. He added
that Mr. Bennet seemed wholly disinclined at present to leave London and promised to write again
very soon. There was also a postscript to this effect:
"I have written to Colonel Forster to desire him to find out, if possible, from some of the young man's
intimates in the regiment, whether Wickham has any relations or connections who would be likely to
know in what part of town he has now concealed himself. If there were anyone that one could apply
to with a probability of gaining such a clue as that, it might be of essential consequence. At present
we have nothing to guide us. Colonel Forster will, I dare say, do everything in his power to satisfy us
on this head. But, on second thoughts, perhaps, Lizzy could tell us what relations he has now living,
better than any other person." Elizabeth was at no loss to understand from whence this deference to her authority proceeded; but it
was not in her power to give any information of so satisfactory a nature as the compliment deserved. She had never heard of his having had any relations, except a father and mother, both of whom had
been dead many years. It was possible, however, that some of his companions in the --shire might
be able to give more information; and though she was not very sanguine in expecting it, the
application was a something to look forward to. Every day at Longbourn was now a day of anxiety; but the most anxious part of each was when the
post was expected. The arrival of letters was the grand object of every morning's impatience. Through letters, whatever of good or bad was to be told would be communicated, and every
succeeding day was expected to bring some news of importance. But before they heard again from Mr. Gardiner, a letter arrived for their father, from a different
quarter, from Mr. Collins; which, as Jane had received directions to open all that came for him in his
absence, she accordingly read; and Elizabeth, who knew what curiosities his letters always were,
looked over her, and read it likewise. It was as follows:
"MY DEAR SIR,
"I feel myself called upon, by our relationship, and my situation in life, to condole with you on the
grievous affliction you are now suffering under, of which we were yesterday informed by a letter
from Hertfordshire. Be assured, my dear sir, that Mrs. Collins and myself sincerely sympathise with
you and all your respectable family, in your present distress, which must be of the bitterest kind,
because proceeding from a cause which no time can remove. No arguments shall be wanting on my
part that can alleviate so severe a misfortune-or that may comfort you, under a circumstance that
must be of all others the most afflicting to a parent's mind. The death of your daughter would have
been a blessing in comparison of this. And it is the more to be lamented, because there is reason to
suppose as my dear Charlotte informs me, that this licentiousness of behaviour in your daughter has
proceeded from a faulty degree of indulgence; though, at the same time, for the consolation of
yourself and Mrs. Bennet, I am inclined to think that her own disposition must be naturally bad, or
she could not be guilty of such an enormity, at so early an age. Howsoever that may be, you are
grievously to be pitied; in which opinion I am not only joined by Mrs. Collins, but likewise by Lady
Catherine and her daughter, to whom I have related the affair. They agree with me in apprehending
that this false step in one daughter will be injurious to the fortunes of all the others; for who, as Lady
Catherine herself condescendingly says, will connect themselves with such a family? And this
consideration leads me moreover to reflect, with augmented satisfaction, on a certain event of last
November; for had it been otherwise, I must have been involved in all your sorrow and disgrace. Let
me then advise you, dear sir, to console yourself as much as possible, to throw off your unworthy
child from your affection for ever, and leave her to reap the fruits of her own heinous offense. "I am, dear sir, etc., etc." Mr. Gardiner did not write again till he had received an answer from Colonel Forster; and then he
had nothing of a pleasant nature to send. It was not known that Wickham had a single relationship
with whom he kept up any connection, and it was certain that he had no near one living. His former
acquaintances had been numerous; but since he had been in the militia, it did not appear that he was
on terms of particular friendship with any of them. There was no one, therefore, who could be
pointed out as likely to give any news of him. And in the wretched state of his own finances, there
was a very powerful motive for secrecy, in addition to his fear of discovery by Lydia's relations, for it
had just transpired that he had left gaming debts behind him to a very considerable amount. Colonel
Forster believed that more than a thousand pounds would be necessary to clear his expenses at
Brighton. He owed a good deal in town, but his debts of honour were still more formidable. Mr.
Gardiner did not attempt to conceal these particulars from the Longbourn family. Jane heard them
with horror. "A gamester!" she cried. "This is wholly unexpected. I had not an idea of it." Mr. Gardiner added in his letter, that they might expect to see their father at home on the following
day, which was Saturday. Rendered spiritless by the ill-success of all their endeavours, he had yielded
to his brother-in-law's entreaty that he would return to his family, and leave it to him to do whatever
occasion might suggest to be advisable for continuing their pursuit. When Mrs. Bennet was told of
this, she did not express so much satisfaction as her children expected, considering what her anxiety
for his life had been before. "What, is he coming home, and without poor Lydia?" she cried. "Sure he will not leave London before
he has found them. Who is to fight Wickham, and make him marry her, if he comes away?" As Mrs. Gardiner began to wish to be at home, it was settled that she and the children should go to
London, at the same time that Mr. Bennet came from it. The coach, therefore, took them the first
stage of their journey, and brought its master back to Longbourn. Mrs. Gardiner went away in all the perplexity about Elizabeth and her Derbyshire friend that had
attended her from that part of the world. His name had never been voluntarily mentioned before
them by her niece; and the kind of half-expectation which Mrs. Gardiner had formed, of their being
followed by a letter from him, had ended in nothing. Elizabeth had received none since her return
that could come from Pemberley. The present unhappy state of the family rendered any other excuse for the lowness of her spirits
unnecessary; nothing, therefore, could be fairly conjectured from that, though Elizabeth, who was by
this time tolerably well acquainted with her own feelings, was perfectly aware that, had she known
nothing of Darcy, she could have borne the dread of Lydia's infamy somewhat better. It would have
spared her, she thought, one sleepless night out of two. When Mr. Bennet arrived, he had all the appearance of his usual philosophic composure. He said as
little as he had ever been in the habit of saying; made no mention of the business that had taken him
away, and it was some time before his daughters had courage to speak of it. It was not till the afternoon, when he had joined them at tea, that Elizabeth ventured to introduce
the subject; and then, on her briefly expressing her sorrow for what he must have endured, he
replied, "Say nothing of that. Who should suffer but myself? It has been my own doing, and I ought
to feel it." "You must not be too severe upon yourself," replied Elizabeth. "You may well warn me against such an evil. Human nature is so prone to fall into it! No, Lizzy, let me
once in my life feel how much I have been to blame. I am not afraid of being overpowered by the
impression. It will pass away soon enough." "Do you suppose them to be in London?" "Yes; where else can they be so well concealed?" "And Lydia used to want to go to London," added Kitty. "She is happy then," said her father drily; "and her residence there will probably be of some
duration." Then after a short silence he continued:
"Lizzy, I bear you no ill-will for being justified in your advice to me last May, which, considering the
event, shows some greatness of mind." They were interrupted by Miss Bennet, who came to fetch her mother's tea. "This is a parade," he cried, "which does one good; it gives such an elegance to misfortune! Another
day I will do the same; I will sit in my library, in my nightcap and powdering gown, and give as much
trouble as I can; or, perhaps, I may defer it till Kitty runs away." "I am not going to run away, papa," said Kitty fretfully. "If I should ever go to Brighton, I would
behave better than Lydia." "You go to Brighton. I would not trust you so near it as Eastbourne for fifty pounds! No, Kitty, I have
at last learnt to be cautious, and you will feel the effects of it. No officer is ever to enter into my
house again, nor even to pass through the village. Balls will be absolutely prohibited, unless you
stand up with one of your sisters. And you are never to stir out of doors till you can prove that you
have spent ten minutes of every day in a rational manner." Kitty, who took all these threats in a serious light, began to cry. "Well, well," said he, "do not make yourself unhappy. If you are a good girl for the next ten years, I
will take you to a review at the end of them." Two days after Mr. Bennet's return, as Jane and Elizabeth were walking together in the shrubbery
behind the house, they saw the housekeeper coming towards them, and, concluding that she came
to call them to their mother, went forward to meet her; but, instead of the expected summons,
when they approached her, she said to Miss Bennet, "I beg your pardon, madam, for interrupting
you, but I was in hopes you might have got some good news from town, so I took the liberty of
coming to ask." "What do you mean, Hill? We have heard nothing from town." "Dear madam," cried Mrs. Hill, in great astonishment, "don't you know there is an express come for
master from Mr. Gardiner? He has been here this half-hour, and master has had a letter." Away ran the girls, too eager to get in to have time for speech. They ran through the vestibule into
the breakfast-room; from thence to the library; their father was in neither; and they were on the
point of seeking him up stairs with their mother, when they were met by the butler, who said:
"If you are looking for my master, ma'am, he is walking towards the little copse." Upon this information, they instantly passed through the hall once more, and ran across the lawn
after their father, who was deliberately pursuing his way towards a small wood on one side of the
paddock. Jane, who was not so light nor so much in the habit of running as Elizabeth, soon lagged behind,
while her sister, panting for breath, came up with him, and eagerly cried out:
"Oh, papa, what news-what news? Have you heard from my uncle?" "Yes I have had a letter from him by express." "Well, and what news does it bring-good or bad?" "What is there of good to be expected?" said he, taking the letter from his pocket. "But perhaps you
would like to read it." Elizabeth impatiently caught it from his hand. Jane now came up. "Read it aloud," said their father, "for I hardly know myself what it is about." "Gracechurch Street, Monday, August 2. "MY DEAR BROTHER,
"At last I am able to send you some tidings of my niece, and such as, upon the whole, I hope it will
give you satisfaction. Soon after you left me on Saturday, I was fortunate enough to find out in what
part of London they were. The particulars I reserve till we meet; it is enough to know they are
discovered. I have seen them both-"
"Then it is as I always hoped," cried Jane; "they are married!" Elizabeth read on:
"I have seen them both. They are not married, nor can I find there was any intention of being so; but
if you are willing to perform the engagements which I have ventured to make on your side, I hope it
will not be long before they are. All that is required of you is, to assure to your daughter, by
settlement, her equal share of the five thousand pounds secured among your children after the
decease of yourself and my sister; and, moreover, to enter into an engagement of allowing her,
during your life, one hundred pounds per annum. These are conditions which, considering
everything, I had no hesitation in complying with, as far as I thought myself privileged, for you. I shall
send this by express, that no time may be lost in bringing me your answer. You will easily
comprehend, from these particulars, that Mr. Wickham's circumstances are not so hopeless as they
are generally believed to be. The world has been deceived in that respect; and I am happy to say
there will be some little money, even when all his debts are discharged, to settle on my niece, in
addition to her own fortune. If, as I conclude will be the case, you send me full powers to act in your
name throughout the whole of this business, I will immediately give directions to Haggerston for
preparing a proper settlement. There will not be the smallest occasion for your coming to town
again; therefore stay quiet at Longbourn, and depend on my diligence and care. Send back your
answer as fast as you can, and be careful to write explicitly. We have judged it best that my niece
should be married from this house, of which I hope you will approve. She comes to us to-day. I shall
write again as soon as anything more is determined on. Yours, etc.,
"EDW. GARDINER." "Is it possible?" cried Elizabeth, when she had finished. "Can it be possible that he will marry her?" "Wickham is not so undeserving, then, as we thought him," said her sister. "My dear father, I
congratulate you." "And have you answered the letter?" cried Elizabeth. "No; but it must be done soon." Most earnestly did she then entreat him to lose no more time before he wrote. "Oh! my dear father," she cried, "come back and write immediately. Consider how important every
moment is in such a case." "Let me write for you," said Jane, "if you dislike the trouble yourself." "I dislike it very much," he replied; "but it must be done." And so saying, he turned back with them, and walked towards the house. "And may I ask-" said Elizabeth; "but the terms, I suppose, must be complied with." "Complied with! I am only ashamed of his asking so little." "And they must marry! Yet he is such a man!" "Yes, yes, they must marry. There is nothing else to be done. But there are two things that I want
very much to know; one is, how much money your uncle has laid down to bring it about; and the
other, how am I ever to pay him." "Money! My uncle!" cried Jane, "what do you mean, sir?" "I mean, that no man in his senses would marry Lydia on so slight a temptation as one hundred a
year during my life, and fifty after I am gone." "That is very true," said Elizabeth; "though it had not occurred to me before. His debts to be
discharged, and something still to remain! Oh! it must be my uncle's doings! Generous, good man, I
am afraid he has distressed himself. A small sum could not do all this." "No," said her father; "Wickham's a fool if he takes her with a farthing less than ten thousand
pounds. I should be sorry to think so ill of him, in the very beginning of our relationship." "Ten thousand pounds! Heaven forbid! How is half such a sum to be repaid?" Mr. Bennet made no answer, and each of them, deep in thought, continued silent till they reached
the house. Their father then went on to the library to write, and the girls walked into the breakfast-
room. "And they are really to be married!" cried Elizabeth, as soon as they were by themselves. "How
strange this is! And for this we are to be thankful. That they should marry, small as is their chance of
happiness, and wretched as is his character, we are forced to rejoice. Oh, Lydia!" "I comfort myself with thinking," replied Jane, "that he certainly would not marry Lydia if he had not
a real regard for her. Though our kind uncle has done something towards clearing him, I cannot
believe that ten thousand pounds, or anything like it, has been advanced. He has children of his own,
and may have more. How could he spare half ten thousand pounds?" "If he were ever able to learn what Wickham's debts have been," said Elizabeth, "and how much is
settled on his side on our sister, we shall exactly know what Mr. Gardiner has done for them,
because Wickham has not sixpence of his own. The kindness of my uncle and aunt can never be
requited. Their taking her home, and affording her their personal protection and countenance, is
such a sacrifice to her advantage as years of gratitude cannot enough acknowledge. By this time she
is actually with them! If such goodness does not make her miserable now, she will never deserve to
be happy! What a meeting for her, when she first sees my aunt!" "We must endeavour to forget all that has passed on either side," said Jane: "I hope and trust they
will yet be happy. His consenting to marry her is a proof, I will believe, that he is come to a right way
of thinking. Their mutual affection will steady them; and I flatter myself they will settle so quietly,
and live in so rational a manner, as may in time make their past imprudence forgotten." "Their conduct has been such," replied Elizabeth, "as neither you, nor I, nor anybody can ever forget. It is useless to talk of it." It now occurred to the girls that their mother was in all likelihood perfectly ignorant of what had
happened. They went to the library, therefore, and asked their father whether he would not wish
them to make it known to her. He was writing and, without raising his head, coolly replied:
"Just as you please." "May we take my uncle's letter to read to her?" "Take whatever you like, and get away." Elizabeth took the letter from his writing-table, and they went up stairs together. Mary and Kitty
were both with Mrs. Bennet: one communication would, therefore, do for all. After a slight
preparation for good news, the letter was read aloud. Mrs. Bennet could hardly contain herself. As
soon as Jane had read Mr. Gardiner's hope of Lydia's being soon married, her joy burst forth, and
every following sentence added to its exuberance. She was now in an irritation as violent from
delight, as she had ever been fidgety from alarm and vexation. To know that her daughter would be
married was enough. She was disturbed by no fear for her felicity, nor humbled by any remembrance
of her misconduct. "My dear, dear Lydia!" she cried. "This is delightful indeed! She will be married! I shall see her again! She will be married at sixteen! My good, kind brother! I knew how it would be. I knew he would
manage everything! How I long to see her! and to see dear Wickham too! But the clothes, the
wedding clothes! I will write to my sister Gardiner about them directly. Lizzy, my dear, run down to
your father, and ask him how much he will give her. Stay, stay, I will go myself. Ring the bell, Kitty, for
Hill. I will put on my things in a moment. My dear, dear Lydia! How merry we shall be together when
we meet!" Her eldest daughter endeavoured to give some relief to the violence of these transports, by leading
her thoughts to the obligations which Mr. Gardiner's behaviour laid them all under. "For we must attribute this happy conclusion," she added, "in a great measure to his kindness. We
are persuaded that he has pledged himself to assist Mr. Wickham with money." "Well," cried her mother, "it is all very right; who should do it but her own uncle? If he had not had a
family of his own, I and my children must have had all his money, you know; and it is the first time we
have ever had anything from him, except a few presents.