I could amaist think whiles my
son, or else Steenie, my oe, was dead, and that I had seen the burial. Isna that a queer dream for a daft auld carline? What for should ony o’
them dee before me?--it’s out o’ the course o’ nature, ye ken.”

“I think you’ll make very little of this stupid old woman,” said
Hector,--who still nourished, perhaps, some feelings of the dislike
excited by the disparaging mention of his countrymen in her lay--“I think
you’ll make but little of her, sir; and it’s wasting our time to sit
here and listen to her dotage.”

“Hector,” said the Antiquary, indignantly, “if you do not respect her
misfortunes, respect at least her old age and grey hairs: this is the
last stage of existence, so finely treated by the Latin poet--

                                --Omni
               Membrorum damno major dementia, quae nec
               Nomina, servorum, nec vultus agnoscit amici,
               Cum queis preterita coenavit nocte, nec illos
                            Quos genuit, quos eduxit.”

“That’s Latin!” said Elspeth, rousing herself as if she attended to the
lines, which the Antiquary recited with great pomp of diction--“that’s
Latin!” and she cast a wild glance around her--“Has there a priest fund
me out at last?”

“You see, nephew, her comprehension is almost equal to your own of that
fine passage.”

“I hope you think, sir, that I knew it to be Latin as well as she did?”

“Why, as to that--But stay, she is about to speak.”

“I will have no priest--none,” said the beldam, with impotent vehemence;
“as I have lived I will die--none shall say that I betrayed my mistress,
though it were to save my soul!”

“That bespoke a foul conscience,” said the mendicant;--“I wuss she wad
mak a clean breast, an it were but for her sake;” and he again assailed
her. “Weel, gudewife, I did your errand to the Yerl.”

“To what Earl? I ken nae Earl;--I ken’d a Countess ance--I wish to Heaven
I had never ken’d her! for by that acquaintance, neighbour, their cam,”--
and she counted her withered fingers as she spoke “first Pride, then
Malice, then Revenge, then False Witness; and Murder tirl’d at the
door-pin, if he camna ben. And werena thae pleasant guests, think ye,
to take up their quarters in ae woman’s heart? I trow there was routh o’
company.”

“But, cummer,” continued the beggar, “it wasna the Countess of Glenallan
I meant, but her son, him that was Lord Geraldin.”

“I mind it now,” she said; “I saw him no that langsyne, and we had a
heavy speech thegither. Eh, sirs! the comely young lord is turned as
auld and frail as I am: it’s muckle that sorrow and heartbreak, and
crossing of true love, will do wi’ young blood. But suldna his mither
hae lookit to that hersell?--we were but to do her bidding, ye ken. I
am sure there’s naebody can blame me--he wasna my son, and she was my
mistress. Ye ken how the rhyme says--I hae maist forgotten how to sing,
or else the tune’s left my auld head--

                  “He turn’d him right and round again,
                       Said, Scorn na at my mither;
                   Light loves I may get mony a ane,
                       But minnie neer anither. Then he was but of the half blude, ye ken, and her’s was the right
Glenallan after a’. Na, na, I maun never maen doing and suffering for
the Countess Joscelin--never will I maen for that.”

Then drawing her flax from the distaff, with the dogged air of one who
is resolved to confess nothing, she resumed her interrupted occupation. “I hae heard,” said the mendicant, taking his cue from what Oldbuck
had told him of the family history--“I hae heard, cummer, that some ill
tongue suld hae come between the Earl, that’s Lord Geraldin, and his
young bride.”

“Ill tongue?” she said in hasty alarm; “and what had she to fear frae an
ill tongue?--she was gude and fair eneugh--at least a’ body said sae. But
had she keepit her ain tongue aff ither folk, she might hae been living
like a leddy for a’ that’s come and gane yet.”

“But I hae heard say, gudewife,” continued Ochiltree, “there was a
clatter in the country, that her husband and her were ower sibb when
they married.”

“Wha durst speak o’ that?” said the old woman hastily; “wha durst say
they were married?--wha ken’d o’ that?--Not the Countess--not I. If
they wedded in secret, they were severed in secret--They drank of the
fountains of their ain deceit.”

“No, wretched beldam!” exclaimed Oldbuck, who could keep silence
no longer, “they drank the poison that you and your wicked mistress
prepared for them.”

“Ha, ha!” she replied, “I aye thought it would come to this. It’s but
sitting silent when they examine me--there’s nae torture in our days;
and if there is, let them rend me!--It’s ill o’ the vassal’s mouth that
betrays the bread it eats.”

“Speak to her, Edie,” said the Antiquary; “she knows your voice, and
answers to it most readily.”

“We shall mak naething mair out o’ her,” said Ochiltree. “When she has
clinkit hersell down that way, and faulded her arms, she winna speak a
word, they say, for weeks thegither. And besides, to my thinking, her
face is sair changed since we cam in. However, I’se try her ance mair
to satisfy your honour.--So ye canna keep in mind, cummer, that your auld
mistress, the Countess Joscelin, has been removed?”

“Removed!” she exclaimed; for that name never failed to produce its
usual effect upon her; “then we maun a’ follow--a’ maun ride when she is
in the saddle. Tell them to let Lord Geraldin ken we’re on before them. Bring my hood and scarf--ye wadna hae me gang in the carriage wi’ my
leddy, and my hair in this fashion?”

She raised her shrivelled arms, and seemed busied like a woman who puts
on her cloak to go abroad, then dropped them slowly and stiffly; and the
same idea of a journey still floating apparently through her head, she
proceeded, in a hurried and interrupted manner,--“Call Miss Neville--What
do you mean by Lady Geraldin? I said Eveline Neville, not Lady Geraldin--
there’s no Lady Geraldin; tell her that, and bid her change her
wet gown, and no’ look sae pale. Bairn! what should she do wi’ a
bairn?--maidens hae nane, I trow.--Teresa--Teresa--my lady calls us!--Bring
a candle;--the grand staircase is as mirk as a Yule midnight--We are
coming, my lady!”--With these words she sunk back on the settle, and from
thence sidelong to the floor. Note I. Elspeth’s death. Edie ran to support her, but hardly got her in his arms, before he said,
“It’s a’ ower--she has passed away even with that last word.”

“Impossible,” said Oldbuck, hastily advancing, as did his nephew. But
nothing was more certain. She had expired with the last hurried word
that left her lips; and all that remained before them were the mortal
relics of the creature who had so long struggled with an internal sense
of concealed guilt, joined to all the distresses of age and poverty. “God grant that she be gane to a better place!” said Edie, as he looked
on the lifeless body; “but oh! there was something lying hard and heavy
at her heart. I have seen mony a ane dee, baith in the field o’ battle,
and a fair-strae death at hame; but I wad rather see them a’ ower again,
as sic a fearfu’ flitting as hers!”

“We must call in the neighbours,” said Oldbuck, when he had somewhat
recovered his horror and astonishment, “and give warning of this
additional calamity. I wish she could have been brought to a confession. And, though of far less consequence, I could have wished to transcribe
that metrical fragment. But Heaven’s will must be done!”

They left the hut accordingly, and gave the alarm in the hamlet, whose
matrons instantly assembled to compose the limbs and arrange the body of
her who might be considered as the mother of their settlement. Oldbuck
promised his assistance for the funeral. “Your honour,” said Alison Breck, who was next in age to the deceased,
“suld send doun something to us for keeping up our hearts at the
lykewake, for a’ Saunders’s gin, puir man, was drucken out at the burial
o’ Steenie, and we’ll no get mony to sit dry-lipped aside the corpse. Elspeth was unco clever in her young days, as I can mind right weel, but
there was aye a word o’ her no being that chancy. Ane suldna speak ill
o’ the dead--mair by token, o’ ane’s cummer and neighbour--but there
was queer things said about a leddy and a bairn or she left the
Craigburnfoot. And sae, in gude troth, it will be a puir lykewake,
unless your honour sends us something to keep us cracking.”

“You shall have some whisky,” answered Oldbuck, “the rather that you
have preserved the proper word for that ancient custom of watching the
dead. You observe, Hector, this is genuine Teutonic, from the Gothic
Leichnam, a corpse. It is quite erroneously called Late-wake, though
Brand favours that modern corruption and derivation.”

“I believe,” said Hector to himself, “my uncle would give away Monkbarns
to any one who would come to ask it in genuine Teutonic! Not a drop of
whisky would the old creatures have got, had their president asked it
for the use of the Late-wake.”

While Oldbuck was giving some farther directions, and promising
assistance, a servant of Sir Arthur’s came riding very hard along the
sands, and stopped his horse when he saw the Antiquary. “There had
something,” he said, “very particular happened at the Castle”--(he could
not, or would not, explain what)--“and Miss Wardour had sent him off
express to Monkbarns, to beg that Mr. Oldbuck would come to them without
a moment’s delay.”

“I am afraid,” said the Antiquary, “his course also is drawing to a
close. What can I do?”

“Do, sir?” exclaimed Hector, with his characteristic impatience,--“get on
the horse, and turn his head homeward--you will be at Knockwinnock Castle
in ten minutes.”

“He is quite a free goer,” said the servant, dismounting to adjust the
girths and stirrups,--“he only pulls a little if he feels a dead weight
on him.”

“I should soon be a dead weight off him, my friend,” said the
Antiquary.--“What the devil, nephew, are you weary of me? or do you
suppose me weary of my life, that I should get on the back of such a
Bucephalus as that? No, no, my friend, if I am to be at Knockwinnock
to-day, it must be by walking quietly forward on my own feet, which I
will do with as little delay as possible. Captain M’Intyre may ride that
animal himself, if he pleases.”

“I have little hope I could be of any use, uncle, but I cannot think of
their distress without wishing to show sympathy at least--so I will ride
on before, and announce to them that you are coming.--I’ll trouble you
for your spurs, my friend.”

“You will scarce need them, sir,” said the man, taking them off at the
same time, and buckling them upon Captain Mlntyre’s heels, “he’s very
frank to the road.”

Oldbuck stood astonished at this last act of temerity, “are you mad,
Hector?” he cried, “or have you forgotten what is said by Quintus
Curtius, with whom, as a soldier, you must needs be familiar,--Nobilis
equus umbra quidem virgae regitur; ignavus ne calcari quidem excitari
potest; which plainly shows that spurs are useless in every case, and, I
may add, dangerous in most.”

But Hector, who cared little for the opinion of either Quintus Curtius
or of the Antiquary, upon such a topic, only answered with a heedless
“Never fear--never fear, sir.”

              With that he gave his able horse the head,
              And, bending forward, struck his armed heels
              Against the panting sides of his poor jade,
                Up to the rowel-head; and starting so,
                He seemed in running to devour the way,
                      Staying no longer question. “There they go, well matched,” said Oldbuck, looking after them as they
started--“a mad horse and a wild boy, the two most unruly creatures in
Christendom! and all to get half an hour sooner to a place where nobody
wants him; for I doubt Sir Arthur’s griefs are beyond the cure of our
light horseman. It must be the villany of Dousterswivel, for whom Sir
Arthur has done so much; for I cannot help observing, that, with some
natures, Tacitus’s maxim holdeth good: Beneficia eo usque laeta sunt
dum videntur exsolvi posse; ubi multum antevenere, pro gratia odium
redditur,--from which a wise man might take a caution, not to oblige any
man beyond the degree in which he may expect to be requited, lest he
should make his debtor a bankrupt in gratitude.”

Murmuring to himself such scraps of cynical philosophy, our Antiquary
paced the sands towards Knockwinnock; but it is necessary we should
outstrip him, for the purpose of explaining the reasons of his being so
anxiously summoned thither. So, while the Goose, of whom the fable told,
                Incumbent, brooded o’er her eggs of gold,
             With hand outstretched, impatient to destroy,
                Stole on her secret nest the cruel Boy,
             Whose gripe rapacious changed her splendid dream,
            --For wings vain fluttering, and for dying scream. The Loves of the Sea-weeds. From the time that Sir Arthur Wardour had become possessor of the
treasure found in Misticot’s grave, he had been in a state of mind more
resembling ecstasy than sober sense. Indeed, at one time his daughter
had become seriously apprehensive for his intellect; for, as he had
no doubt that he had the secret of possessing himself of wealth to an
unbounded extent, his language and carriage were those of a man who
had acquired the philosopher’s stone. He talked of buying contiguous
estates, that would have led him from one side of the island to the
other, as if he were determined to brook no neighbour save the sea. He
corresponded with an architect of eminence, upon a plan of renovating
the castle of his forefathers on a style of extended magnificence that
might have rivalled that of Windsor, and laying out the grounds on
a suitable scale. Troops of liveried menials were already, in fancy,
marshalled in his halls, and--for what may not unbounded wealth authorize
its possessor to aspire to?--the coronet of a marquis, perhaps of a duke,
was glittering before his imagination. His daughter--to what matches
might she not look forward? Even an alliance with the blood-royal was
not beyond the sphere of his hopes. His son was already a general--and he
himself whatever ambition could dream of in its wildest visions. In this mood, if any one endeavoured to bring Sir Arthur down to the
regions of common life, his replies were in the vein of Ancient Pistol--

                   A fico for the world, and worldlings base
                   I speak of Africa and golden joys! The reader may conceive the amazement of Miss Wardour, when, instead of
undergoing an investigation concerning the addresses of Lovel, as she
had expected from the long conference of her father with Mr. Oldbuck,
upon the morning of the fated day when the treasure was discovered,
the conversation of Sir Arthur announced an imagination heated with the
hopes of possessing the most unbounded wealth. But she was seriously
alarmed when Dousterswivel was sent for to the Castle, and was closeted
with her father--his mishap condoled with--his part taken, and his
loss compensated. All the suspicions which she had long entertained
respecting this man became strengthened, by observing his pains to keep
up the golden dreams of her father, and to secure for himself, under
various pretexts, as much as possible out of the windfall which had so
strangely fallen to Sir Arthur’s share. Other evil symptoms began to appear, following close on each other. Letters arrived every post, which Sir Arthur, as soon as he had looked
at the directions, flung into the fire without taking the trouble to
open them. Miss Wardour could not help suspecting that these epistles,
the contents of which seemed to be known to her father by a sort of
intuition, came from pressing creditors. In the meanwhile, the temporary
aid which he had received from the treasure dwindled fast away. By far
the greater part had been swallowed up by the necessity of paying the
bill of six hundred pounds, which had threatened Sir Arthur with instant
distress. Of the rest, some part was given to the adept, some wasted
upon extravagances which seemed to the poor knight fully authorized by
his full-blown hopes,--and some went to stop for a time the mouths of
such claimants as, being weary of fair promises, had become of opinion
with Harpagon, that it was necessary to touch something substantial. At
length circumstances announced but too plainly, that it was all expended
within two or three days after its discovery; and there appeared
no prospect of a supply. Sir Arthur, naturally impatient, now taxed
Dousterswivel anew with breach of those promises through which he had
hoped to convert all his lead into gold. But that worthy gentleman’s
turn was now served; and as he had grace enough to wish to avoid
witnessing the fall of the house which he had undermined, he was at the
trouble of bestowing a few learned terms of art upon Sir Arthur, that at
least he might not be tormented before his time. He took leave of him,
with assurances that he would return to Knockwinnock the next morning,
with such information as would not fail to relieve Sir Arthur from all
his distresses. “For, since I have consulted in such matters, I ave never,” said Mr.
Herman Dousterswivel, “approached so near de arcanum, what you call de
great mystery,--de Panchresta--de Polychresta--I do know as much of it as
Pelaso de Taranta, or Basilius--and either I will bring you in two and
tree days de No. III. of Mr. Mishdigoat, or you shall call me one knave
myself, and never look me in de face again no more at all.”

The adept departed with this assurance, in the firm resolution of making
good the latter part of the proposition, and never again appearing
before his injured patron. Sir Arthur remained in a doubtful and anxious
state of mind. The positive assurances of the philosopher, with the hard
words Panchresta, Basilius, and so forth, produced some effect on his
mind. But he had been too often deluded by such jargon, to be absolutely
relieved of his doubt, and he retired for the evening into his library,
in the fearful state of one who, hanging over a precipice, and without
the means of retreat, perceives the stone on which he rests gradually
parting from the rest of the crag, and about to give way with him. The visions of hope decayed, and there increased in proportion that
feverish agony of anticipation with which a man, educated in a sense
of consequence, and possessed of opulence,--the supporter of an ancient
name, and the father of two promising children,--foresaw the hour
approaching which should deprive him of all the splendour which time had
made familiarly necessary to him, and send him forth into the world to
struggle with poverty, with rapacity, and with scorn. Under these dire
forebodings, his temper, exhausted by the sickness of delayed hope,
became peevish and fretful, and his words and actions sometimes
expressed a reckless desperation, which alarmed Miss Wardour extremely. We have seen, on a former occasion, that Sir Arthur was a man of
passions lively and quick, in proportion to the weakness of his
character in other respects; he was unused to contradiction, and if
he had been hitherto, in general, good-humoured and cheerful, it was
probably because the course of his life had afforded no such frequent
provocation as to render his irritability habitual. On the third morning after Dousterswivel’s departure, the servant, as
usual, laid on the breakfast table the newspaper and letters of the day. Miss Wardour took up the former to avoid the continued ill-humour of
her father, who had wrought himself into a violent passion, because the
toast was over-browned. “I perceive how it is,” was his concluding speech on this interesting
subject,--“my servants, who have had their share of my fortune, begin
to think there is little to be made of me in future. But while I am the
scoundrel’s master I will be so, and permit no neglect--no, nor endure
a hair’s-breadth diminution of the respect I am entitled to exact from
them.”

“I am ready to leave your honour’s service this instant,” said the
domestic upon whom the fault had been charged, “as soon as you order
payment of my wages.”

Sir Arthur, as if stung by a serpent, thrust his hand into his pocket,
and instantly drew out the money which it contained, but which was short
of the man’s claim. “What money have you got, Miss Wardour?” he said, in
a tone of affected calmness, but which concealed violent agitation. Miss Wardour gave him her purse; he attempted to count the bank notes
which it contained, but could not reckon them. After twice miscounting
the sum, he threw the whole to his daughter, and saying, in a stern
voice, “Pay the rascal, and let him leave the house instantly!” he
strode out of the room. The mistress and servant stood alike astonished at the agitation and
vehemence of his manner. “I am sure, ma’am, if I had thought I was particularly wrang, I wadna
hae made ony answer when Sir Arthur challenged me. I hae been lang in
his service, and he has been a kind master, and you a kind mistress, and
I wad like ill ye should think I wad start for a hasty word. I am sure
it was very wrang o’ me to speak about wages to his honour, when maybe
he has something to vex him. I had nae thoughts o’ leaving the family in
this way.”

“Go down stair, Robert,” said his mistress--“something has happened to
fret my father--go down stairs, and let Alick answer the bell.”

When the man left the room, Sir Arthur re-entered, as if he had been
watching his departure. “What’s the meaning of this?” he said hastily,
as he observed the notes lying still on the table--“Is he not gone? Am I
neither to be obeyed as a master or a father?”

“He is gone to give up his charge to the housekeeper, sir,--I thought
there was not such instant haste.”

“There is haste, Miss Wardour,” answered her father, interrupting
her;--“What I do henceforth in the house of my forefathers, must be done
speedily, or never.”

He then sate down, and took up with a trembling hand the basin of tea
prepared for him, protracting the swallowing of it, as if to delay the
necessity of opening the post-letters which lay on the table, and which
he eyed from time to time, as if they had been a nest of adders ready to
start into life and spring upon him. “You will be happy to hear,” said Miss Wardour, willing to withdraw her
father’s mind from the gloomy reflections in which he appeared to be
plunged, “you will be happy to hear, sir, that Lieutenant Taffril’s
gun-brig has got safe into Leith Roads--I observe there had been
apprehensions for his safety--I am glad we did not hear them till they
were contradicted.”

“And what is Taffril and his gun-brig to me?”

“Sir!” said Miss Wardour in astonishment; for Sir Arthur, in his
ordinary state of mind, took a fidgety sort of interest in all the
gossip of the day and country. “I say,” he repeated in a higher and still more impatient key, “what do
I care who is saved or lost? It’s nothing to me, I suppose?”

“I did not know you were busy, Sir Arthur; and thought, as Mr. Taffril
is a brave man, and from our own country, you would be happy to hear”--

“Oh, I am happy--as happy as possible--and, to make you happy too, you
shall have some of my good news in return.” And he caught up a letter. “It does not signify which I open first--they are all to the same tune.”

He broke the seal hastily, ran the letter over, and then threw it to
his daughter. “Ay--I could not have lighted more happily!--this places the
copestone.”

Miss Wardour, in silent terror, took up the letter. “Read it--read it
aloud!” said her father; “it cannot be read too often; it will serve to
break you in for other good news of the same kind.”

She began to read with a faltering voice, “Dear Sir.”

“He dears me too, you see, this impudent drudge of a writer’s office,
who, a twelvemonth since, was not fit company for my second table--I
suppose I shall be dear Knight’ with him by and by.”

“Dear Sir,” resumed Miss Wardour; but, interrupting herself, “I see
the contents are unpleasant, sir--it will only vex you my reading them
aloud.”

“If you will allow me to know my own pleasure, Miss Wardour, I entreat
you to go on--I presume, if it were unnecessary, I should not ask you to
take the trouble.”

“Having been of late taken into copartnery,” continued Miss Wardour,
reading the letter, “by Mr. Gilbert Greenhorn, son of your late
correspondent and man of business, Girnigo Greenhorn, Esq., writer to
the signet, whose business I conducted as parliament-house clerk for
many years, which business will in future be carried on under the firm
of Greenhorn and Grinderson (which I memorandum for the sake of accuracy
in addressing your future letters), and having had of late favours
of yours, directed to my aforesaid partner, Gilbert Greenhorn, in
consequence of his absence at the Lamberton races, have the honour to
reply to your said favours.”

“You see my friend is methodical, and commences by explaining the causes
which have procured me so modest and elegant a correspondent. Go on--I
can bear it.”

And he laughed that bitter laugh which is perhaps the most fearful
expression of mental misery. Trembling to proceed, and yet afraid to
disobey, Miss Wardour continued to read--“I am for myself and partner,
sorry we cannot oblige you by looking out for the sums you mention, or
applying for a suspension in the case of Goldiebirds’ bond, which
would be more inconsistent, as we have been employed to act as the said
Goldiebirds’ procurators and attorneys, in which capacity we have
taken out a charge of horning against you, as you must be aware by
the schedule left by the messenger, for the sum of four thousand seven
hundred and fifty-six pounds five shillings and sixpence one-fourth of
a penny sterling, which, with annual-rent and expenses effeiring, we
presume will be settled during the currency of the charge, to prevent
further trouble. Same time, I am under the necessity to observe our own
account, amounting to seven hundred and sixty-nine pounds ten shillings
and sixpence, is also due, and settlement would be agreeable; but as we
hold your rights, title-deeds, and documents in hypothec, shall have no
objection to give reasonable time--say till the next money term. I am,
for myself and partner, concerned to add, that Messrs. Goldiebirds’
instructions to us are to proceed peremptorie and sine mora, of which I
have the pleasure to advise you, to prevent future mistakes, reserving
to ourselves otherwise to age’ as accords. I am, for self and partner,
dear sir, your obliged humble servant, Gabriel Grinderson, for Greenhorn
and Grinderson.”

“Ungrateful villain!” said Miss Wardour. “Why, no--it’s in the usual rule, I suppose; the blow could not have
been perfect if dealt by another hand--it’s all just as it should be,”
 answered the poor Baronet, his affected composure sorely belied by
his quivering lip and rolling eye--“But here’s a postscript I did not
notice--come, finish the epistle.”

“I have to add (not for self but partner) that Mr. Greenhorn will
accommodate you by taking your service of plate, or the bay horses, if
sound in wind and limb, at a fair appreciation, in part payment of your
accompt.”

“G--d confound him!” said Sir Arthur, losing all command of himself at
this condescending proposal: “his grandfather shod my father’s horses,
and this descendant of a scoundrelly blacksmith proposes to swindle me
out of mine! But I will write him a proper answer.”

And he sate down and began to write with great vehemence, then stopped
and read aloud:--“Mr. Gilbert Greenhorn,--in answer to two letters of a
late date, I received a letter from a person calling himself Grinderson,
and designing himself as your partner. When I address any one, I do not
usually expect to be answered by deputy--I think I have been useful to
your father, and friendly and civil to yourself, and therefore am now
surprised--And yet,” said he, stopping short, “why should I be surprised
at that or anything else? or why should I take up my time in writing to
such a scoundrel?--I shan’t be always kept in prison, I suppose; and to
break that puppy’s bones when I get out, shall be my first employment.”

“In prison, sir?” said Miss Wardour, faintly. “Ay, in prison to be sure. Do you make any question about that? Why, Mr.
what’s his name’s fine letter for self and partner seems to be thrown
away on you, or else you have got four thousand so many hundred pounds,
with the due proportion of shillings, pence, and half-pence, to pay that
aforesaid demand, as he calls it.”

“I, sir? O if I had the means!--But where’s my brother?--why does he not
come, and so long in Scotland? He might do something to assist us.”

“Who, Reginald?--I suppose he’s gone with Mr. Gilbert Greenhorn, or some
such respectable person, to the Lamberton races--I have expected him this
week past; but I cannot wonder that my children should neglect me as
well as every other person. But I should beg your pardon, my love, who
never either neglected or offended me in your life.”

And kissing her cheek as she threw her arms round his neck, he
experienced that consolation which a parent feels, even in the most
distressed state, in the assurance that he possesses the affection of a
child. Miss Wardour took the advantage of this revulsion of feeling, to
endeavour to soothe her father’s mind to composure. She reminded him
that he had many friends. “I had many once,” said Sir Arthur; “but of some I have exhausted their
kindness with my frantic projects; others are unable to assist me--others
are unwilling. It is all over with me. I only hope Reginald will take
example by my folly.”

“Should I not send to Monkbarns, sir?” said his daughter. “To what purpose? He cannot lend me such a sum, and would not if he
could, for he knows I am otherwise drowned in debt; and he would only
give me scraps of misanthropy and quaint ends of Latin.”

“But he is shrewd and sensible, and was bred to business, and, I am
sure, always loved this family.”

“Yes, I believe he did. It is a fine pass we are come to, when the
affection of an Oldbuck is of consequence to a Wardour! But when matters
come to extremity, as I suppose they presently will--it may be as well
to send for him. And now go take your walk, my dear--my mind is more
composed than when I had this cursed disclosure to make. You know the
worst, and may daily or hourly expect it. Go take your walk--I would
willingly be alone for a little while.”

When Miss Wardour left the apartment, her first occupation was to avail
herself of the half permission granted by her father, by despatching to
Monkbarns the messenger, who, as we have already seen, met the Antiquary
and his nephew on the sea-beach. Little recking, and indeed scarce knowing, where she was wandering,
chance directed her into the walk beneath the Briery Bank, as it was
called. A brook, which in former days had supplied the castle-moat with
water, here descended through a narrow dell, up which Miss Wardour’s
taste had directed a natural path, which was rendered neat and easy of
ascent, without the air of being formally made and preserved. It suited
well the character of the little glen, which was overhung with thickets
and underwood, chiefly of larch and hazel, intermixed with the usual
varieties of the thorn and brier. In this walk had passed that scene of
explanation between Miss Wardour and Lovel which was overheard by old
Edie Ochiltree. With a heart softened by the distress which approached
her family, Miss Wardour now recalled every word and argument which
Lovel had urged in support of his suit, and could not help confessing to
herself, it was no small subject of pride to have inspired a young
man of his talents with a passion so strong and disinterested. That he
should have left the pursuit of a profession in which he was said to be
rapidly rising, to bury himself in a disagreeable place like Fairport,
and brood over an unrequited passion, might be ridiculed by others as
romantic, but was naturally forgiven as an excess of affection by
the person who was the object of his attachment. Had he possessed an
independence, however moderate, or ascertained a clear and undisputed
claim to the rank in society he was well qualified to adorn, she
might now have had it in her power to offer her father, during his
misfortunes, an asylum in an establishment of her own. These thoughts,
so favourable to the absent lover, crowded in, one after the other,
with such a minute recapitulation of his words, looks, and actions, as
plainly intimated that his former repulse had been dictated rather
by duty than inclination. Isabella was musing alternately upon this
subject, and upon that of her father’s misfortunes, when, as the path
winded round a little hillock covered with brushwood, the old Blue-Gown
suddenly met her. With an air as if he had something important and mysterious to
communicate, he doffed his bonnet, and assumed the cautious step and
voice of one who would not willingly be overheard. “I hae been wishing
muckle to meet wi’ your leddyship--for ye ken I darena come to the house
for Dousterswivel.”

“I heard indeed,” said Miss Wardour, dropping an alms into the bonnet--“I
heard that you had done a very foolish, if not a very bad thing, Edie--
and I was sorry to hear it.”

“Hout, my bonny leddy--fulish? A’ the world’s fules--and how should auld
Edie Ochiltree be aye wise?--And for the evil--let them wha deal wi’
Dousterswivel tell whether he gat a grain mair than his deserts.”

“That may be true, Edie, and yet,” said Miss Wardour, “you may have been
very wrong.”

“Weel, weel, we’se no dispute that e’ennow--it’s about yoursell I’m gaun
to speak. Div ye ken what’s hanging ower the house of Knockwinnock?”

“Great distress, I fear, Edie,” answered Miss Wardour; “but I am
surprised it is already so public.”

“Public!--Sweepclean, the messenger, will be there the day wi’ a’ his
tackle. I ken it frae ane o’ his concurrents, as they ca’ them, that’s
warned to meet him; and they’ll be about their wark belyve; whare they
clip, there needs nae kame--they shear close eneugh.”

“Are you sure this bad hour, Edie, is so very near?--come, I know, it
will.”

“It’s e’en as I tell you, leddy. But dinna be cast down--there’s a
heaven ower your head here, as weel as in that fearful night atween
the Ballyburghness and the Halket-head. D’ye think He, wha rebuked the
waters, canna protect you against the wrath of men, though they be armed
with human authority?”

“It is indeed all we have to trust to.”

“Ye dinna ken--ye dinna ken: when the night’s darkest, the dawn’s
nearest. If I had a gude horse, or could ride him when I had him, I
reckon there wad be help yet. I trusted to hae gotten a cast wi’ the
Royal Charlotte, but she’s coupit yonder, it’s like, at Kittlebrig. There was a young gentleman on the box, and he behuved to drive; and
Tam Sang, that suld hae mair sense, he behuved to let him, and the daft
callant couldna tak the turn at the corner o’ the brig; and od! he took
the curbstane, and he’s whomled her as I wad whomle a toom bicker--it was
a luck I hadna gotten on the tap o’ her. Sae I came down atween hope and
despair, to see if ye wad send me on.”

“And, Edie--where would ye go?” said the young lady. “To Tannonburgh, my leddy” (which was the first stage from Fairport, but
a good deal nearer to Knockwinnock), “and that without delay--it’s a’ on
your ain business.”

“Our business, Edie? Alas! I give you all credit for your good meaning;
but”--

“There’s nae buts about it, my leddy, for gang I maun,” said the
persevering Blue-Gown. “But what is it that you would do at Tannonburgh?--or how can your going
there benefit my father’s affairs?”

“Indeed, my sweet leddy,” said the gaberlunzie, “ye maun just trust
that bit secret to auld Edie’s grey pow, and ask nae questions about it. Certainly if I wad hae wared my life for you yon night, I can hae nae
reason to play an ill pliskie t’ye in the day o’ your distress.”

“Well, Edie, follow me then,” said Miss Wardour, “and I will try to get
you sent to Tannonburgh.”

“Mak haste then, my bonny leddy--mak haste, for the love o’ goodness!”--
and he continued to exhort her to expedition until they reached the
Castle. Let those go see who will--I like it not--
               For, say he was a slave to rank and pomp,
               And all the nothings he is now divorced from
                 By the hard doom of stern necessity:
                 Yet it is sad to mark his altered brow,
                 Where Vanity adjusts her flimsy veil
               O’er the deep wrinkles of repentant anguish. Old Play. When Miss Wardour arrived in the court of the Castle, she was apprized
by the first glance that the visit of the officers of the law had
already taken place. There was confusion, and gloom and sorrow, and
curiosity among the domestics, while the retainers of the law went from
place to place, making an inventory of the goods and chattels falling
under their warrant of distress, or poinding, as it is called in the
law of Scotland. Captain M’Intyre flew to her, as, struck dumb with
the melancholy conviction of her father’s ruin, she paused upon the
threshold of the gateway. “Dear Miss Wardour,” he said, “do not make yourself uneasy; my uncle
is coming immediately, and I am sure he will find some way to clear the
house of these rascals.”

“Alas! Captain M’Intyre, I fear it will be too late.”

“No,” answered Edie, impatiently--“could I but get to Tannonburgh. In the
name of Heaven, Captain, contrive some way to get me on, and ye’ll do
this poor ruined family the best day’s doing that has been done
them since Redhand’s days--for as sure as e’er an auld saw came true,
Knockwinnock house and land will be lost and won this day.”

“Why, what good can you do, old man?” said Hector. But Robert, the domestic with whom Sir Arthur had been so much
displeased in the morning, as if he had been watching for an opportunity
to display his zeal, stepped hastily forward and said to his mistress,
“If you please, ma’am, this auld man, Ochiltree, is very skeely and
auld-farrant about mony things, as the diseases of cows and horse, and
sic like, and I am sure be disna want to be at Tannonburgh the day
for naething, since he insists on’t this gate; and, if your leddyship
pleases, I’ll drive him there in the taxed-cart in an hour’s time. I wad
fain be of some use--I could bite my very tongue out when I think on this
morning.”

“I am obliged to you, Robert,” said Miss Wardour; “and if you really
think it has the least chance of being useful”--

“In the name of God,” said the old man, “yoke the cart, Robie, and if
I am no o’ some use, less or mair, I’ll gie ye leave to fling me ower
Kittlebrig as ye come back again. But, O man, haste ye, for time’s
precious this day.”

Robert looked at his mistress as she retired into the house, and seeing
he was not prohibited, flew to the stable-yard, which was adjacent to
the court, in order to yoke the carriage; for, though an old beggar was
the personage least likely to render effectual assistance in a case
of pecuniary distress, yet there was among the common people of Edie’s
circle, a general idea of his prudence and sagacity, which authorized
Robert’s conclusion that he would not so earnestly have urged the
necessity of this expedition had he not been convinced of its utility. But so soon as the servant took hold of a horse to harness him for the
taxed-cart, an officer touched him on the shoulder--“My friend, you must
let that beast alone--he’s down in the schedule.”

“What!” said Robert, “am I not to take my master’s horse to go my young
leddy’s errand?”

“You must remove nothing here,” said the man of office, “or you will be
liable for all consequences.”

“What the devil, sir,” said Hector, who having followed to examine
Ochiltree more closely on the nature of his hopes and expectations,
already began to bristle like one of the terriers of his own native
mountains, and sought but a decent pretext for venting his displeasure,
“have you the impudence to prevent the young lady’s servant from obeying
her orders?”

There was something in the air and tone of the young soldier, which
seemed to argue that his interference was not likely to be confined to
mere expostulation; and which, if it promised finally the advantages of
a process of battery and deforcement, would certainly commence with the
unpleasant circumstances necessary for founding such a complaint. The
legal officer, confronted with him of the military, grasped with one
doubtful hand the greasy bludgeon which was to enforce his authority,
and with the other produced his short official baton, tipped with
silver, and having a movable ring upon it--“Captain M’Intyre,--Sir, I have
no quarrel with you,--but if you interrupt me in my duty, I will break
the wand of peace, and declare myself deforced.”

“And who the devil cares,” said Hector, totally ignorant of the words of
judicial action, “whether you declare yourself divorced or married? And
as to breaking your wand, or breaking the peace, or whatever you call
it, all I know is, that I will break your bones if you prevent the lad
from harnessing the horses to obey his mistress’s orders.”

“I take all who stand here to witness,” said the messenger, “that I
showed him my blazon, and explained my character. He that will to Cupar
maun to Cupar,”--and he slid his enigmatical ring from one end of the
baton to the other, being the appropriate symbol of his having been
forcibly interrupted in the discharge of his duty. Honest Hector, better accustomed to the artillery of the field than to
that of the law, saw this mystical ceremony with great indifference;
and with like unconcern beheld the messenger sit down to write out
an execution of deforcement. But at this moment, to prevent the
well-meaning hot-headed Highlander from running the risk of a
severe penalty, the Antiquary arrived puffing and blowing, with his
handkerchief crammed under his hat, and his wig upon the end of his
stick. “What the deuce is the matter here?” he exclaimed, hastily adjusting
his head-gear; “I have been following you in fear of finding your idle
loggerhead knocked against one rock or other, and here I find you parted
with your Bucephalus, and quarrelling with Sweepclean. A messenger,
Hector, is a worse foe than a phoca, whether it be the phoca barbata, or
the phoca vitulina of your late conflict.”

“D--n the phoca, sir,” said Hector, “whether it be the one or the other--I
say d--n them both particularly! I think you would not have me stand
quietly by and see a scoundrel like this, because he calls himself a
king’s messenger, forsooth--(I hope the king has many better for his
meanest errands)--insult a young lady of family and fashion like Miss
Wardour?”

“Rightly argued, Hector,” said the Antiquary; “but the king, like other
people, has now and then shabby errands, and, in your ear, must have
shabby fellows to do them. But even supposing you unacquainted with the
statutes of William the Lion, in which capite quarto versu quinto, this
crime of deforcement is termed despectus Domini Regis--a contempt, to
wit, of the king himself, in whose name all legal diligence issues,--
could you not have inferred, from the information I took so much pains
to give you to-day, that those who interrupt officers who come to
execute letters of caption, are tanquam participes criminis rebellionis? seeing that he who aids a rebel, is himself, quodammodo, an accessory to
rebellion--But I’ll bring you out of this scrape.”

He then spoke to the messenger, who, upon his arrival, had laid aside
all thoughts of making a good by-job out of the deforcement, and
accepted Mr. Oldbuck’s assurances that the horse and taxed-cart should
be safely returned in the course of two or three hours. “Very well, sir,” said the Antiquary, “since you are disposed to be so
civil, you shall have another job in your own best way--a little cast of
state politics--a crime punishable per Legem Juliam, Mr. Sweepclean-- Hark
thee hither.”

And after a whisper of five minutes, he gave him a slip of paper, on
receiving which, the messenger mounted his horse, and, with one of his
assistants, rode away pretty sharply. The fellow who remained seemed to
delay his operations purposely, proceeded in the rest of his duty very
slowly, and with the caution and precision of one who feels himself
overlooked by a skilful and severe inspector. In the meantime, Oldbuck, taking his nephew by the arm, led him into the
house, and they were ushered into the presence of Sir Arthur Wardour,
who, in a flutter between wounded pride, agonized apprehension, and
vain attempts to disguise both under a show of indifference, exhibited a
spectacle of painful interest. “Happy to see you, Mr. Oldbuck--always happy to see my friends in fair
weather or foul,” said the poor Baronet, struggling not for composure,
but for gaiety--an affectation which was strongly contrasted by the
nervous and protracted grasp of his hand, and the agitation of his whole
demeanour--“I am happy to see you. You are riding, I see--I hope in this
confusion your horses are taken good care of--I always like to have my
friend’s horses looked after--Egad! they will have all my care now, for
you see they are like to leave me none of my own--he! he! he!