girl! don't be foolish,' replied the doctor; 'keep your pity for
more deserving objects; and, as the wisest thing you can do, endeavour
to forget your mother.' 'Forget her! Never.' 'Well, well, you will be wiser in time; and now you shall hear all that
passed. When she recovered entirely, and found that you were gone, she
gave way to an agony of sorrow, such as I never before witnessed; for I
believe that I never beheld before the agony of remorse.' 'My poor mother!' cried Adeline, again bursting into tears. 'What! again!' exclaimed the doctor. (Adeline motioned to him to go on,
and he continued.) 'At sight of this, I was weak enough to pity her;
and, with the greatest simplicity, I told her, that I was glad to see
that she felt penitent for her conduct, since penitence paved the way to
amendment; when, to my great surprise, all the vanished fierceness and
haughtiness of her look returned, and she told me, that so far from
repenting she approved of her conduct; and that remorse had no share in
her sorrow; that she wept from consciousness of misery inflicted by the
faults of others, not her own.' 'Oh! Dr Norberry,' cried Adeline reproachfully, 'I doubt, by awakening
her pride, you destroyed the tenderness returning towards me.' 'May be so. However, so much the better; for anger is a less painful
state of mind to endure than that of remorse: and while she thinks
herself only injured and aggrieved, she will be less unhappy.' 'Then,' continued Adeline in a faltering voice, 'I care not how long she
hates me.' Dr Norberry looked at Adeline a moment with tears in his eyes, and
evidently gulped down a rising sob, 'Good child! good child!' he at
length articulated. 'But she'll forget and forgive all in time, I do
not doubt.' 'Impossible: remember her oath.' 'And do you really suppose that she will think herself bound to keep so
silly and rash an oath; an oath made in the heat of passion?' 'Undoubtedly I do; and I know, that were she to break it, she would
never be otherwise than wretched all her life after. Therefore, unless
Glenmurray forsakes me (she added, trying to smile archly as she spoke),
and this I am not happy enough to expect, I look on our separation in
this world to be eternal.' 'You do?--Then, poor devil! how miserable she will be, when her present
resentment shall subside! Well; when that time comes I may perhaps see
her again,' added the doctor, gulping again. 'Heaven bless you for that intention!' cried Adeline. 'But how could you
ever have the heart to renounce her?' 'Girl! you are almost as provoking as your mother. Why, how could I have
the heart to do otherwise, when she whitewashed herself and blackened
you? To be sure, it did cause me a twinge or two to do it; and had she
been an iota less haughty, I should have turned back and said, "Kiss and
be friends again." But she seemed so provokingly anxious to get rid of
me, and waved me with her hand to the door in such a tragedy queen sort
of a manner, that, having told her very civilly to go to the devil her
own way, I gulped down a sort of a tender choking in my throat, and made
as rapid an exit as possible. And now another trial awaits me. I came to
town, at some inconvenience to myself, to try to do you service. I have
failed, and I have now no further business here: so we must part, and I
know not when we shall meet again. For I rarely leave home, and may not
see you again for years.' 'Indeed!' exclaimed Adeline, 'Surely,' looking at Glenmurray, 'we might
settle in Dr Norberry's neighbourhood?' Glenmurray said nothing, but looked at the doctor; who seemed confused,
and was silent. 'Look ye, my dear girl,' said he at length: 'the idea of your settling
near me occurred to me, but--' here he took two hasty strides across the
room--'in short, that's an impossible thing; so I beg you to think no
more about it. If, indeed, you mean to marry Mr Glenmurray--'

'Which I shall not do,' replied Adeline coldly. 'There again, now!' cried the doctor pettishly: 'you, in your way, are
quite as obstinate and ridiculous as your mother. However, I hope you
will know better in time. But it grows late--'tis time I should be in my
chaise, and I hear it driving up. Mr Glenmurray,' continued he in an
altered tone of voice, 'to your care and your tenderness I leave this
poor child; and, zounds, man! if you will but burn your books before her
face, and swear they are stuff, why, 'sdeath, I say, I would come to
town on purpose to do you homage.--Adeline, my child, God bless you! I
have loved you from your infancy, and I wish, from my soul, that I left
you in a better situation. But you will write to me, heh?' 'Undoubtedly.' 'Well, one kiss:--don't be jealous, Glenmurray. Your hand, man.--Woons,
what a hand! My dear fellow, take care of yourself, for that poor
child's sake: get the advice which I recommended, and good air.' A
rising sob interrupted him--he hemmed it off, and ran into his chaise. 'Now then,' said Adeline, her tears dropping fast as she spoke, 'now,
then, we are alone in the world; henceforward we must be all to each
other.' 'Is the idea a painful one, Adeline?' replied Glenmurray reproachfully. 'Not so,' returned Adeline, 'Still I can't yet forget that I had a
mother, and a kind one too.' 'And may have again.' 'Impossible:--there is a vow in heaven against it. No--My plans for
future happiness must be laid unmindful and independent of her. They
must have you and your happiness for their sole object; I must live for
you alone: and you,' added she in a faltering voice, 'must live for me.' 'I will live as long as I can,' replied Glenmurray sighing, 'and as one
step towards it I shall keep early hours: so to rest, dear Adeline, and
let us forget our sorrows as soon as possible.' The next morning Adeline's and Glenmurray's first care was to determine
on their future residence. It was desirable that it should be at a
sufficient distance from London, to deserve the name and have the
conveniences of a country abode, yet sufficiently near it for Glenmurray
to have the advice of a London physician if necessary. 'Suppose we fix at Richmond?' said Glenmurray: and Adeline, to whom the
idea of dwelling on a spot at once so classical and beautiful was most
welcome, joyfully consented; and in a few days they were settled there
in a pleasant but expensive lodging. But here, as when abroad, Glenmurray occasionally saw old acquaintances,
many of whom were willing to renew their intercourse with him for the
sake of being introduced to Adeline; and who, from a knowledge of her
situation, presumed to pay her that sort of homage, which, though not
understood by her, gave pangs unutterable to the delicate mind of
Glenmurray. 'Were she my wife, they dared not pay her such marked
attention,' said he to himself; and again, as delicately as he could, he
urged Adeline to sacrifice her principles to the prejudices of society. 'I thought,' replied Adeline gravely, 'that, as we lived for each other,
we might act independent of society, and serve it by our example even
against its will.' Glenmurray was silent.--He did not like to own how painful and
mischievous he found in practice the principles which he admired in
theory--and Adeline continued:

'Believe me, Glenmurray, ours is the very situation calculated to urge
us on in the pursuit of truth. We are answerable to no one for our
conduct; and we can make any experiments in morals that we choose. I am
wholly at a loss to comprehend why you persist in urging me to marry
you. Take care, my dear Glenmurray--the high respect I bear your
character was shaken a little by your fighting a duel in defiance of
your principles; and your eagerness to marry, in further defiance of
them, may weaken my esteem, if not my love.' Adeline smiled as she said this: but Glenmurray thought she spoke more
in earnest than she was willing to allow; and, alarmed at the threat, he
only answered, 'You know it is for your sake merely that I speak,' and
dropped the subject; secretly resolving, however, that he would not walk
with Adeline in the fashionable promenades, at the hours commonly spent
there by the beau monde. But, in spite of this precaution, they could not escape the assiduities
of some gay men of fashion, who knew Glenmurray and admired his
companion; and Adeline at length suspected that Glenmurray was jealous. But in this she wronged him; it was not the attention paid her, but the
nature of it, that disturbed him. Nor is it to be wondered at that
Adeline herself was eager to avoid the public walks, when it is known
that one of her admirers at Richmond was the Colonel Mordaunt whom she
had become acquainted with at Bath. Colonel Mordaunt, 'curst with every granted prayer,' was just beginning
to feel the tedium of life, when he saw Adeline unexpectedly at
Richmond; and though he felt shocked at first, at beholding her in so
different a situation from that in which he had first beheld her, still
that very situation, by holding forth to him a prospect of being
favoured by her in his turn, revived his admiration with more than its
original violence, and he resolved to be, if possible, the lover of
Adeline, after Glenmurray should have fallen a victim, as he had no
doubt but he would, to his dangerous illness. But the opportunities which he had of seeing her suddenly ceased. She
no longer frequented the public walks; and him, though he suspected it
not, she most studiously avoided; for she could not bear to behold the
alteration in his manner when be addressed her, an alteration perhaps
unknown to himself. True, it was not insulting; but Adeline, who had
admired him too much at Bath not to have examined with minute attention
the almost timid expression of his countenance, and the respectfulness
of his manner when he addressed her, shrunk abashed from the ardent and
impassioned expression with which he now met her--an expression which
Adeline used to call 'looking like Sir Patrick;' and which indicated
even to her inexperience, that the admiration which he then felt was of
a nature less pure and flattering than the one which she excited before;
and though in her own eyes she appeared as worthy of respect as ever,
she was forced to own even to herself, that persons in general would be
of a contrary opinion. But in vain did she resolve to walk very early in a morning only, being
fully persuaded that she should then meet with no one. Colonel Mordaunt
was as wakeful as she was; and being convinced that she walked during
some part of the day, and probably early in a morning, he resolved to
watch near the door of her lodgings, in hopes to obtain an hour's
conversation with her. The consequence was, that he saw Adeline one
morning walk pensively alone, down the shady road that leads from the
terrace to Petersham. This opportunity was not to be overlooked; and he overtook and accosted
her with such an expression of pleasure on his countenance, as was
sufficient to alarm the now suspicious delicacy of Adeline; and, conscious
as she was that Glenmurray beheld Colonel Mordaunt's attentions with
pain, a deep blush overspread her cheek at his approach, while her eyes
were timidly cast down. Colonel Mordaunt saw her emotion, and attributed it to a cause flattering
to his vanity; it even encouraged him to seize her hand; and, while he
openly congratulated himself on his good fortune in meeting her alone,
he presumed to press her hand to his lips. Adeline indignantly withdrew
it, and replied very coldly to his inquiries concerning her health. 'But where have you hidden yourself lately?' cried he.--'O Miss Mowbray! loveliest and, I may add, most beloved of women, how have I longed to
see you alone, and pour out my whole soul to you!' Adeline answered this rhapsody by a look of astonishment only--being
silent from disgust and consternation,--while involuntarily she
quickened her pace, as if wishing to avoid him. 'O hear me, and hear me patiently!' he resumed. 'You must have noticed
the effect which your charms produced on me at Bath; and may I dare to
add that my attentions then did not seem displeasing to you?' 'Sir!' interrupted Adeline, sighing deeply, 'my situation is now
changed; and--'

'It is so, I thank Fortune that it is so,' replied Colonel Mordaunt;
'and I am happy to say, it is changed by no crime of mine.' (Here
Adeline started and turned pale.) 'But I were unworthy all chance of
happiness, were I to pass by the seeming opportunity of being blest,
which the alteration to which you allude holds forth to me.' Here he paused, as if in embarrassment, but Adeline was unable to
interrupt him. 'Miss Mowbray,' he at length continued, 'I am told that you are not on
good terms with your mother; nay, I have heard that she has renounced
you; may I presume to ask if this be true?' 'It is,' answered Adeline trembling with emotion. 'Then, as before long it is probable that you will be without--without a
protector--' (Adeline turned round and fixed her eyes wildly upon him.) 'To be sure,' continued he, avoiding her steadfast gaze, 'I could wish
to call you mine this moment; but, unhappy as you appear to be in your
present situation, I know, unlike many women circumstanced as you are,
you are too generous and noble-minded to be capable of forsaking in his
last illness the man whom in his happier moments you have honoured with
your love.' As he said this, Adeline, her lips parched with agitation,
and breathing short, caught hold of his arm; and pressing her cold hand,
he went on: 'Therefore, I will not venture even to wish to be honoured
with a kind look from you till Mr Glenmurray is removed to a happier
world. But then, dearest of women, you whom I loved without hope of
possessing you, and whom now I dote upon to madness, I conjure you to
admit my visits, and let my attentions prevail on you to accept my
protection, and allow me to devote the remainder of my days to love and
you!' 'Merciful Heaven!' exclaimed Adeline, clasping her hands together, 'to
what insults am I reserved!' 'Insults!' echoed Colonel Mordaunt. 'Yes, Sir,' replied Adeline: 'you have insulted me, grossly insulted me,
and know not the woman whom you have tortured to the very soul.' 'Hear me, hear me, Miss Mowbray!' exclaimed Colonel Mordaunt, almost
as much agitated as herself: 'by heaven I meant not to insult you! and
perhaps I--perhaps I have been misinformed--No! Yes, yes, it must be so;
your indignation proves that I have--You are, no doubt--and on my knees
I implore your pardon--you are the wife of Mr Glenmurray.' 'And suppose I am _not_ his wife,' cried Adeline, 'is it then given to
a wife only to be secure from being insulted by offers horrible to the
delicacy, and wounding to the sensibility, like those which I have heard
from you?' But before Colonel Mordaunt could reply, Adeline's thoughts
had reverted to what he had said of Glenmurray's certain danger; and,
unable to bear this confirmation of her fears, with the speed of phrensy
she ran towards home, and did not stop till she was in sight of her
lodging, and the still closed curtain of her apartment met her view. 'He is still sleeping, then,' she exclaimed, 'and I have time to recover
myself, and endeavour to hide from him the emotion of which I could not
tell the reason.' So saying, she softly entered the house, and by the
time Glenmurray rose she had regained her composure. Still there was a
look of anxiety on her fine countenance, which could not escape the
penetrating eye of love. 'Why are you so grave this morning?' said Glenmurray, as Adeline seated
herself at the breakfast table:--'I feel much better and more cheerful
to-day.' 'But are you, indeed, better?' replied Adeline, fixing her tearful eyes
on him. 'Or I much deceive myself,' said Glenmurray. 'Thank Heaven!' devoutly replied Adeline. 'I thought--I thought--' Here
tears choked her utterance, and Glenmurray drew from her a confession of
her anxious fears for him, though she prudently resolved not to agitate
him by telling him of the rencontre with Colonel Mordaunt. But when the continued assurances of Glenmurray that he was better, and
the animation of his countenance, had in a degree removed her fears for
his life, she had leisure to revert to another source of uneasiness,
and to dwell on the insult which she had experienced from Colonel
Mordaunt's offer of protection. 'How strange and irrational,' thought Adeline, 'are the prejudices of
society! Because an idle ceremony has not been muttered over me at the
altar, I am liable to be thought a woman of vicious inclinations, and to
be exposed to the most daring insults.' As these reflections occurred to her, she could scarcely help regretting
that her principles would not allow her delicacy and virtue to be placed
under the sacred shelter bestowed by that ceremony which she was pleased
to call idle. And she was not long without experiencing still further
hardships from the situation in which she had persisted so obstinately
to remain. Their establishment consisted of a footman and a maid servant;
but the latter had of late been so remiss in the performance of her
duties, and so impertinent when reproved for her faults, that Adeline
was obliged to give her warning. 'Warning, indeed!' replied the girl: 'a mighty hardship, truly! I can
promise you I did not mean to stay long; it is no such favour to live
with a kept miss; and if you come to that, I think I am as good as you.' Shocked, surprised, and unable to answer, Adeline took refuge in her
room. Never before had she been accosted by her inferiors without
respectful attention; and now, owing to her situation, even a
servant-maid thought herself authorised to insult her, and to raise
herself to her level! 'But surely,' said Adeline mentally, 'I ought to reason with her, and
try to convince her that I am in reality as virtuous as if I were
Glenmurray's wife, instead of his mistress.' Accordingly she went back into the kitchen; but her resolution failed
her when she found the footman there, listening with a broad grin on
his countenance to the relation which Mary was giving him of the 'fine
trimming' which she had given 'madam.' Scarcely did the presence of Adeline interrupt or restrain her; but at
last she turned round and said, 'And, pray, have you got anything to say
to me?' 'Nothing more now,' meekly replied Adeline, 'unless you will follow me
to my chamber.' 'With all my heart,' cried the girl; and Adeline returned to her own
room. 'I wish, Mary, to set you right,' said Adeline, 'with respect to my
situation. You called me, I think, a kept miss, and seemed to think ill
of me.' 'Why, to be sure, ma'am,' replied Mary, a little alarmed--'every body
says you are a kept lady, and so I made no bones of saying so; but I am
sure if so be you are not so, why I ax pardon.' 'But what do you mean by the term kept lady?' 'Why, a lady who lives with a man without being married to him, I take
it; and that I take to be your case, ain't it, I pray?' Adeline blushed and was silent:--it certainly was her case. However, she
took courage and went on. 'But mistresses, or kept ladies in general, are women of bad character,
and would live with any man; but I never loved, nor ever shall love, any
man but Mr Glenmurray. I look on myself as his wife in the sight of God;
nor will I quit him till death shall separate us.' 'Then if so be that you don't want to change, I think you might as well
be married to him.' Adeline was again silent for a moment, but continued--

'Mr Glenmurray would marry me to-morrow, if I chose.' 'Indeed! Well, if master is inclined to make an honest woman of you, you
had better take him at his word, I think.' 'Gracious heaven!' cried Adeline, 'what an expression! Why will you
persist to confound me with those deluded women who are victims of their
own weakness?' 'As to that,' replied Mary, 'you talk too fine for me; but a fact is a
fact--are you or are you not my master's wife?' 'I am not.' 'Why then you are his mistress, and a kept lady to all intents and
purposes: so what signifies argufying the matter? I lived with a kept
madam before; and she was as good as you, for aught I know.' Adeline, shocked and disappointed, told her she might leave the room. 'I am going,' pertly answered Mary, 'and to seek for a place; but I must
beg that you will not own you are no better than you should be, when a
lady comes to ask my character; for then perhaps I should not get any
one to take me. I shall call you Mrs Glenmurray.' 'But I shall not call _myself_ so,' replied Adeline. 'I will not say
what is not true, on any account.' 'There now, there's spite! and yet you pretend to call yourself a
gentlewoman, and to be better than other kept ladies! Why, you are not
worthy to tie the shoestrings of my last mistress--she did not mind
telling a lie rather than lose a poor servant a place; and she called
herself a married woman rather than hurt me.' 'Neither she nor you, then,' replied Adeline gravely, 'were sensible
of what great importance a strict adherence to veracity is, to the
interests of society. I am;--and for the sake of mankind I will always
tell the truth.' 'You had better tell one innocent lie for mine,' replied the girl
pertly. 'I dare to say the world will neither know nor care anything
about it: and I can tell you I shall expect you will.' So saying she shut the door with violence, leaving Adeline mournfully
musing on the distress attending on her situation, and even disposed to
question the propriety of remaining in it. The inquietude of her mind, as usual, showed itself in her countenance,
and involved her in another difficulty: to make Glenmurray uneasy by an
avowal of what had passed between her and Mary was impossible; yet how
could she conceal it from him? And while she was deliberating on this
point, Glenmurray entered the room, and tenderly inquired what had so
evidently disturbed her. 'Nothing of any consequence,' she faltered out, and burst into tears. 'Could "nothing of consequence" produce such emotion?' answered
Glenmurray. 'But I am ashamed to own the cause of my uneasiness.' 'Ashamed to own it to me, Adeline? To be sure, you have a great deal to
fear from my severity!'