"You give me these riches for a trial, Madam," said
she; "as such they are sent me by Providence. Oh! may I, by a humble, by a right use of them,
prove myself worthy of the distinguished favour!" "That you ever will, I am sure," said Mrs. Deborah Moreton; "Oh! an hundred and a
thousand times have I wished, that the poor lost one had been like you! but my dear child the
assistance of a clergyman may be of some use to keep even you in the right way.-Don't blush
now, Miss Cuthbert-Mr. Montgomery loves you; he is worthy of you; and-but all in good
time, child, I hope to see you united." And in good time Mrs. Deborah Moreton is likely to see her wishes completed. Montgomery will become the happy pastor of his father's flock; and Miss Cuthbert's fortune will
enable them to gratify the benevolent feelings of their hearts.-The emoluments of the Elmsly
living will, with the full consent of Mrs. Deborah Moreton and her favourite, be secured to Mrs.
Montgomery and her daughters, who are to reside in a cottage near the parsonage. Mary Cuthbert does not wish to inherit the Attic Villa. "No, dearest Madam," said she,
while conversing with Mrs. Deborah Moreton on the subject, "the Villa would bring us a
thousand unpleasant recollections.-Comparisons would be made; we could not bear them; it
would grieve us to hear them.-Peace to the ashes of the dead!"-"Amen!" said Mrs. Deborah,
lifting up her hands and eyes; "the estate has not been many years in our family; I wish my poor
brother had never bought it, from the very bottom of my heart; but no matter, I will sell it, Miss
Cuthbert, and the money shall accumulate for your children!" Thus we must draw our curtain, telling our readers that, in all human probability, Mr. and
Mrs. Montgomery, and Mr. and Mrs. Walsingham will maintain an uninterrupted and friendly
intercourse, and that Mrs. Deborah Moreton will be a witness of their happiness. We fear that we shall be accused of the murder of Miss Moreton, our redoubtable
heroine; but, reader! in the intricacies of her destiny, we had imposed on ourselves no easy task. It was impossible to let a lady on stilts slide down gently-and, (be merciful, O reader!) it was
not murder, believe us, but accidental death.