About the time that the pestilence had broken out, a young German student
had joined them. Their simple history was easily divined. He, a noble, loved the fair daughter of the
poor musician, and followed them in their flight from the persecutions of his friends; but soon the
mighty leveller came with unblunted scythe to mow, together with the grass, the tall flowers of the
field. The youth was an early victim. She preserved herself for her father's sake. His blindness
permitted her to continue a delusion, at first the child of accident-and now solitary beings, sole
survivors in the land, he remained unacquainted with the change, nor was aware that when he
listened to his child's music, the mute mountains, senseless lake, and unconscious trees, were,
himself excepted, her sole auditors. The very day that we arrived she had been attacked by symptomatic illness. She was paralyzed with
horror at the idea of leaving her aged, sightless father alone on the empty earth; but she had not
courage to disclose the truth, and the very excess of her desperation animated her to surpassing
exertions. At the accustomed vesper hour, she led him to the chapel; and, though trembling and
weeping on his account, she played, without fault in time, or error in note, the hymn written to
celebrate the creation of the adorned earth, soon to be her tomb. We came to her like visitors from heaven itself; her high-wrought courage; her hardly sustained
firmness, fled with the appearance of relief. With a shriek she rushed towards us, embraced the
knees of Adrian, and uttering but the words, "O save my father!" with sobs and hysterical cries,
opened the long-shut floodgates of her woe. Poor girl!-she and her father now lie side by side, beneath the high walnut-tree where her lover
reposes, and which in her dying moments she had pointed out to us. Her father, at length aware of
his daughter's danger, unable to see the changes of her dear countenance, obstinately held her hand,
till it was chilled and stiffened by death. Nor did he then move or speak, till, twelve hours after,
kindly death took him to his breakless repose. They rest beneath the sod, the tree their
monument;-the hallowed spot is distinct in my memory, paled in by craggy Jura, and the far,
immeasurable Alps; the spire of the church they frequented still points from out the embosoming
trees; and though her hand be cold, still methinks the sounds of divine music which they loved
wander about, solacing their gentle ghosts. WE had now reached Switzerland, so long the final mark and aim of our exertions. We had looked, I
know not wherefore, with hope and pleasing expectation on her congregation of hills and snowy
crags, and opened our bosoms with renewed spirits to the icy Biz, which even at Midsummer used to
come from the northern glacier laden with cold. Yet how could we nourish expectation of relief? Like
our native England, and the vast extent of fertile France, this mountain-embowered land was
desolate of its inhabitants. Nor bleak mountain-top, nor snow-nourished rivulet; not the ice-laden
Biz, nor thunder, the tamer of contagion, had preserved them- why therefore should we claim
exemption? Who was there indeed to save? What troop had we brought fit to stand at bay, and combat with the
conqueror? We were a failing remnant, tamed to mere submission to the coming blow. A train half
dead, through fear of death-a hopeless, unresisting, almost reckless crew, which, in the tossed bark
of life, had given up all pilotage, and resigned themselves to the destructive force of ungoverned
winds. Like a few furrows of unreaped corn, which, left standing on a wide field after the rest is
gathered to the garner, are swiftly borne down by the winter storm. Like a few straggling swallows,
which, remaining after their fellows had, on the first unkind breath of passing autumn, migrated to
genial climes, were struck to earth by the first frost of November. Like a stray sheep that wanders
over the sleet-beaten hill-side, while the flock is in the pen, and dies before morning-dawn. Like a
cloud, like one of many that were spread in impenetrable woof over the sky, which, when the
shepherd north has driven its companions "to drink Antipodean noon," fades and dissolves in the
clear ether-Such were we! We left the fair margin of the beauteous lake of Geneva, and entered the Alpine ravines; tracing to its
source the brawling Arve, through the rock-bound valley of Servox, beside the mighty waterfalls, and
under the shadow of the inaccessible mountains, we travelled on; while the luxuriant walnut-tree
gave place to the dark pine, whose musical branches swung in the wind, and whose upright forms
had braved a thousand storms-till the verdant sod, the flowery dell, and shrubbery hill were
exchanged for the sky-piercing, untrodden, seedless rock, "the bones of the world, waiting to be
clothed with every thing necessary to give life and beauty." Strange that we should seek shelter
here! Surely, if, in those countries where earth was wont, like a tender mother, to nourish her
children, we had found her a destroyer, we need not seek it here, where stricken by keen penury she
seems to shudder through her stony veins. Nor were we mistaken in our conjecture. We vainly
sought the vast and ever moving glaciers of Chamounix, rifts of pendant ice, seas of congelated
waters, the leafless groves of tempest-battered pines, dells, mere paths for the loud avalanche, and
hill-tops, the resort of thunder-storms. Pestilence reigned paramount even here. By the time that day
and night, like twin sisters of equal growth, shared equally their dominion over the hours, one by
one, beneath the ice-caves, beside the waters springing from the thawed snows of a thousand
winters, another and yet another of the remnant of the race of Man, closed their eyes for ever to the
light. Yet we were not quite wrong in seeking a scene like this, whereon to close the drama. Nature, true to
the last, consoled us in the very heart of misery. Sublime grandeur of outward objects soothed our
hapless hearts, and were in harmony with our desolation. Many sorrows have befallen man during
his chequered course; and many a woe-stricken mourner has found himself sole survivor among
many. Our misery took its majestic shape and colouring from the vast ruin, that accompanied and
made one with it. Thus on lovely earth, many a dark ravine contains a brawling stream, shadowed by
romantic rocks, threaded by mossy paths-but all, except this, wanted the mighty back-ground, the
towering Alps, whose snowy capes, or bared ridges, lifted us from our dull mortal abode, to the
palaces of Nature's own. This solemn harmony of event and situation regulated our feelings, and gave as it were fitting
costume to our last act. Majestic gloom and tragic pomp attended the decease of wretched
humanity. The funeral procession of monarchs of old, was transcended by our splendid shews. Near
the sources of the Arveiron we performed the rites for, four only excepted, the last of the species. Adrian and I, leaving Clara and Evelyn wrapt in peaceful unobserving slumber, carried the body to
this desolate spot, and placed it in those caves of ice beneath the glacier, which rive and split with
the slightest sound, and bring destruction on those within the clefts-no bird or beast of prey could
here profane the frozen form. So, with hushed steps and in silence, we placed the dead on a bier of
ice, and then, departing, stood on the rocky platform beside the river springs. All hushed as we had
been, the very striking of the air with our persons had sufficed to disturb the repose of this thawless
region; and we had hardly left the cavern, before vast blocks of ice, detaching themselves from the
roof, fell, and covered the human image we had deposited within. We had chosen a fair moonlight
night, but our journey thither had been long, and the crescent sank behind the western heights by
the time we had accomplished our purpose. The snowy mountains and blue glaciers shone in their
own light. The rugged and abrupt ravine, which formed one side of Mont Anvert, was opposite to us,
the glacier at our side; at our feet Arveiron, white and foaming, dashed over the pointed rocks that
jutted into it, and, with whirring spray and ceaseless roar, disturbed the stilly night. Yellow lightnings
played around the vast dome of Mont Blanc, silent as the snow-clad rock they illuminated; all was
bare, wild, and sublime, while the singing of the pines in melodious murmurings added a gentle
interest to the rough magnificence. Now the riving and fall of icy rocks clave the air; now the thunder
of the avalanche burst on our ears. In countries whose features are of less magnitude, nature betrays
her living powers in the foliage of the trees, in the growth of herbage, in the soft purling of
meandering streams; here, endowed with giant attributes, the torrent, the thunder-storm, and the
flow of massive waters, display her activity. Such the church-yard, such the requiem, such the eternal
congregation, that waited on our companion's funeral! Nor was it the human form alone which we had placed in this eternal sepulchre, whose obsequies we
now celebrated. With this last victim Plague vanished from the earth. Death had never wanted
weapons wherewith to destroy life, and we, few and weak as we had become, were still exposed to
every other shaft with which his full quiver teemed. But pestilence was absent from among them. For
seven years it had had full sway upon earth; she had trod every nook of our spacious globe; she had
mingled with the atmosphere, which as a cloak enwraps all our fellow-creatures-the inhabitants of
native Europe-the luxurious Asiatic-the swarthy African and free American had been vanquished
and destroyed by her. Her barbarous tyranny came to its close here in the rocky vale of Chamounix. Still recurring scenes of misery and pain, the fruits of this distemper, made no more a part of our
lives-the word plague no longer rung in our ears-the aspect of plague incarnate in the human
countenance no longer appeared before our eyes. From this moment I saw plague no more. She
abdicated her throne, and despoiled herself of her imperial sceptre among the ice rocks that
surrounded us. She left solitude and silence co-heirs of her kingdom. My present feelings are so mingled with the past, that I cannot say whether the knowledge of this
change visited us, as we stood on this sterile spot. It seems to me that it did; that a cloud seemed to
pass from over us, that a weight was taken from the air; that henceforth we breathed more freely,
and raised our heads with some portion of former liberty. Yet we did not hope. We were impressed
by the sentiment, that our race was run, but that plague would not be our destroyer. The coming
time was as a mighty river, down which a charmed boat is driven, whose mortal steersman knows,
that the obvious peril is not the one he needs fear, yet that danger is nigh; and who floats awe-struck
under beetling precipices, through the dark and turbid waters-seeing in the distance yet stranger
and ruder shapes, towards which he is irresistibly impelled. What would become of us? O for some
Delphic oracle, or Pythian maid, to utter the secrets of futurity! O for some Oedipus to solve the
riddle of the cruel Sphynx! Such Oedipus was I to be-not divining a word's juggle, but whose
agonizing pangs, and sorrow-tainted life were to be the engines, wherewith to lay bare the secrets of
destiny, and reveal the meaning of the enigma, whose explanation closed the history of the human
race. Dim fancies, akin to these, haunted our minds, and instilled feelings not unallied to pleasure, as we
stood beside this silent tomb of nature, reared by these lifeless mountains, above her living veins,
choking her vital principle. "Thus are we left," said Adrian, "two melancholy blasted trees, where
once a forest waved. We are left to mourn, and pine, and die. Yet even now we have our duties,
which we must string ourselves to fulfil: the duty of bestowing pleasure where we can, and by force
of love, irradiating with rainbow hues the tempest of grief. Nor will I repine if in this extremity we
preserve what we now possess. Something tells me, Verney, that we need no longer dread our cruel
enemy, and I cling with delight to the oracular voice. Though strange, it will be sweet to mark the
growth of your little boy, and the development of Clara's young heart. In the midst of a desert world,
we are everything to them; and, if we live, it must be our task to make this new mode of life happy to
them. At present this is easy, for their childish ideas do not wander into futurity, and the stinging
craving for sympathy, and all of love of which our nature is susceptible, is not yet awake within them:
we cannot guess what will happen then, when nature asserts her indefeasible and sacred powers;
but, long before that time, we may all be cold, as he who lies in yonder tomb of ice. We need only
provide for the present, and endeavour to fill with pleasant images the inexperienced fancy of your
lovely niece. The scenes which now surround us, vast and sublime as they are, are not such as can
best contribute to this work. Nature is here like our fortunes, grand, but too destructive, bare, and
rude, to be able to afford delight to her young imagination. Let us descend to the sunny plains of
Italy. Winter will soon be here, to clothe this wilderness in double desolation; but we will cross the
bleak hill-tops, and lead her to scenes of fertility and beauty, where her path will be adorned with
flowers, and the cheery atmosphere inspire pleasure and hope." In pursuance of this plan we quitted Chamounix on the following day. We had no cause to hasten our
steps; no event was transacted beyond our actual sphere to enchain our resolves, so we yielded to
every idle whim, and deemed our time well spent, when we could behold the passage of the hours
without dismay. We loitered along the lovely Vale of Servox; passed long hours on the bridge, which,
crossing the ravine of Arve, commands a prospect of its pine-clothed depths, and the snowy
mountains that wall it in. We rambled through romantic Switzerland; till, fear of coming winter
leading us forward, the first days of October found us in the valley of La Maurienne, which leads to
Cenis. I cannot explain the reluctance we felt at leaving this land of mountains; perhaps it was, that
we regarded the Alps as boundaries between our former and our future state of existence, and so
clung fondly to what of old we had loved. Perhaps, because we had now so few impulses urging to a
choice between two modes of action, we were pleased to preserve the existence of one, and
preferred the prospect of what we were to do, to the recollection of what had been done. We felt
that for this year danger was past; and we believed that, for some months, we were secured to each
other. There was a thrilling, agonizing delight in the thought-it filled the eyes with misty tears, it
tore the heart with tumultuous heavings; frailer than the "snow fall in the river," were we each and
all-but we strove to give life and individuality to the meteoric course of our several existences, and
to feel that no moment escaped us unenjoyed. Thus tottering on the dizzy brink, we were happy. Yes! as we sat beneath the toppling rocks, beside the waterfalls, near
-Forests, ancient as the hills,
And folding sunny spots of greenery, where the chamois grazed, and the timid squirrel laid up its
hoard-descanting on the charms of nature, drinking in the while her unalienable beauties-we
were, in an empty world, happy. Yet, O days of joy-days, when eye spoke to eye, and voices, sweeter than the music of the swinging
branches of the pines, or rivulet's gentle murmur, answered mine-yet, O days replete with
beatitude, days of loved society-days unutterably dear to me forlorn-pass, O pass before me,
making me in your memory forget what I am. Behold, how my streaming eyes blot this senseless
paper-behold, how my features are convulsed by agonizing throes, at your mere recollection, now
that, alone, my tears flow, my lips quiver, my cries fill the air, unseen, unmarked, unheard! Yet, O yet,
days of delight! let me dwell on your long-drawn hours! As the cold increased upon us, we passed the Alps, and descended into Italy. At the uprising of morn,
we sat at our repast, and cheated our regrets by gay sallies or learned disquisitions. The live-long day
we sauntered on, still keeping in view the end of our journey, but careless of the hour of its
completion. As the evening star shone out, and the orange sunset, far in the west, marked the
position of the dear land we had for ever left, talk, thought enchaining, made the hours fly-O that
we had lived thus for ever and for ever! Of what consequence was it to our four hearts, that they
alone were the fountains of life in the wide world? As far as mere individual sentiment was
concerned, we had rather be left thus united together, than if, each alone in a populous desert of
unknown men, we had wandered truly companionless till life's last term. In this manner, we
endeavoured to console each other; in this manner, true philosophy taught us to reason. It was the delight of Adrian and myself to wait on Clara, naming her the little queen of the world,
ourselves her humblest servitors. When we arrived at a town, our first care was to select for her its
most choice abode; to make sure that no harrowing relic remained of its former inhabitants; to seek
food for her, and minister to her wants with assiduous tenderness. Clara entered into our scheme
with childish gaiety. Her chief business was to attend on Evelyn; but it was her sport to array herself
in splendid robes, adorn herself with sunny gems, and ape a princely state. Her religion, deep and
pure, did not teach her to refuse to blunt thus the keen sting of regret; her youthful vivacity made
her enter, heart and soul, into these strange masquerades. We had resolved to pass the ensuing winter at Milan, which, as being a large and luxurious city,
would afford us choice of homes. We had descended the Alps, and left far behind their vast forests
and mighty crags. We entered smiling Italy. Mingled grass and corn grew in her plains, the unpruned
vines threw their luxuriant branches around the elms. The grapes, overripe, had fallen on the ground,
or hung purple, or burnished green, among the red and yellow leaves. The ears of standing corn
winnowed to emptiness by the spendthrift winds; the fallen foliage of the trees, the weed-grown
brooks, the dusky olive, now spotted with its blackened fruit; the chestnuts, to which the squirrel
only was harvest-man; all plenty, and yet, alas! all poverty, painted in wondrous hues and fantastic
groupings this land of beauty. In the towns, in the voiceless towns, we visited the churches, adorned
by pictures, master-pieces of art, or galleries of statues-while in this genial clime the animals, in
new found liberty, rambled through the gorgeous palaces, and hardly feared our forgotten aspect. The dove-coloured oxen turned their full eyes on us, and paced slowly by; a startling throng of silly
sheep, with pattering feet, would start up in some chamber, formerly dedicated to the repose of
beauty, and rush, huddling past us, down the marble staircase into the street, and again in at the first
open door, taking unrebuked possession of hallowed sanctuary, or kingly council-chamber. We no
longer started at these occurrences, nor at worse exhibition of change-when the palace had
become a mere tomb, pregnant with fetid stench, strewn with the dead; and we could perceive how
pestilence and fear had played strange antics, chasing the luxurious dame to the dank fields and bare
cottage; gathering, among carpets of Indian woof, and beds of silk, the rough peasant, or the
deformed half-human shape of the wretched beggar. We arrived at Milan, and stationed ourselves in the Vice-Roy's palace. Here we made laws for
ourselves, dividing our day, and fixing distinct occupations for each hour. In the morning we rode in
the adjoining country, or wandered through the palaces, in search of pictures or antiquities. In the
evening we assembled to read or to converse. There were few books that we dared read; few, that
did not cruelly deface the painting we bestowed on our solitude, by recalling combinations and
emotions never more to be experienced by us. Metaphysical disquisition; fiction, which wandering
from all reality, lost itself in self-created errors; poets of times so far gone by, that to read of them
was as to read of Atlantis and Utopia; or such as referred to nature only, and the workings of one
particular mind; but most of all, talk, varied and ever new, beguiled our hours. While we paused thus in our onward career towards death, time held on its accustomed course. Still
and for ever did the earth roll on, enthroned in her atmospheric car, speeded by the force of the
invisible coursers of never-erring necessity. And now, this dew-drop in the sky, this ball, ponderous
with mountains, lucent with waves, passing from the short tyranny of watery Pisces and the frigid
Ram, entered the radiant demesne of Taurus and the Twins. There, fanned by vernal airs, the Spirit of
Beauty sprung from her cold repose; and, with winnowing wings and soft pacing feet, set a girdle of
verdure around the earth, sporting among the violets, hiding within the springing foliage of the trees,
tripping lightly down the radiant streams into the sunny deep. "For lo! winter is past, the rain is over
and gone; the flowers appear on the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of
the turtle is heard in our land; the fig tree putteth forth her green figs, and the vines, with the tender
grape, give a good smell." Thus was it in the time of the ancient regal poet; thus was it now. Yet how could we miserable hail the approach of this delightful season? We hoped indeed that death
did not now as heretofore walk in its shadow; yet, left as we were alone to each other, we looked in
each other's faces with enquiring eyes, not daring altogether to trust to our presentiments, and
endeavouring to divine which would be the hapless survivor to the other three. We were to pass the
summer at the lake of Como, and thither we removed as soon as spring grew to her maturity, and
the snow disappeared from the hill tops. Ten miles from Como, under the steep heights of the
eastern mountains, by the margin of the lake, was a villa called the Pliniana, from its being built on
the site of a fountain, whose periodical ebb and flow is described by the younger Pliny in his letters. The house had nearly fallen into ruin, till in the year 2090, an English nobleman had bought it, and
fitted it up with every luxury. Two large halls, hung with splendid tapestry, and paved with marble,
opened on each side of a court, of whose two other sides one overlooked the deep dark lake, and the
other was bounded by a mountain, from whose stony side gushed, with roar and splash, the
celebrated fountain. Above, underwood of myrtle and tufts of odorous plants crowned the rock,
while the star-pointing giant cypresses reared themselves in the blue air, and the recesses of the hills
were adorned with the luxuriant growth of chestnut-trees. Here we fixed our summer residence. We
had a lovely skiff, in which we sailed, now stemming the midmost waves, now coasting the over-
hanging and craggy banks, thick sown with evergreens, which dipped their shining leaves in the
waters, and were mirrored in many a little bay and creek of waters of translucent darkness. Here
orange plants bloomed, here birds poured forth melodious hymns; and here, during spring, the cold
snake emerged from the clefts, and basked on the sunny terraces of rock. Were we not happy in this paradisiacal retreat? If some kind spirit had whispered forgetfulness to us,
methinks we should have been happy here, where the precipitous mountains, nearly pathless, shut
from our view the far fields of desolate earth, and with small exertion of the imagination, we might
fancy that the cities were still resonant with popular hum, and the peasant still guided his plough
through the furrow, and that we, the world's free denizens, enjoyed a voluntary exile, and not a
remediless cutting off from our extinct species. Not one among us enjoyed the beauty of this scenery so much as Clara. Before we quitted Milan, a
change had taken place in her habits and manners. She lost her gaiety, she laid aside her sports, and
assumed an almost vestal plainness of attire. She shunned us, retiring with Evelyn to some distant
chamber or silent nook; nor did she enter into his pastimes with the same zest as she was wont, but
would sit and watch him with sadly tender smiles, and eyes bright with tears, yet without a word of
complaint. She approached us timidly, avoided our caresses, nor shook off her embarrassment till
some serious discussion or lofty theme called her for awhile out of herself. Her beauty grew as a
rose, which, opening to the summer wind, discloses leaf after leaf till the sense aches with its excess
of loveliness. A slight and variable colour tinged her cheeks, and her motions seemed attuned by
some hidden harmony of surpassing sweetness. We redoubled our tenderness and earnest
attentions. She received them with grateful smiles, that fled swift as sunny beam from a glittering
wave on an April day. Our only acknowledged point of sympathy with her, appeared to be Evelyn. This dear little fellow was
a comforter and delight to us beyond all words. His buoyant spirit, and his innocent ignorance of our
vast calamity, were balm to us, whose thoughts and feelings were over-wrought and spun out in the
immensity of speculative sorrow. To cherish, to caress, to amuse him was the common task of all. Clara, who felt towards him in some degree like a young mother, gratefully acknowledged our
kindness towards him. To me, O! to me, who saw the clear brows and soft eyes of the beloved of my
heart, my lost and ever dear Idris, re-born in his gentle face, to me he was dear even to pain; if I
pressed him to my heart, methought I clasped a real and living part of her, who had lain there
through long years of youthful happiness. It was the custom of Adrian and myself to go out each day in our skiff to forage in the adjacent
country. In these expeditions we were seldom accompanied by Clara or her little charge, but our
return was an hour of hilarity. Evelyn ransacked our stores with childish eagerness, and we always
brought some new found gift for our fair companion. Then too we made discoveries of lovely scenes
or gay palaces, whither in the evening we all proceeded. Our sailing expeditions were most divine,
and with a fair wind or transverse course we cut the liquid waves; and, if talk failed under the
pressure of thought, I had my clarionet with me, which awoke the echoes, and gave the change to
our careful minds. Clara at such times often returned to her former habits of free converse and gay
sally; and though our four hearts alone beat in the world, those four hearts were happy. One day, on our return from the town of Como, with a laden boat, we expected as usual to be met at
the port by Clara and Evelyn, and we were somewhat surprised to see the beach vacant. I, as my
nature prompted, would not prognosticate evil, but explained it away as a mere casual incident. Not
so Adrian. He was seized with sudden trembling and apprehension, and he called to me with
vehemence to steer quickly for land, and, when near, leapt from the boat, half falling into the water;
and, scrambling up the steep bank, hastened along the narrow strip of garden, the only level space
between the lake and the mountain. I followed without delay; the garden and inner court were
empty, so was the house, whose every room we visited. Adrian called loudly upon Clara's name, and
was about to rush up the near mountain-path, when the door of a summer-house at the end of the
garden slowly opened, and Clara appeared, not advancing towards us, but leaning against a column
of the building with blanched cheeks, in a posture of utter despondency. Adrian sprang towards her
with a cry of joy, and folded her delightedly in his arms. She withdrew from his embrace, and,
without a word, again entered the summer-house. Her quivering lips, her despairing heart refused to
afford her voice to express our misfortune. Poor little Evelyn had, while playing with her, been seized
with sudden fever, and now lay torpid and speechless on a little couch in the summer-house. For a whole fortnight we unceasingly watched beside the poor child, as his life declined under the
ravages of a virulent typhus. His little form and tiny lineaments encaged the embryo of the world-
spanning mind of man. Man's nature, brimful of passions and affections, would have had an home in
that little heart, whose swift pulsations hurried towards their close. His small hand's fine mechanism,
now flaccid and unbent, would in the growth of sinew and muscle, have achieved works of beauty or
of strength. His tender rosy feet would have trod in firm manhood the bowers and glades of earth-
these reflections were now of little use: he lay, thought and strength suspended, waiting unresisting
the final blow. We watched at his bedside, and when the access of fever was on him, we neither spoke nor looked
at each other, marking only his obstructed breath and the mortal glow that tinged his sunken cheek,
the heavy death that weighed on his eyelids. It is a trite evasion to say, that words could not express
our long drawn agony; yet how can words image sensations, whose tormenting keenness throw us
back, as it were, on the deep roots and hidden foundations of our nature, which shake our being with
earth-quake-throe, so that we leave to confide in accustomed feelings which like mother-earth
support us, and cling to some vain imagination or deceitful hope, which will soon be buried in the
ruins occasioned by the final shock. I have called that period a fortnight, which we passed watching
the changes of the sweet child's malady-and such it might have been-at night, we wondered to
find another day gone, while each particular hour seemed endless. Day and night were exchanged for
one another uncounted; we slept hardly at all, nor did we even quit his room, except when a pang of
grief seized us, and we retired from each other for a short period to conceal our sobs and tears. We
endeavoured in vain to abstract Clara from this deplorable scene. She sat, hour after hour, looking at
him, now softly arranging his pillow, and, while he had power to swallow, administered his drink. At
length the moment of his death came: the blood paused in its flow -his eyes opened, and then
closed again: without convulsion or sigh, the frail tenement was left vacant of its spiritual inhabitant. I have heard that the sight of the dead has confirmed materialists in their belief. I ever felt otherwise. Was that my child-that moveless decaying inanimation? My child was enraptured by my caresses;
his dear voice cloathed with meaning articulations his thoughts, otherwise inaccessible; his smile was
a ray of the soul, and the same soul sat upon its throne in his eyes. I turn from this mockery of what
he was. Take, O earth, thy debt! freely and for ever I consign to thee the garb thou didst afford. But
thou, sweet child, amiable and beloved boy, either thy spirit has sought a fitter dwelling, or, shrined
in my heart, thou livest while it lives. We placed his remains under a cypress, the upright mountain being scooped out to receive them. And then Clara said, "If you wish me to live, take me from hence. There is something in this scene of
transcendent beauty, in these trees, and hills and waves, that for ever whisper to me, leave thy
cumbrous flesh, and make a part of us. I earnestly entreat you to take me away." So on the fifteenth of August we bade adieu to our villa, and the embowering shades of this abode of
beauty; to calm bay and noisy waterfall; to Evelyn's little grave we bade farewell! and then, with
heavy hearts, we departed on our pilgrimage towards Rome. NOW-soft awhile-have I arrived so near the end? Yes! it is all over now-a step or two over those
new made graves, and the wearisome way is done. Can I accomplish my task? Can I streak my paper
with words capacious of the grand conclusion? Arise, black Melancholy! quit thy Cimmerian solitude! Bring with thee murky fogs from hell, which may drink up the day; bring blight and pestiferous
exhalations, which, entering the hollow caverns and breathing places of earth, may fill her stony
veins with corruption, so that not only herbage may no longer flourish, the trees may rot, and the
rivers run with gall-but the everlasting mountains be decomposed, and the mighty deep putrify,
and the genial atmosphere which clips the globe, lose all powers of generation and sustenance. Do
this, sad visaged power, while I write, while eyes read these pages. And who will read them? Beware, tender offspring of the re-born world- beware, fair being, with
human heart, yet untamed by care, and human brow, yet unploughed by time-beware, lest the
cheerful current of thy blood be checked, thy golden locks turn grey, thy sweet dimpling smiles be
changed to fixed, harsh wrinkles! Let not day look on these lines, lest garish day waste, turn pale, and
die. Seek a cypress grove, whose moaning boughs will be harmony befitting; seek some cave, deep
embowered in earth's dark entrails, where no light will penetrate, save that which struggles, red and
flickering, through a single fissure, staining thy page with grimmest livery of death. There is a painful confusion in my brain, which refuses to delineate distinctly succeeding events. Sometimes the irradiation of my friend's gentle smile comes before me; and methinks its light spans
and fills eternity-then, again, I feel the gasping throes-
We quitted Como, and in compliance with Adrian's earnest desire, we took Venice in our way to
Rome. There was something to the English peculiarly attractive in the idea of this wave-encircled,
island-enthroned city. Adrian had never seen it. We went down the Po and the Brenta in a boat; and,
the days proving intolerably hot, we rested in the bordering palaces during the day, travelling
through the night, when darkness made the bordering banks indistinct, and our solitude less
remarkable; when the wandering moon lit the waves that divided before our prow, and the night-
wind filled our sails, and the murmuring stream, waving trees, and swelling canvass, accorded in
harmonious strain. Clara, long overcome by excessive grief, had to a great degree cast aside her
timid, cold reserve, and received our attentions with grateful tenderness. While Adrian with poetic
fervour discoursed of the glorious nations of the dead, of the beauteous earth and the fate of man,
she crept near him, drinking in his speech with silent pleasure. We banished from our talk, and as
much as possible from our thoughts, the knowledge of our desolation. And it would be incredible to
an inhabitant of cities, to one among a busy throng, to what extent we succeeded. It was as a man
confined in a dungeon, whose small and grated rift at first renders the doubtful light more sensibly
obscure, till, the visual orb having drunk in the beam, and adapted itself to its scantiness, he finds
that clear noon inhabits his cell. So we, a simple triad on empty earth, were multiplied to each other,
till we became all in all. We stood like trees, whose roots are loosened by the wind, which support
one another, leaning and clinging with encreased fervour while the wintry storms howl. Thus we
floated down the widening stream of the Po, sleeping when the cicale sang, awake with the stars. We
entered the narrower banks of the Brenta, and arrived at the shore of the Laguna at sunrise on the
sixth of September. The bright orb slowly rose from behind its cupolas and towers, and shed its
penetrating light upon the glassy waters. Wrecks of gondolas, and some few uninjured ones, were
strewed on the beach at Fusina. We embarked in one of these for the widowed daughter of ocean,
who, abandoned and fallen, sat forlorn on her propping isles, looking towards the far mountains of
Greece. We rowed lightly over the Laguna, and entered Canale Grande. The tide ebbed sullenly from
out the broken portals and violated halls of Venice: sea weed and sea monsters were left on the
blackened marble, while the salt ooze defaced the matchless works of art that adorned their walls,
and the sea gull flew out from the shattered window. In the midst of this appalling ruin of the
monuments of man's power, nature asserted her ascendancy, and shone more beauteous from the
contrast. The radiant waters hardly trembled, while the rippling waves made many sided mirrors to
the sun; the blue immensity, seen beyond Lido, stretched far, unspecked by boat, so tranquil, so
lovely, that it seemed to invite us to quit the land strewn with ruins, and to seek refuge from sorrow
and fear on its placid extent. We saw the ruins of this hapless city from the height of the tower of San Marco, immediately under
us, and turned with sickening hearts to the sea, which, though it be a grave, rears no monument,
discloses no ruin. Evening had come apace. The sun set in calm majesty behind the misty summits of
the Apennines, and its golden and roseate hues painted the mountains of the opposite shore. "That
land," said Adrian, "tinged with the last glories of the day, is Greece." Greece! The sound had a
responsive chord in the bosom of Clara. She vehemently reminded us that we had promised to take
her once again to Greece, to the tomb of her parents. Why go to Rome? what should we do at
Rome? We might take one of the many vessels to be found here, embark in it, and steer right for
Albania. I objected the dangers of ocean, and the distance of the mountains we saw, from Athens; a distance
which, from the savage uncultivation of the country, was almost impassable. Adrian, who was
delighted with Clara's proposal, obviated these objections. The season was favourable; the north-
west that blew would take us transversely across the gulph; and then we might find, in some
abandoned port, a light Greek caique, adapted for such navigation, and run down the coast of the
Morea, and, passing over the Isthmus of Corinth, without much land-travelling or fatigue, find
ourselves at Athens. This appeared to me wild talk; but the sea, glowing with a thousand purple
hues, looked so brilliant and safe; my beloved companions were so earnest, so determined, that,
when Adrian said, "Well, though it is not exactly what you wish, yet consent, to please me"-I could
no longer refuse. That evening we selected a vessel, whose size just seemed fitted for our enterprize;
we bent the sails and put the rigging in order, and reposing that night in one of the city's thousand
palaces, agreed to embark at sunrise the following morning. When winds that move not its calm surface, sweep
  The azure sea, I love the land no more;
  The smiles of the serene and tranquil deep
  Tempt my unquiet mind-
Thus said Adrian, quoting a translation of Moschus's poem, as in the clear morning light, we rowed
over the Laguna, past Lido, into the open sea-I would have added in continuation,
  But when the roar
  Of ocean's gray abyss resounds, and foam
  Gathers upon the sea, and vast waves burst-
But my friends declared that such verses were evil augury; so in cheerful mood we left the shallow
waters, and, when out at sea, unfurled our sails to catch the favourable breeze. The laughing
morning air filled them, while sun-light bathed earth, sky and ocean-the placid waves divided to
receive our keel, and playfully kissed the dark sides of our little skiff, murmuring a welcome; as land
receded, still the blue expanse, most waveless, twin sister to the azure empyrean, afforded smooth
conduct to our bark. As the air and waters were tranquil and balmy, so were our minds steeped in
quiet. In comparison with the unstained deep, funereal earth appeared a grave, its high rocks and
stately mountains were but monuments, its trees the plumes of a herse, the brooks and rivers
brackish with tears for departed man. Farewell to desolate towns -to fields with their savage
intermixture of corn and weeds-to ever multiplying relics of our lost species. Ocean, we commit
ourselves to thee -even as the patriarch of old floated above the drowned world, let us be saved, as
thus we betake ourselves to thy perennial flood. Adrian sat at the helm; I attended to the rigging, the breeze right aft filled our swelling canvas, and
we ran before it over the untroubled deep. The wind died away at noon; its idle breath just
permitted us to hold our course. As lazy, fair-weather sailors, careless of the coming hour, we talked
gaily of our coasting voyage, of our arrival at Athens. We would make our home of one of the
Cyclades, and there in myrtle-groves, amidst perpetual spring, fanned by the wholesome sea-
breezes-we would live long years in beatific union-Was there such a thing as death in the world?-
The sun passed its zenith, and lingered down the stainless floor of heaven. Lying in the boat, my face
turned up to the sky, I thought I saw on its blue white, marbled streaks, so slight, so immaterial, that
now I said- They are there-and now, It is a mere imagination. A sudden fear stung me while I
gazed; and, starting up, and running to the prow,-as I stood, my hair was gently lifted on my brow-
a dark line of ripples appeared to the east, gaining rapidly on us-my breathless remark to Adrian,
was followed by the flapping of the canvas, as the adverse wind struck it, and our boat lurched-
swift as speech, the web of the storm thickened over head, the sun went down red, the dark sea was
strewed with foam, and our skiff rose and fell in its encreasing furrows. Behold us now in our frail tenement, hemmed in by hungry, roaring waves, buffeted by winds. In the
inky east two vast clouds, sailing contrary ways, met; the lightning leapt forth, and the hoarse
thunder muttered. Again in the south, the clouds replied, and the forked stream of fire running along
the black sky, shewed us the appalling piles of clouds, now met and obliterated by the heaving
waves. Great God! And we alone-we three- alone-alone-sole dwellers on the sea and on the
earth, we three must perish! The vast universe, its myriad worlds, and the plains of boundless earth
which we had left-the extent of shoreless sea around-contracted to my view-they and all that
they contained, shrunk up to one point, even to our tossing bark, freighted with glorious humanity. A convulsion of despair crossed the love-beaming face of Adrian, while with set teeth he murmured,
"Yet they shall be saved!" Clara, visited by an human pang, pale and trembling, crept near him-he
looked on her with an encouraging smile-"Do you fear, sweet girl? O, do not fear, we shall soon be
on shore!" The darkness prevented me from seeing the changes of her countenance; but her voice was clear and
sweet, as she replied, "Why should I fear? neither sea nor storm can harm us, if mighty destiny or the
ruler of destiny does not permit. And then the stinging fear of surviving either of you, is not here-
one death will clasp us undivided." Meanwhile we took in all our sails, save a gib; and, as soon as we might without danger, changed our
course, running with the wind for the Italian shore. Dark night mixed everything; we hardly discerned
the white crests of the murderous surges, except when lightning made brief noon, and drank the
darkness, shewing us our danger, and restoring us to double night. We were all silent, except when
Adrian, as steersman, made an encouraging observation. Our little shell obeyed the rudder
miraculously well, and ran along on the top of the waves, as if she had been an offspring of the sea,
and the angry mother sheltered her endangered child. I sat at the prow, watching our course; when suddenly I heard the waters break with redoubled fury. We were certainly near the shore-at the same time I cried, "About there!" and a broad lightning
filling the concave, shewed us for one moment the level beach a-head, disclosing even the sands, and
stunted, ooze-sprinkled beds of reeds, that grew at high water mark. Again it was dark, and we drew
in our breath with such content as one may, who, while fragments of volcano-hurled rock darken the
air, sees a vast mass ploughing the ground immediately at his feet. What to do we knew not -the
breakers here, there, everywhere, encompassed us-they roared, and dashed, and flung their hated
spray in our faces. With considerable difficulty and danger we succeeded at length in altering our
course, and stretched out from shore. I urged my companions to prepare for the wreck of our little
skiff, and to bind themselves to some oar or spar which might suffice to float them. I was myself an
excellent swimmer-the very sight of the sea was wont to raise in me such sensations, as a huntsman
experiences, when he hears a pack of hounds in full cry; I loved to feel the waves wrap me and strive
to overpower me; while I, lord of myself, moved this way or that, in spite of their angry buffetings. Adrian also could swim-but the weakness of his frame prevented him from feeling pleasure in the
exercise, or acquiring any great expertness. But what power could the strongest swimmer oppose to
the overpowering violence of ocean in its fury? My efforts to prepare my companions were rendered
nearly futile -for the roaring breakers prevented our hearing one another speak, and the waves,
that broke continually over our boat, obliged me to exert all my strength in lading the water out, as
fast as it came in. The while darkness, palpable and rayless, hemmed us round, dissipated only by the
lightning; sometimes we beheld thunderbolts, fiery red, fall into the sea, and at intervals vast spouts
stooped from the clouds, churning the wild ocean, which rose to meet them; while the fierce gale
bore the rack onwards, and they were lost in the chaotic mingling of sky and sea. Our gunwales had
been torn away, our single sail had been rent to ribbands, and borne down the stream of the wind. We had cut away our mast, and lightened the boat of all she contained-Clara attempted to assist
me in heaving the water from the hold, and, as she turned her eyes to look on the lightning, I could
discern by that momentary gleam, that resignation had conquered every fear. We have a power
given us in any worst extremity, which props the else feeble mind of man, and enables us to endure
the most savage tortures with a stillness of soul which in hours of happiness we could not have
imagined. A calm, more dreadful in truth than the tempest, allayed the wild beatings of my heart-a
calm like that of the gamester, the suicide, and the murderer, when the last die is on the point of
being cast-while the poisoned cup is at the lips,-as the death-blow is about to be given. Hours passed thus-hours which might write old age on the face of beardless youth, and grizzle the
silky hair of infancy--hours, while the chaotic uproar continued, while each dread gust transcended
in fury the one before, and our skiff hung on the breaking wave, and then rushed into the valley
below, and trembled and spun between the watery precipices that seemed most to meet above her. For a moment the gale paused, and ocean sank to comparative silence-it was a breathless interval;
the wind which, as a practised leaper, had gathered itself up before it sprung, now with terrific roar
rushed over the sea, and the waves struck our stern. Adrian exclaimed that the rudder was gone;-
"We are lost," cried Clara, "Save yourselves-O save yourselves!" The lightning shewed me the poor
girl half buried in the water at the bottom of the boat; as she was sinking in it Adrian caught her up,
and sustained her in his arms. We were without a rudder-we rushed prow foremost into the vast
billows piled up a-head- they broke over and filled the tiny skiff; one scream I heard-one cry that
we were gone, I uttered; I found myself in the waters; darkness was around. When the light of the
tempest flashed, I saw the keel of our upset boat close to me-I clung to this, grasping it with
clenched hand and nails, while I endeavoured during each flash to discover any appearance of my
companions. I thought I saw Adrian at no great distance from me, clinging to an oar; I sprung from
my hold, and with energy beyond my human strength, I dashed aside the waters as I strove to lay
hold of him. As that hope failed, instinctive love of life animated me, and feelings of contention, as if
a hostile will combated with mine. I breasted the surges, and flung them from me, as I would the
opposing front and sharpened claws of a lion about to enfang my bosom. When I had been beaten
down by one wave, I rose on another, while I felt bitter pride curl my lip. Ever since the storm had carried us near the shore, we had never attained any great distance from it. With every flash I saw the bordering coast; yet the progress I made was small, while each wave, as it
receded, carried me back into ocean's far abysses. At one moment I felt my foot touch the sand, and
then again I was in deep water; my arms began to lose their power of motion; my breath failed me
under the influence of the strangling waters- a thousand wild and delirious thoughts crossed me: as
well as I can now recall them, my chief feeling was, how sweet it would be to lay my head on the
quiet earth, where the surges would no longer strike my weakened frame, nor the sound of waters
ring in my ears-to attain this repose, not to save my life, I made a last effort-the shelving shore
suddenly presented a footing for me. I rose, and was again thrown down by the breakers-a point of
rock to which I was enabled to cling, gave me a moment's respite; and then, taking advantage of the
ebbing of the waves, I ran forwards- gained the dry sands, and fell senseless on the oozy reeds that
sprinkled them. I must have lain long deprived of life; for when first, with a sickening feeling, I unclosed my eyes, the
light of morning met them. Great change had taken place meanwhile: grey dawn dappled the flying
clouds, which sped onwards, leaving visible at intervals vast lakes of pure ether. A fountain of light
arose in an encreasing stream from the east, behind the waves of the Adriatic, changing the grey to a
roseate hue, and then flooding sky and sea with aerial gold. A kind of stupor followed my fainting; my senses were alive, but memory was extinct. The blessed
respite was short-a snake lurked near me to sting me into life-on the first retrospective emotion I
would have started up, but my limbs refused to obey me; my knees trembled, the muscles had lost
all power. I still believed that I might find one of my beloved companions cast like me, half alive, on
the beach; and I strove in every way to restore my frame to the use of its animal functions. I wrung
the brine from my hair; and the rays of the risen sun soon visited me with genial warmth. With the
restoration of my bodily powers, my mind became in some degree aware of the universe of misery,
henceforth to be its dwelling. I ran to the water's edge, calling on the beloved names. Ocean drank
in, and absorbed my feeble voice, replying with pitiless roar. I climbed a near tree: the level sands
bounded by a pine forest, and the sea clipped round by the horizon, was all that I could discern. In
vain I extended my researches along the beach; the mast we had thrown overboard, with tangled
cordage, and remnants of a sail, was the sole relic land received of our wreck. Sometimes I stood still,
and wrung my hands. I accused earth and sky -the universal machine and the Almighty power that
misdirected it. Again I threw myself on the sands, and then the sighing wind, mimicking a human cry,
roused me to bitter, fallacious hope. Assuredly if any little bark or smallest canoe had been near, I
should have sought the savage plains of ocean, found the dear remains of my lost ones, and clinging
round them, have shared their grave. The day passed thus; each moment contained eternity; although when hour after hour had gone by, I
wondered at the quick flight of time. Yet even now I had not drunk the bitter potion to the dregs; I
was not yet persuaded of my loss; I did not yet feel in every pulsation, in every nerve, in every
thought, that I remained alone of my race,-that I was the LAST MAN. The day had clouded over, and a drizzling rain set in at sunset. Even the eternal skies weep, I thought;
is there any shame then, that mortal man should spend himself in tears? I remembered the ancient
fables, in which human beings are described as dissolving away through weeping into ever-gushing
fountains. Ah! that so it were; and then my destiny would be in some sort akin to the watery death of
Adrian and Clara. Oh! grief is fantastic; it weaves a web on which to trace the history of its woe from
every form and change around; it incorporates itself with all living nature; it finds sustenance in every
object; as light, it fills all things, and, like light, it gives its own colours to all.