She continued for some minutes in this attitude, and with her heart
devoutly raised to heaven; till every feeling yielded to resignation,
and she arose calm, if not contented; when, on turning round, she saw
Glenmurray leaning against the door, and gazing on her. 'Sweet enthusiast!' cried he smiling: 'so, thus, when you are
distressed, you seek consolation.' 'I do,' she replied: 'Sceptic, wouldst thou wish to deprive me of it?' 'No, by heaven!' warmly exclaimed Glenmurray; and the evening passed
more cheerfully than usual. The next post brought a letter, not from Dr. Norberry, but from his
wife; it was as follows, and contained three pound-notes:--

     'Mrs Norberry's compliments to Miss Mowbray, having opened her
     letter, poor Dr Norberry being dangerously ill of a fever, find
     her distress; of which shall not inform the doctor, as he feels
     so much for his friend's misfortunes, specially when brought on
     by misconduct. But, out of respect for your mother, who is a
     good sort of woman, though rather particular, as all learned
     ladies are, have sent three pound-notes; the Miss Norberrys
     giving one a-piece, not to lend, but a gift, and they join Mrs
     Norberry in hoping Miss Mowbray will soon see the error of her
     ways; and, if so be, no doubt Dr Norberry will use his interest
     to get her into the Magdalen.' This curious epistle would have excited in Glenmurray and Adeline no
other feelings save those of contempt, but for the information it
contained of the doctor's being dangerously ill; and, in fear for the
worthy husband, they forgot the impertinence of the wife and daughters. The next day, fortunately, Mr Berrendale arrived, and with him the three
hundred pounds. Consequently, all Glenmurray's debts were discharged,
better lodgings procured, and the three pound-notes returned in a blank
cover to Mrs Norberry. Charles Berrendale was first-cousin to
Glenmurray, and so like him in face, that they were, at first, mistaken
for brothers: but to a physiognomist they must always have been unlike;
as Glenmurray was remarkable for the character and expression of his
countenance, and Berrendale for the extreme beauty of his features and
complexion. Glenmurray was pale and thin, and his eyes and hair dark. Berrendale's eyes were of a light blue; and though his eye-lashes were
black, his hair was of a rich auburn; Glenmurray was thin and muscular;
Berrendale, round and corpulent: still they were alike; and it was not
ill observed of them, that Berrendale was Glenmurray in good health. But Berrendale could not be flattered by the resemblance, as his face
and person were so truly what is called handsome, that, partial as our
sex is said to be to beauty, any woman would have been excused for
falling in love with him. Whether his mind was equal to his person we
shall show hereafter. The meeting between Berrendale and Glenmurray was affectionate on both
sides; but Berrendale could scarcely hide the pain he felt on seeing
the situation of Glenmurray, whose virtues he had always loved, whose
talents he had always respected, and to whose active friendship towards
himself he owed eternal gratitude. But he soon learnt to think Glenmurray, in one respect, an object of
envy, when he beheld the constant, skilful, and tender attentions of
his nurse, and saw in that nurse every gift of heart, mind, and person,
which could make a woman amiable. Berrendale had heard that his eccentric cousin was living with a girl as
odd as himself; who thought herself a genius, and pretended to universal
knowledge; great then was his astonishment to find this imagined pedant,
and pretender, not only an adept in every useful and feminine pursuit,
but modest in her demeanour, and gentle in her manners: little did he
expect to see her capable of serving the table of Glenmurray with dishes
made by herself, not only tempting to the now craving appetite of the
invalid but to the palate of an epicure,--while all his wants were
anticipated by her anxious attention, and many of the sufferings of
sickness alleviated by her inventive care. Adeline, meanwhile, was agreeably surprised to see the good effect
produced on Glenmurray's spirits, and even his health, by the arrival of
his cousin; and her manner became even affectionate to Berrendale, from
gratitude for the change which his presence seemed to have occasioned. Adeline had now a companion in her occasional walks;--Glenmurray
insisted on her walking, and insisted on Berrendale's accompanying
her. In these tête-à-têtes Adeline unburthened her heart, by telling
Berrendale of the agony she felt at the idea of losing Glenmurray; and
while drowned in tears she leaned on his arm, she unconsciously suffered
him to press the hand that leaned against him; nor would she have felt
it a freedom to be reproved, had she been conscious that he did so. But
these trifling indulgences were fuel to the flame that she had kindled
in the heart of Berrendale; a flame which he saw no guilt in indulging,
as he looked on Glenmurray's death as certain, and Adeline would then be
free. But though Adeline was perfectly unconscious of his attachment,
Glenmurray had seen it even before Berrendale himself discovered it; and
he only waited a favourable opportunity to make the discovery known to
the parties. All he had as yet ventured to say was, 'Charles, my Adeline
is an excellent nurse!--You would like such as one during your fits of
the gout;' and Berrendale had blushed deeply while he assented to
Glenmurray's remarks, because he was conscious that, while enumerating
Adeline's perfections, he had figured her to himself warming his
flannels, and leaning tenderly over his gouty couch. One day, while Adeline was reading to Glenmurray, and Berrendale was
attending not to what she read, but to the beauty of her mouth while
reading, the nurse came in, and said that 'a mulatto woman wished to
speak to Miss Mowbray.' 'Show her up,' immediately cried Glenmurray; 'and if her little boy is
with her, let him come too.' In vain did Adeline expostulate--Glenmurray wished to enjoy the
mulatto's expressions of gratitude; and, in spite of all she could say,
the mother and child were introduced. 'So!' cried the mulatto, (whose looks were so improved that Adeline
scarcely knew her again,) 'So! me find you at last; and, please God! we
not soon part more.' As she said this, she pressed the hem of Adeline's
gown to her lips with fervent emotion. 'Not part from her again!' cried Glenmurray, 'What do you mean, my good
woman?' 'Oh! when she gave tree guinea for me, me tought she mus be rich lady,
but now dey say she be poor, and me mus work for her.' 'And who told you I was poor?' 'Dat cross man where you live once--he say you could not pay him, and
you go away--and he tell me that your love be ill; and me so sorry, yet
so glad! for my love be well aden, and he have good employ; and now
I can come and serve you, and nurse dis poor gentleman, and all for
nothing but my meat and drink; and I know dat great fat nurse have gold
wages, and eat and drink fat beside,--I knowd her well.' All this was uttered with volubility, and in a tone between laughing and
crying. 'Well, Adeline,' said Glenmurray when she had ended, 'you did not throw
away your kindness on an unworthy and ungrateful object; so I am quite
reconciled to the loss of the pine-apple; and I will tell your honest
friend here the story,--to show her, as she has a tender heart herself,
the greatness of the sacrifice you made for her sake.' Adeline begged him to desist; but he went on; and the mulatto could not
keep herself quiet on the chair while he related the circumstance. 'And did she do dat to save me?' she passionately exclaimed: 'Angel
woman! I should have let poor man go to prison, before disappoint my
William!' 'And did you forgive her immediately?' said Berrendale. 'Yes, certainly.' 'Well, that was heroic too,' returned he. 'And no one but Glenmurray would have been so heroic, I believe,' said
Adeline. 'But, lady, you break my heart,' cried the mulatto, 'if you not take
my service. Mr William and me, too poor to live togedder of some year
perhaps. Here, child, tawny boy, down on knees, and vow wid me to be
faithful and grateful to this our mistress, till our last day; and
never to forsake her in sickness or in sorrow! I swear dis to my great
God:--and now say dat after me.' She then clasped the little boy's
hands, bade him raise his eyes to heaven, and made him repeat what she
had said, ending it with 'I swear dis, to my great God.' There was such an affecting solemnity in this action, and in the mulatto
such a determined enthusiasm of manner incapable of being controlled,
that Adeline, Glenmurray, and Berrendale observed what passed in
respectful silence: and when it was over, Glenmurray said, in a voice of
emotion, 'I think, Adeline, we must accept this good creature's offer;
and as nurse grows lazy and saucy, we had better part with her: and as
for your young knight there,' (the tawny boy had by this time nestled
himself close to Adeline, who, with no small emotion, was playing with
his woolly curls,) 'we must send him to school; for, my good woman, we
are not so poor as you imagine.' 'God be thanked!' cried the mulatto. 'But what is your name?' 'I was christened Savanna,' replied she. 'Then, good Savanna,' cried Adeline, 'I hope we shall both have reason
to bless the day when first we met; and to-morrow you shall come home to
us.' Savanna, on hearing this, almost screamed with joy, and as she took
her leave Berrendale slipped a guinea into her hand: the tawny boy
meanwhile slowly followed his mother, as if unwilling to leave Adeline,
even though she gave him halfpence to spend in cakes: but on being told
that she would let him come again the next day, he tripped gaily down
after Savanna. The quiet of the chamber being then restored, Glenmurray fell into a
calm slumber. Adeline took up her work; and Berrendale, pretending
to read, continued to feed his passion by gazing on the unconscious
Adeline. While they were thus engaged, Glenmurray, unobserved, awoke; and he soon
guessed how Berrendale's eyes were employed, as the book which he held
in his hand was upside down; and through the fingers of the hand which
he held before his face, he saw his looks fixed on Adeline. The moment was a favourable one for Glenmurray's purpose: and just as he
raised himself from his pillow, Adeline had discovered the earnest gaze
of Berrendale; and a suspicion of the truth that instant darting across
her mind, disconcerted and blushing, she had cast her eyes on the
ground. 'That is an interesting study which you are engaged in, Charles,' cried
Glenmurray smiling. Berrendale started; and, deeply blushing, faltered out, 'Yes.' Adeline looked at Glenmurray, and seeing a very arch and meaning
expression on his countenance, suspected that he had made the same
discovery as herself: yet, if so, she wondered at his looking so
pleasantly on Berrendale as he spoke. 'It is a book, Charles,' continued Glenmurray, 'which the more you study
the more you will admire; and I wish to give you a clue to understand
some passages in it better than you can now do.' This speech deceived Adeline, and made her suppose that Glenmurray
really alluded to the book which lay before Berrendale: but it convinced
_him_ that Glenmurray spoke metaphorically; and as his manner was kind,
it also made him think that he saw and did not disapprove his
attachment. For a few minutes, each of them being engrossed in different
contemplations, there was a complete silence; but Glenmurray interrupted
it by saying, 'My dear Adeline, it is your hour for walking; but, as
I am not disposed to sleep again, will you forgive me if I keep your
walking companion to myself to-day?--I wish to converse with him alone.' 'Oh! most cheerfully,' she replied with quickness: 'you know I love a
solitary ramble of all things.' 'Not very flattering that to my cousin,' observed Glenmurray. 'I did not wish to flatter him,' said Adeline gravely; and Berrendale,
fluttered at the idea of the coming conversation with Glenmurray, and
mortified by Adeline's words and manner, turned to the window to conceal
his emotion. Adeline, then, with more than usual tenderness, conjured Glenmurray not
to talk too much, nor do anything to destroy the hopes on which her only
chance of happiness depended, viz. the now possible chance of his
recovery, and then set out for her walk; while, with a restraint and
coldness which she could not conquer, she bade Berrendale farewell for
the present. The walk was long, and her thoughts perturbed:--'What could Glenmurray
want to say to Mr Berrendale?' --'Why did Mr Berrendale sit with his eyes
so intently and clandestinely, as it were, fixed on me?' were thoughts
perpetually recurring to her: and half impatient, and half reluctant,
she at length returned to her lodgings. When she entered the apartment, she saw signs of great emotion in the
countenance of both the gentlemen; and in Berrendale's eyes the traces
of recent tears. The tone of Glenmurray's voice too, when he addressed
her, was even more tender than usual, and Berrendale's attentions more
marked, yet more respectful; and Adeline observed that Glenmurray was
unusually thoughtful and absent, and that the cough and other symptoms
of his complaint were more troublesome than ever. 'I see you have exerted yourself and talked too much during my absence,'
cried Adeline, 'and I will never leave you again for so long a time.' 'You never shall,' said Glenmurray. 'I must leave _you_ for so long a
time at last, that I will be blessed with the sight of you as long as I
can.' Adeline whose hopes had been considerably revived during the last few
days, looked mournfully and reproachfully in his face as he uttered
these words. 'It is even so, my dearest girl,' continued Glenmurray, 'and I say this
to guard you against a melancholy surprise:--I wish to prepare you for
an event which to me seems unavoidable.' 'Prepare me!' exclaimed Adeline wildly. 'Can there be any preparation to
enable one to bear such a calamity? Absurd idea! However, I shall derive
consolation from the severity of the stroke: I feel that I shall not be
able to survive it.' So saying, her head fell on Glenmurray's pillow;
and for some time, her sorrow almost suspended the consciousness of
suffering. From this state she was aroused by Glenmurray's being attacked with a
violent paroxysm of his complaint, and all selfish distress was lost in
the consciousness of his sufferings: again he struggled through, and
seemed so relieved by the effort, that again Adeline's hopes revived;
and she could scarcely return, with temper, Berrendale's 'good night,'
when Glenmurray expressed a wish to rest, because his spirits had not
risen in any proportion to hers. The nurse had been dismissed that afternoon; and Adeline, as Savanna
was not to come home till the next morning, was to sit up alone with
Glenmurray that night; and, contrary to his usual custom, he did not
insist that she should have a companion. For a few hours his exhausted frame was recruited by a sleep more than
usually quiet, and but for a few hours only. He then became restless,
and so wakeful and disturbed, that he professed to Adeline an utter
inability to sleep, and therefore he wished to pass the rest of the
night in serious conversation with her. Adeline, alarmed at this intention, conjured him not to irritate his
complaint by so dangerous an exertion. 'My mind will irritate it more,' replied he, 'if I refrain from it; for
it is burthened, my Adeline, and it longs to throw off its burthen. Now,
then, ere my senses wander, hear what I wish to communicate to you, and
interrupt me as little as possible.' Adeline, oppressed and awed beyond measure at the unusual solemnity of
his manner, made no answer; but, leaning her cheek on his hand, awaited
his communication in silence. 'I think,' said Glenmurray, 'I shall begin with telling you Berrendale's
history; it is proper that you should know all that concerns him.' Adeline raising her head, replied hastily,--'Not to satisfy any
curiosity of mine; for I feel none, I assure you.' 'Well, then,' returned Glenmurray, sighing, 'to please me, be
it.--Berrendale is the son of my mother's sister, by a merchant of
the neighbourhood of the 'Change, who hurt the family pride so much by
marrying a tradesman, that I am the only one of the clan who has noticed
her since. He ran away, about four years ago, with the only child of a
rich West Indian from a boarding-school. The consequence was, that her
father renounced her; but, when, three years ago, she died in giving
birth to a son, the unhappy parent repented of his displeasure, and
offered to allow Berrendale, who from the bankruptcy and sudden death
of both his parents had been left destitute, an annuity of 300_l._ for
life, provided he would send the child over to Jamaica, and allow him to
have all the care of his education. To this Berrendale consented.' 'Reluctantly, I hope,' said Adeline, 'and merely out of pity for the
feelings of the childless father.' 'I hope so too,' continued Glenmurray; 'for I do not think the chance of
inheriting all his grandfather's property a sufficient reason to lead
him to give up to another, and in a foreign land too, the society and
education of his child: but, whatever were his reasons, Berrendale
acceded to the request, and the infant was sent to Jamaica; and ever
since the 300_l._ has been regularly remitted to him: besides that, he
has recovered two thousand and odd hundred pounds from the wreck of his
father's property; and with economy, and had he a good wife to manage
his affairs for him, Berrendale might live very comfortably.' 'My dear Glenmurray,' cried Adeline impatiently, 'what is this to
me? and why do you weary yourself to tell me particulars so little
interesting to me?' Glenmurray bade her have patience, and continued thus: 'And now,
Adeline,' (here his voice evidently faltered,) 'I must open my whole
heart to you, and confess that the idea of leaving you friendless,
unprotected, and poor, your reputation injured, and your peace of mind
destroyed, is more than I am able to bear, and will give me, in my last
moments, the torments of the damned.' Here a violent burst of tears
interrupted him; and Adeline, overcome with emotion and surprise at the
sight of the agitation which his own sufferings could never occasion in
him, hung over him in speechless woe. 'Besides,' continued Glenmurray, recovering himself a little, 'I--O
Adeline!' seizing her cold hand, 'can you forgive me for having been the
means of blasting all your fair fame and prospects in life?' 'For the sake of justice, if not of mercy,' exclaimed Adeline, 'forbear
thus cruelly to accuse yourself. You know that from my own free,
unbiassed choice I gave myself to you, and in compliance with my own
principles.' 'But who taught you those principles?--who led you to a train of
reasoning, so alluring in theory, so pernicious in practice? Had not
I, with the heedless vanity of youth, given to the world the crude
conceptions of four-and-twenty, you might at this moment have been the
idol of a respectable society; and I, equally respected, have been the
husband of your heart; while happiness would perhaps have kept the fatal
disease at bay, of which anxiety has facilitated the approach.' He was going on: but Adeline, who had till now struggled successfully
with her feelings, wound up almost to phrensy at the possibility that
anxiety had shortened Glenmurray's life, gave way to a violent paroxysm
of sorrow, which, for a while, deprived her of consciousness; and when
she recovered she found Berrendale bending over her, while her head lay
on Glenmurray's pillow. The sight of Berrendale in a moment roused her to exertion:--his look
was so full of anxious tenderness, and she was at that moment so ill
disposed to regard it with complacency, that she eagerly declared she
was quite recovered, and begged Mr Berrendale would return to bed; and
Glenmurray seconding her request, with a deep sigh he departed. 'Poor fellow!' said Glenmurray, 'I wish you had seen his anxiety during
your illness!' 'I am glad I did _not_,' replied Adeline: 'but how can you persist in
talking to me of any other person's anxiety, when I am tortured with
yours? Your conversation of to-night has made me even more miserable
than I was before. By what strange fatality do you blame yourself for
the conduct worthy of admiration?--for giving to the world, as soon as
produced, opinions which were calculated to enlighten it?' 'But,' replied Glenmurray, 'as those opinions militated against the
experience and custom of ages, ought I not to have paused before I
published, and kept them back till they had received the sanction of my
maturer judgment?' 'And does your maturer judgment condemn them?' 'Four years cannot have added much to the maturity of my judgment,'
replied Glenmurray: 'but I will own that some of my opinions are changed;
and that, though I believe those which are unchanged are right in
theory, I think, as the mass of society could never _at once_ adopt
them, they had better remain unacted upon, than that a few lonely
individuals should expose themselves to certain distress, by making them
the rules of their conduct. You, for instance, you, my Adeline, what
misery--!' Here his voice again faltered, and emotion impeded his
utterance. 'Live--do but live,' exclaimed Adeline passionately, 'and I can know of
misery but the name.' 'But I cannot live, I cannot live,' replied Glenmurray, 'and the sooner
I die the better;--for thus to waste your youth and health in the
dreadful solitude of a sick-room is insupportable to me.' 'O Glenmurray!' replied Adeline, fondly throwing herself on his neck,
'could you but live free from any violent pain, and were neither you nor
I ever to leave this room again, believe me, I should not have a wish
beyond it. To see you, to hear you, to prove to you how much I love you,
would, indeed it would, be happiness sufficient for me!' After this burst
of true and heartfelt tenderness, there was a pause of some moments:
Glenmurray felt too much to speak, and Adeline was sobbing on his
pillow. At length she pathetically again exclaimed, 'Live! only live! and I am blest!' 'But I _cannot_ live, I _cannot_ live,' again replied Glenmurray; 'and
when I die, what will become of you?' 'I care not,' cried Adeline: 'if I lose you, may the same grave receive
us!' 'But it _will_ not, my dearest:--grief does not kill; and, entailed as
my estate is, I have nothing to leave you: and though richly qualified
to undertake the care of children, in order to maintain yourself, your
unfortunate connexion, and singular opinions, will be an eternal bar to
your being so employed. O Adeline! these cutting fears, these dreadful
reflections, are indeed the bitterness of death: but there is one way of
alleviating my pangs.' 'Name it,' replied Adeline with quickness. 'But you must promise then to hear me with patience.--Had I been able to
live through my illness, I should have conjured you to let me endeavour
to restore you to your place in society, and consequently to your
usefulness, by making you my wife: and young, and I may add innocent and
virtuous, as you are, I doubt not but the world would at length have
received you into its favour again.' 'But you must, you will, you shall live,' interrupted Adeline, 'and I
shall be your happy wife.' 'Not _mine_' replied Glenmurray, laying an emphasis on the last word. Adeline started, and, fixing her eyes wildly on his, demanded what he
meant. 'I mean,' replied he, 'to prevail on you to make my last moments happy,
by promising, some time hence, to give yourself a tender, a respectable,
and a legal protector.' 'O Glenmurray!' exclaimed Adeline, 'and can you insult my tenderness for
you with such a proposal? If I can even survive you, do you think that I
can bear to give you a successor in my affection? or, how can you bear
to imagine that I shall?' 'Because my love for you is without selfishness, and I wish you to be
happy even though another makes you so. The lover, or the husband, who
wishes the woman of his affection to form no second attachment, is, in
my opinion, a selfish, contemptible being. Perhaps I do not expect that
you will ever feel, for another man, an attachment like that which has
subsisted between us--the first affection of young and impassioned
hearts; but I am sure that you may again feel love enough to make
yourself and the man of your choice perfectly happy; and I hope and
trust that you will be so.' 'And forget you, I suppose?' interrupted Adeline reproachfully. 'Not so: I would have you remember me always, but with a chastized and
even a pleasing sorrow; nay, I would wish you to imagine me a sort of
guardian spirit watching your actions and enjoying your happiness.' 'I have _listened_ to you,' cried Adeline in a tone of suppressed
anguish, 'and, I trust, with tolerable patience: there is one thing yet
for me to learn--the name of the object whom you wish me to marry, for I
suppose _he_ is found.' 'He is,' returned Glenmurray, 'Berrendale loves you; and he it is whom I
wish you to choose.' 'I thought so,' exclaimed Adeline, rising and traversing the room
hastily, and wringing her hands. 'But wherefore does his name,' said Glenmurray, 'excite such angry
emotion? Perhaps self-love makes me recommend him,' continued he,
forcing a smile, 'as he is reckoned like me, and I thought that likeness
might make him more agreeable to you.' 'Only the more odious,' impatiently interrupted Adeline. 'To look like
you, and not _be_ you, Oh! insupportable idea!' she exclaimed, throwing
herself on Glenmurray's pillow, and pressing his burning temples to her
cold cheek. 'Adeline,' said Glenmurray solemnly, 'this is, perhaps, the last moment
of confidential and uninterrupted intercourse that we shall ever have
together;' Adeline started, but spoke not; 'allow me, therefore, to
tell you it is my _dying request_, that you would endeavour to dispose
your mind in favour of Berrendale, and to become in time his wife. Circumstanced as you are, your only chance for happiness is becoming a
wife: but it is too certain that few men worthy of you, in the most
essential points, will be likely to marry you after your connexion with
me.' 'Strange prejudice!' cried Adeline, 'to consider as my disgrace, what I
deem my glory!' Glenmurray continued thus: 'Berrendale himself has a great deal of the
old school about him, but I have convinced him that you are not to be
classed with the frail of your sex; and that you are one of the purest
as well as loveliest of human beings.' 'And did he want to be convinced of this?' cried Adeline indignantly;
'and _yet_ you advise me to marry him?' 'My dearest love,' replied Glenmurray, 'in all cases the most we can
expect is, to choose the best _possible_ means of happiness. Berrendale
is not perfect; but I am convinced that you would commit a fatal error
in not making him your husband; and when I tell you it is my _dying
request_ that you should do so--'

'If you wish me to retain my senses,' exclaimed Adeline, 'repeat that
dreadful phrase no more.' 'I will not say any more at all now,' faintly observed Glenmurray, 'for
I am exhausted:--still, as morning begins to dawn, I should like to sit
up in my bed and gaze on it, perhaps for--' Here Adeline put her hand to
his mouth: Glenmurray kissed it, sighed, and did not finish the sentence. She then opened the shutters to let in the rising splendour of day, and,
turning round towards Glenmurray, almost shrieked with terror at seeing
the visible alteration a night had made in his appearance; while the
yellow rays of the dawn played on his sallow cheek, and his dark curls,
once crisped and glossy, hung faint and moist on his beating temples. 'It is strange, Adeline,' said Glenmurray (but with great effort),
'that, even in my situation, the sight of morning, and the revival as it
were of nature, seems to invigorate my whole frame. I long to breathe
the freshness of its breeze also.' Adeline, conscious for the first time that all hope was over, opened the
window, and felt even her sick soul and languid frame revived by the
chill but refreshing breeze. To Glenmurray it imparted a feeling of
physical pleasure, to which he had long been a stranger: 'I breathe
freely,' he exclaimed, 'I feel alive again!' --and, strange as it may
seem, Adeline's hopes began to revive also.--'I feel as if I could sleep
now,' said Glenmurray, 'the feverish restlessness seems abated; but,
lest my dreams be disturbed, promise me, ere I lie down again, that you
will behave kindly to Berrendale.' 'Impossible! The only tie that bound me to him is broken:--I thought
he sincerely sympathized with me in my wishes for your recovery; but
now that, as he loves me, his wishes must be in direct opposition to
mine,--I cannot, indeed I cannot, endure the sight of him.'