The plan adopted by Mrs. Kennedy was highly relished by the whole society: the
Rector gave his now unreluctant consent; and Mrs. Kennedy's tasteful talents were
immediately put in requisition: the decorations and the whole style of the entertainment
were to be under her direction; and she was engaged every evening and morning in
penning sonnets and hand-bills to accord with each different character, and which shewed
how prolific were her ideas and how versatile her talents. A combination and a form indeed! Where every god did seem to set his seal,
To give the world assurance of a man. SHAKESPEARE. She thrice essay'd to speak; her accents hung,
And, fault'ring, dy'd unfinished' on her tongue,
Or vanish'd into sighs. DRYDEN. ON the day appointed in the following week, Mary Marsham, in the habit of a
flower-girl, and Margaret as an Arcadian shepherdess, attended by their father and uncle,
repaired to the parsonage, in order to be present at the fancy-ball given as a farewell f�te
to all his genteel parishioners by the Honourable and Reverend Theodore Leslie. Mr.
Rouveau and Mrs. Edmonds, on this occasion, received cards of invitation; but being
gone to London on business, it was unknown whether that was really the cause of their
absence, or whether, not having been invited to any of the Rector's private parties, or
their own dwelling never having been honoured by a visit from Lady Caroline, they
scorned to accept this public desire of filling up and adding variety to the motley group. Mrs. Susanna Bradbury, however, to please her dear niece, Lady Ringwood,
resumed all the graceful ease, good-nature, and politeness she had hitherto shewn in the
Rector's elegant parties, and with a cordiality and pleasantry, as if she had never been
neglected, made her appearance again at the parsonage. Sir Edward Harrington, not to appear fastidious, or too immediately to give up his
connexion with this family after the departure of his nephew, accepted the invitation, and
with that usual affability which made him a welcome guest wherever he appeared, arrived
at the rectory the preceding evening, after dispatching a letter to his dear nephew, who
was detained at Ramsgate with his regiment, waiting, not only for a fair wind, but for a
fresh embarkation of troops before they sailed. The Rector and his Curate departed not from their professional character, but
attended merely as lookers-on at this elegant and unique species of entertainment. Lady
Caroline Leslie appeared as the Goddess of Chance, with a dice-box in one hand, which
she shook, as a challenge to all those who chose to inlist under her standard; while she
waved a flag gracefully with the other hand towards a door, which opened into a cardroom
brilliantly lighted up and filled with tables for cards and other games of hazard. The
flag her ladyship held, which was painted on India silk by the ingenious Mrs. Kennedy,
displayed, on a rose-coloured ground, a scattered pack of cards, and at each corner bags
overflowing with guineas, with this motto:-"He who fears to venture, must never hope
to gain." Her ladyship, however, gained but few volunteers. Lady Isabella appeared in the dress of a pilgrim; Sir Charles Sefton as a Turk, in a
very splendid habit, and looked uncommonly well; Major Raymond a friar. Sir Edward Harrington, who was in the masquerade secret, being no dancer,
declined appearing in any fancy dress till after the dancing began: Mrs. Kennedy looked
characteristic as a Norwood gipsey; and Lady Wringham, as the renowned Queen of
Egypt, made a very comely and very richly dressed Cleopatra, but she moved alone, and
told the Rector she thought he might as well dress himself and appear as her Tantony. Mrs. Susanna Bradbury looked and performed the character of the Virgin-Queen
Elizabeth, to admiration; the only fault that was found with her appearance was, that she
looked much too handsome for this female glory of Great Britain. Lucy Ringwood, as a
novice of St. Dominick, looked most bewitching and lovely: she took up the Rector's sole
attention till the arrival of a minstrel in the evening, who never quitted her till the hour of
supper, when he refused to unmask, and left the brilliant party wondering who he was. The guests who were expected from London, and my lady's quality friends in the
country, in the environs of Eglantine, were all previously told to come disguised and in
masks. With well-feigned astonishment, Lady Isabella beheld the servants bringing in a
large deal packing-case, addressed "to the Right Honourable Lady Caroline Leslie, to be
opened in the presence of herself and party assembled for the fancy-ball." The servants
were then ordered to open it, and on the top lay the following note, which Lady Caroline
read aloud. "My dear Caroline,
"As you did me the favour of inviting me to your fancy-ball, 'know, by
these presents,' that I will most certainly accept the invitation, and I shall bring with me a
party of friends at eleven o'clock, so completely disguised, that it will puzzle all your
wise heads put together, to find us out; I must therefore beg your party to wear what I
have sent; for I see no wit or spirit in a fancy-ball, unless the face is covered. Love to
Isabel and your reverend husband. "Your's, affectionately,
"SOPHIA LESLIE." "From the Marchioness, I declare," said Lady Caroline, while Lady Isabella and
the party thronging round her, were examining the masks. "What must we do?" added
Lady Caroline, turning to her husband. "Do," repeated he, "why, of course, the dancers
must wear them: not that I much approve of it; but now there is no alternative; it is too
late to answer her ladyship's letter; besides, if we did not act as she requests, it might
cause offence, which we must be very careful of giving there; and it would look also just
as if we did not wish her or her party to come; which would infallibly ruin us with the
Marquis, for he does so doat on his wife." Now it was well known to most of the company, and to the world in general, that
though the Marquis did so doat on his wife,* that he kept a mistress, in great splendour,
and who absolutely governed his lordship with the most arbitrary and despotic sway; and
that, to give five hundred guineas for a pair of bracelets* to encircle the wrists of this
Sultana, was thought by him a mere trifle. *Historique. "I could wish, sir," said Edward Marsham, "if you will pardon me, that my girls
should-" "My dear fellow," said Mr. Leslie, quickly interrupting him, "do not be uneasy,
it is a mere frolic of the Marchioness of Leslie: it is only for an hour or two, every one
will unmask at supper, and then we shall all laugh at each other; neither you nor I, my
dear friend, will cover our faces at all: it is only the dancers and the young folks; come,
come; mirth and good humour are the order of the evening." No one, after this, could be fastidious enough to make an objection to what
appeared so reasonable: Lady Wringham alone, who had been highly complimented by
the Rector, was long obstinate; and, pouting, she declared it was quite scandalous to hide
people's beauty under such nasty, ugly, painted things! "My dear madam," said Lady
Isabella, "it will only heighten yours; and when you unmask at supper, you will astonish
every one with the wonderful comparison! "-"Comparisments, my lady," she replied,
"are odorous; and I am sure I ar'nt a bit like that red-brown broad face which Lady
Caroline has picked out for me." "Excuse me, Lady Wringham," said Lady Caroline, "now you surely must
recollect that you are personating an Egyptian Queen! and do you think she was as fair as
our unripened beauties of the North?" "Besides," said Sir Charles Sefton, "I think a beautiful woman should always wear
an ugly mask; it gains her so many admirers the moment she unmasks, that the effect is
rendered irresistible in the bosoms of all those who regard her." "Well, well, give us hold
of the mask," said the polite lady, "I'll e'en put it on." And immediately Lady Isabella,
with playful freedom, said, "Now, I must insist on all you men-creatures quitting the
room; for as this is so hung round with pier-glasses, it will be a better place for us to put
on our masks, than to be running up stairs to our different dressing-rooms. "-"Well, I do
declare, you are so funny, Lady Isabella," said Lady Wringham; but never mind, I has got
on mine." "Well, then," said Lady Caroline, after receiving a look from her sister, "Come up
stairs with me; and let us leave the girls to do as they please." Lady Caroline little thought
of the regret she was preparing for herself and her noble and reverend partner, by thus
attending to those expressive looks of her sister, which she always so well understood. Lady Isabella now having got rid of all whom she feared, and making the doors
secure, prepared for a change of disguise with Margaret. "I wish you were a little taller,"
said she, "but the dress I am in has been made so wide and full, that it will fit you, and the
little difference of our height will not be perceived in the breadth of our figures: imitate
my manner, my sweet girl, as much as possible, as I will yours, and it will cause fine
diversion." Margaret was very willing to come into this scheme, which promised so much
amusement; and retiring into a recess, they quickly changed habits, unperceived by the
rest of the female party, who were all occupied in choosing their masks. In the mean time, Lady Isabella had caused the friar, Major Raymond, to change
dresses with the Turk, Sir Charles Sefton; who, not having the smallest suspicion of what
was going forward, or, indeed, that she now loved any one upon earth but his own dear
self, readily came into the plot, as it would facilitate his elopement with Margaret; whom,
as her ladyship in the pilgrim's disguise, he could very well pay unremitted attention to;
and as a few days was all he wished for to carry on his iniquitous commerce with the


unhappy victim of his libertinism, he rejoiced in the scheme of Lady Isabella, who
laughed inwardly at the success of her plans. Proud of her confidence, he retired with Major Raymond to a summer-house at
the bottom of the garden, where they mutually exchanged their disguises, after the Major
had made some strong objections, as had been before preconcerted between him and her
ladyship. And now all the wit and small-talk of a masquerade enlivened the present gay
assembly, which soon became crowded with masks in various characters: the transformed
Raymond, from a friar to a Turk, took particular notice of the pretty shepherdess; while
the Friar Sefton was very busy in extorting confession from the female pilgrim, to whom,
when he declared he knew her, notwithstanding her disguise, he imparted in private the
metamorphosis he had undergone. Lady Isabella confided also to her brother and sister
the change she had made with Margaret; but took special care not to mention that which
she had effected between her lovers; and thus they exulted in the unremitting attention
paid to her by the well-made Sultan of the East. Just before supper, entered two new characters in masks, whom none of the party
were able to recognize, either by voice, figure, or manners: he, who seemed the youngest,
was possessed of a fine and elegant form, which appeared to every advantage in the dress
of a German hussar; the other was in that of a Highland chief, with a pair of boots of a
very foreign make, with enormous long gold spurs: he strutted about in these boots, and
afforded much diversion*; boasting that they were the boots and spurs of General Le
Febvre, taken prisoner by the English in the last winter's Spanish campaign. The Hussar,
with a badinage which was pointedly half serious, expressed with all the native high
sense of pride peculiar to his country, his indignation at the idea of wearing* another
man's boots! The Chieftian, however, whether to render the action absurd, or actually
making a boast of these leathern achievements, vauntingly told all the company that they
were really and bona fide General Le Febvre's boots which then covered his legs. At
length a warm dispute took place at the side-board, between the Highland Chief and the
German Officer, over two or three tumblers of champaign, about which regiment it was
that took the French general prisoner! The Highlander positively declared he was taken by
the Prince's regiment, while the Hussar contended, and indeed with unquestionable
veracity, by all those who saw the action, that it was a * private hussar belonging to the
King's German Legion, who first took him, and turned him over to the care of another
soldier belonging to a different regiment, while he continued his services in the field of
combat. The contest grew so warm, that the Chief challenged the Hussar immediately to
retire and settle it in that way conformable to the laws of honour. In vain the party
interposed; the indignant officers haughtily bade good-night to the gay assembly, who,
with all the indifference of fashion, continued their amusement; except that part of the
company whose feelings and principles were not extinguished by the fatal contagion of
the goddess Dissipation, who builds her temple close by that of Vice. A faint sickness, which she could not account for, came over the feeling and
compassionate Mary; in vain she endeavoured to persuade herself that it was only
*Historique. *Historique. common humanity for a fellow-creature; why then did she not feel equally as keenly
awake to the safety of the Highland Chief? No, a nearer and more lively interest seemed
kindling in her bosom towards his companion: she shuddered at, and severely condemned
the inconstancy of her nature, which made her, in the intoxicating pleasures of that
evening, forget that such a being as Frederic Harrington existed; and now, when she did
think of him, it was only to draw a comparison to his disadvantage, with the
accomplished stranger. The Hussar Officer had attended to no female but her during the whole time he
remained there; and those attentions were pointed and unremitting: the polished elegance
of his manners, his fine martial form, his interesting foreign accent, which rather
embellished the graces of his speech than destroyed them, made an impression on Mary,
which, whatever soft sentiment she might have before felt for Harrington, seemed new to
her bosom and more delightful. Lady Caroline observing, as she seated herself in a retired seat, the evident
perturbation she was in, kindly led her from the company, and gave her some refreshment
in a small anti-room, which appeared to revive her. Mrs. Kennedy joined them: "You
have too much sensibility, my dear girl," said that lady, as she presented her vinaigrette to
Mary; "the gentlemen are only both flushed with champaign, they are convinced of it
themselves, and have only retired from the company, which they knew they were unfit
for: to-morrow, be assured, they will be more cool, and think nothing of it. Pray, do you
know them, that you are so alarmed?"-"Oh! no, madam, I assure you," said Mary, with
that uncommon energy which made the penetrating Mrs. Kennedy rather suspect that she
did: but she added, "Come, come, we are all so happy; do not spoil the mirth and good
order of the evening by such uncommon agitation about strangers; your father is not
present, and your uncle is anxious about you: rally, and recover spirits." "Good heavens!" said Lady Caroline, "why surely, child, the sparring of two men
half intoxicated cannot have affected you in this manner: you say you know nothing of
them, no more do I; and if they choose to take a pop at each other, what is that to you or
me?" Mary felt shocked at the unfeeling manner in which this lady of high fashion
expressed herself; and she felt a renewed detestation of the manners of the age, which had
so depraved a mind, in which she had just before seen, in the kind behaviour shewn to
herself, an instance of the most tender attention and kindness. She re-entered the ballroom;
but its wild and exuberant gaiety now seemed only to give her disgust; she could
not again join in its festivities, but went and seated herself by her uncle. "Where is my
father?" said she to him. "Gone," said Ralph, with a degree of blunt ill-humour, which
shewed he was far from finding himself at home in this chequered midnight scene, "gone,
if possible, to prevent murder!" "Merciful heaven! my dear uncle," said the terrified girl, "explain yourself." "Why, gone to prevent, if he can find them," replied Ralph, "those two gingerbread
dressed, belaced figures, who represented officers, from destroying one another, if
he can." A ray of comfort now darted across the breast of Mary: she found from farther
enquiry, that her father had followed them out; and she knew not the headstrong
obstinacy of impetuous young men of fashion, but judged only from her own feelings,


that her father, in the mild and sweet accents of true religious language, would be able to
speak persuasion and conviction to their minds, how heinous is the sin of committing
deliberate murder, because enduring contradiction, or for differing in opinion. Mary joined no more in the festive amusement of the night: Margaret, under the
persuasive influence of her friar, was so well converted by him, as to consent to elope
with him that very evening: the Turk and his shepherdess had long been missing, but with
that no one troubled themselves; though Ralph had wondered for some time what could
have become of his niece Margaret, whom he brought in his own hand to the parsonage,
habited as a shepherdess: but Margaret was continually hopping about the room, in her
pilgrim's disguise, and imitating Lady Isabella as well as she could, and which passed off
very well with the unsuspecting multitude, who thought only that Lady Isabella was
endeavouring to disguise herself. Now tables, covered with every home and exotic rarity, and that in the most costly
profusion, were elegantly laid out in different rooms; and various parties retired to supper
at various times: Sir Charles Sefton and Lady Isabella Emerson were supposed to be in
one of them: Ralph asked for his other niece, as he led Mary towards a supper-room; but
he was commanded silence by the friar, who told him, he entirely destroyed the effect of
the entertainment; for no one was to take cognizance of another as an acquaintance, till
the whole company unmasked. Ralph, however, saw that the Rector had deceived him
and his brother; for many took no supper, and refused to unmask at all; amongst whom
was the pretended Lady Isabella, who walked with the friar round the tables, watching the
opportunity of escaping, but who stayed enjoying the idea of how well she deceived her
rustic uncle and the rest of the company; her vanity not a little flattered, that she should
be taken for the elegantly formed Isabella. Ralph seated himself beside his now unmasked and lovely flower-girl: the
attending beaux thronged behind the chair of the blushing Mary, all emulous of
administering to her wants at this hour of refreshment. A necromancer, however, who had in the course of the evening told every one
wonders, and the most wonderful intelligence for a fine lady to hear her faults, drove
away the flutterers with his magic wand, and insisted solely on attending upon the
charming Miss Marsham. During supper, though Mary could not feel void of anxiety, nor though her spirits
were not in any degree elevated, yet she experienced a kind of calm tranquillity, and a
gentle and quiet languor succeeded to the agitation she had lately experienced. Suddenly a note was brought, addressed to Sir Edward Harrington; but Sir Edward
Harrington could not be found: another came to her uncle Ralph, and she read, as he held
it to her, the following heart-rending words: "A fatal accident has happened, which
renders it improper for my family to remain any longer at this unfortunate masked-ball:
bring home my girls immediately: find out, if you can, Sir Edward Harrington, and bring
him also with you. EDWARD MARSHAM." The necromancer was at the side-board when the note arrived: as he returned to
the table with a glass of lemonade for Mary, he heard the emphatic enquiry of Ralph-for
God's sake, to tell him, any one that could, which was Sir Edward Harrington; which


intreaty was answered by little else than peals of laughter at his energetic manner. "I am
he," said the necromancer, throwing off his mask, and discovering his benign and
handsome countenance. "God of heaven!" exclaimed he, on perusing his own billet,
while the pallid hue which overspread his visage alarmed even the gayest of the
fashionable throng. "Haste," added he, "dear Mr. Marsham, let us haste to the farm." But
when Ralph turned to lead away Mary, she had fallen, unperceived, in the confusion this
last scene gave rise to, from her seat to the floor, apparently lifeless. Margaret, whose natural affections had not yet deserted her, whose deluded,
though still innocent mind was not yet become that receptacle of depravity which Sir
Charles Sefton and the intriguing Lady Isabella wished it should be, flew to her breathless
sister, pressed her to her warm bosom, and to the general surprise, she sobbing exclaimed,
"Oh! my sister, my sister, my beloved Mary, never, never can I leave you; look up, dear
girl." "Your sister!" said Ralph, as he administered some volatiles to Mary, and which
caused her to open her eyes, "your sister! Do not I see Lady Isabella before me? and yet it
is like the voice of Peggy. "-"No, no, dear uncle," said she, though much vexed at the
detestable name he always called her by, "Lady Isabella and I changed dresses;" and
snatching off her mask, and throwing it from her with a degree of shame and vexation,
she added, "as soon as my sister is able to move, let me accompany you home." Sir Charles bit his lips with rage, cursed the sex in his heart, tore off his mask, and
tossed down a copious bumper of burgundy. And now amazement was painted on the countenances of the Rector and his lady:
they had laughed at the surprise the discovery of Margaret's changed disguise had
excited, and with which change they were acquainted before; but now the fatal
presentiment of what had really happened, flashed conviction on their minds, that Lady
Isabella had eloped with Major Raymond! for it was very long since any one had seen the
shepherdess and the Turk, and they were no where to be found. Lady Isabella's woman was ordered in, that she might be interrogated; but she was
missing also: the lady's valuable jewels were likewise gone. Sir Charles was in a state of disappointed vanity, bordering on distraction; which
the Rector and his lady imagined proceeded from violent affection, and hoped it would be
followed by a resolution to pursue the fugitives: but Sir Charles was resolved on no such
thing; and the next morning, he very politely took his leave of the parsonage, nor troubled
himself any more about Margaret, as she was an object he thought by no means worthy
for him to attempt scaling her windows for, or to take the trouble of pursuing in various
disguises; neither was this swain of St. James's-street at all inclined to those romantic
adventures. Mary, with her uncle, her sister, and Sir Edward Harrington, who preserved a
solemn silence, only broken by agonised sighs, were conveyed home in the Rector's
barouche: the afflicting and strange events of the evening, to which was added a
considerable loss at the gaming-table, to Lady Caroline, entirely destroyed the gaiety of
the scene, and the disappointed parties soon returned to their different homes. Sir Edward and Ralph, on their arrival at the farm-house, immediately followed a
servant up stairs. Mary, led by her sister, went, without scarce knowing where her feet
carried her, to the common parlour; where the first object that presented itself to her sight,


was the Hussar Officer's jacket streaming with blood! Sickening at the sight, she sank,
weeping, on her sister's bosom, who, equally affected at the sanguinary habit, was unable
to afford her any consolation. The poor girls sat in that pitiable situation for a few moments, when they were
joined by their father: taking an hand of each, he said, in a voice almost unintelligible
from sorrow, "Who was so unguarded, my dear ones, as to suffer you to enter this
apartment? Retire to your chamber; these hours of dissipation require repose: and, oh! may this be the last time that my family are seen partakers of such midnight festivals! and
which has proved so fatal to one of fashion's splendid votaries." "Oh! tell us, my dear father," said Mary, "tell us what has happened? something
dreadful, I am sure, to him who wore that habit," added she, pointing to the late glittering
ornaments of the jacket, and which were now obscured by the crimson drops of life. "Prepare your mind, my good girl," said he, "to meet every affliction sent by the
Almighty, with fortitude and firmness! I am not ignorant of the partiality mutually felt by
the nephew of Sir Edward Harrington and you for each other: he informed me of it before
his departure; it was too quick and premature on your part, and impetuous and ill-judged
on his: you are destined to move in an humble sphere; and now, heaven has doomed you
to think no more of him as an inhabitant of this world: oh! my daughter, he who appeared
in that dress, was Mr. Harrington!" "How was that possible, sir?" said Mary; and now she felt that she loved no one
but Frederic, whatever transitory predilection had shot across her heart: she felt shocked
at the state of the Hussar, but she felt convinced in her own mind that her father was
mistaken, as she heard that the expedition was to sail that morning; and she was sure it
would be impossible for him to obtain leave to quit his regiment. "Go," said Edward, "quietly to rest, and to-morrow I will inform you of all: I
hasten to my dying charge! Sir Edward and I will sit up with him the remainder of the
night, and wait the arrival of a surgeon of the first eminence from London, though I am
sure he can do no more for him, since our friend, Mr. Alberry, assures me it is impossible
for him to recover." "Oh! then he yet lives," said Margaret, "and there may be hope." "He lives," said Edward, "but it is scarcely probable he will live out to-morrow;
the wound, dangerous in itself, is rendered yet more so from the apparent impossibility of
extracting the ball. We talk too long; I again repeat my commands, that you both retire to
rest. To-morrow I shall need your assistance, if the amiable young man should be alive;
for I know, my girls, you are both excellent nurses. Go then, and reflect how much it
behoves us to recruit our own strength, that we may exert it in the service of our fellowcreatures,
who require our assistance: offer up the prayers of innocence, that our friend
may bear his anguish patiently, and implore consolation for his afflicted relatives, and
those to whom he was dear, who may survive him." Margaret hung down her head, and
trembled at what she thought the penetrating look of her father, when she felt how artfully
she had been acting, and how little she deserved the appellation of innocent: while Mary,
with an heavy heart, but yet hoping it could not be her Frederic, only a relation of the
Harringtons', who was reckoned extremely like him in person, retired to her chamber, but
was very far from finding there repose; while a conflict of contending thoughts and
sentiments, consisting partly of remorse, partly of disappointment, and once a little


portion of thankfulness that she had been so disappointed, kept Margaret from closing her
eyes, as her aching head sought rest on her pillow. Oh! that men should put an enemy in their mouths,
to steal away their brains! SHAKESPEARE.