I had seen nothing of the world but its most unfavourable
specimens. What can be less amiable, than the broad, rude, unfeeling and insolent debaucheries of a circle of young men, who have just begun to assume the
privileges of man, without having yet learned his engagements and his duties? What can be more ignoble and depraved, than the manners of a court and a
metropolis, especially of such a court and metropolis as those of the last years of Louis XV? My constitutional temper was saturnine and sensitive. This
character of mind had been much heightened in me in my early solitude in Wales,

I came into the world prepared to be a severe and an unsparing judge. For a time I did violence to myself, and mingled in the vices I witnessed. But this had
not the effect of making me less, but more, intolerant. When I came to myself, the spots I observed upon the vesture of my innocence, made me feel a still
deeper loathing for the foul and miry roads through which I had journeyed. It has often been said that there is no sharper Argus or severer judge, than a
superannuated debauchee. I know not how generally this is the case; but it may easily be supposed that there is much truth in the maxim, where the mind was
originally virtuous, and was endowed with a taste vivid and thoroughly alive to the difference of beauty and deformity, whether intellectual or moral. I
loved
and inexpressibly honoured the characters of Ruffigny and my own immediate ancestors; but this

only whetted my disapprobation of the rest of my species. They were so totally unlike every other person with whom I had familiarly associated, that they
struck me like luminaries sent into the world to expose the opacity and disgraces of the rest of its inhabitants. Perhaps that is the most in corrigible
species of misanthropy, which, as Swift expresses it, loves John and Matthew and Alexander, but hates mankind. Here then begins the moral of my tale: I "repented," but I was not "made whole." My entire future life was devoted to the expiation of five years of youthful
folly and forgetfulness. If I had retained the simplicity and guilelessness of my Merionethshire character, it is impossible but I should have been happy. As

it was,
all the voyage of my life
Was bound in shallows and in miseries. I had contracted a contamination, which could never be extirpated. Innocence is philanthropical and confiding, "believeth all things, and hopeth all things." I
looked upon every thing with an eye of jealousy and incredulity. The universe had lost to me that sunshine, which it derives from the reflection of an
unspotted mind. All was dark, and dreary, and sable around me. I wandered in pathless wilds, unable to arrive but at regions of barren rock and immeasurable

sands. Innocence is a sort of magnetism, by which one good heart understands another. It is peaceful when alone; and, when it comes out into the world, it
meets with individual after individual whom it confesses for brothers. I had lost this touchstone. In solitude I was disconsolate; and, if I mixed in the
haunts of men, I understood them not; in no one did I find a

companion; and, in the most populous resorts and crowded assemblies, I was perfectly and consummately alone. I returned to my solitude in Wales with an arrow in my heart. What did I want? I knew not. Yet I was not happy. I regarded my own life with no complacency or
approbation. Oh, Cader Idris! Oh, beloved banks of the Desunny! Glorious men once trod your shades, my father, and my father's friend. How can I compare with

these? Their lives were generous, and marked with the most disinterested sacrifices; but what have I done? If my days had been spent in innocence, that were

much. I passed but a short period in the tumult of society; but in that period how many blots did I contract! These blots make all my history. There are but two principal sources of happiness to the man who lives in solitude:

memory, and imagination. The recollections which offered themselves to my memory gave me no pleasure. That period of my life which was most fraught with
impressions, and which therefore made the principal stock of my memory, was hateful to me. Imagination in the days of my youth had been the main fountain of
my
delight. The materials of my imagination had been childish impressions, eked out with the books of children, with pastoral ideas, and fairies, and magic, and

processions, and palaces. But, when we have mixed in real scenes, the materials furnished by books shrink into insignificance. The actual affairs into which

the passions of man have obtruded themselves, ambition and vanity and shame, and love and jealousy and despair, take so much faster hold of the mind, that
even
when we would expatiate in worlds of fancy, these

affairs will push forward, and in spite of us make a part of the landscape we delineate. I know that most men would have been happy in my place, at least much happier than I was. The transactions of my early years have nothing singular in them,
except as they were made so by my turn of mind, and the strong and subtle passions which were thus called forth in me. A dissipated and riotous life at the
university, and a succession of mistresses at first introduction into the world, compose the history of most young men, born to the inheritance of a
considerable fortune, and whose education has been conducted in a style of liberal expence. Such young men are usually found to retire contented after the
effervescence of youth is over, and unreluctantly to exchange the drawing-rooms of foreign courts, and the contemplation of foreign manners, for the

country-club and the bowling-green. They lay aside their sattin suits, and take up their pipes, and become as complete rustics, as if they had never wandered
beyond the smoke of their own chimneys. Such was not the case in my instance. At no time of my life did I ever delight in such "worshipful society;" and I retained too deep an impression of the
scenes of courtly refinement I had witnessed, to be capable of dwindling into a mere justice of the peace. I sought consolation in the exercise of my
beneficence; and, though I never entered the halls of the wealthy, I often penetrated into the cottages of the poor: and I found what I expected. But, though
I
found the consolation I looked for, I did not find it in the degree I looked for. I had recourse to the amusements of literature: I formed projects,---
sometimes of investigating the progress

or decay of national genius and taste, and sometimes of following through its minutest ramifications a certain memorable period of history,---projects which
led me from author to author in wide succession, and took away the oppressive feelings of passiveness which frequently pursue us, when we resign ourselves to

the simple and direct reading of a single work. But neither beneficence nor study afforded me sufficient occupation. The relieving the wants of our neighbour, is a pursuit which can only employ us at
intervals, and can never form the leading and regular business of our lives. Reading has its periods of satiety. I fell sometimes, for want of an object
sufficiently to exercise the passions, into long fits of languor and depression, which were inconceivably wearisome. Exercise and the scenes of nature no
longer relieved me. The inactivity which came

over me made it very difficult for me to summon the resolution to go out of doors in search of variety. But, when that difficulty was conquered, variety itself
afforded me no pleasure. The landscape was as if it had lost the prismatic illusion, which clothes it to the sense of sight in such beautiful colours. The
fields were no longer green, nor the skies were blue; or at least they afforded no more pleasure to my eyes, than they would have done if the grass had been

withered, and the heavens shrouded in pestilence and death. The beautiful and the bold forms of valley and mountain, which had frequently delighted me,
seemed
to my eye loathsome and tame and monotonous. The refreshing breeze which gives new life even to the wearied patient perishing with a fever, played in vain
upon
my countenance and among the locks of my hair. Tired of the country, I repaired to London. To be presented at court, and occasionally to make one in the rout, the ball, or the festino of a lady of quality,
were rather necessities I submitted to, than pleasures I sought. One advantage which I knew I should find in the metropolis was an opportunity of frequenting

the society of men of genius. I heard of a club of authors, several of whose works I had read with pleasure, and I obtained the favour of being admitted an
honorary member. The society had assumed to itself a Greek name, as if by way of hint to the ignorant and the illiterate to keep their distance. I did not however find in this society

the pleasure I had anticipated. Undoubtedly in the conversations they held I heard many profound remarks, many original conceptions, many pointed repartees,
many admirable turns of humour and wit. I impute it to the fastidiousness of my own temper, bred in solitude, and disgusted with the world, that I so soon
grew
weary of this classic circle. I saw better men than myself, men of elevated rank and refined breeding, as well as of accomplished minds, who derived from the

dinners and suppers of this club, and still more from the separate society and acquaintance of its members, an enjoyment upon which they set a high value. As

far as my observation of the world extended, it was always the more valuable individuals in the class of men of quality and fortune, it was such as possessed

the most generous minds and the most comprehensive views, who delighted most in the intercourse

of men of literature. They were the fools, the envious and the selfish, who shunned such intimates, because they could not bear to be outdone by persons poorer
than themselves, and because they felt the terrifying apprehension of being reduced by them into ciphers. I saw also, contrary to the received opinion, that

the men of real genius, and who were genuine ornaments of the republic of letters, were always men of liberal tempers, of a certain nobility and
disinterestedness of sentiment, and anxious for the promotion of individual and general advantage, however they might sometimes be involved in petty and
degrading altercations and disputes. On the other hand I must do myself the justice to say, that I discovered many real blemishes and errors in these conversations. The literary men whose
acquaintance I could boast, were frequently

as jealous of their fame and superiority, as the opulent men, their neighbours, were of the preservation and improvement of their estates. This indeed is but
natural: every man, who is in any way distinguished from the herd of his species, will of course set no small value upon that thing, whatever it is, to which

he is indebted for his distinction. No one who has tasted of honour, would willingly be thrust out among the ignoble vulgar. The only thing which can defend
a
man against this pitiful jealousy and diseased vigilance, is a generous confidence in his own worth, teaching him that it will find its place without any
dishonest and clandestine exertion on his part. The individual who is continually blowing the fire of his own brilliancy, who asserts and denies, is direct
or
artificial, serious or jocose, not attending to the inspirations of truth and simplicity of heart, but as he

thinks may best contribute to advance his reputation, if he can at all be acknowledged for a pleasant companion and associate, is so at least with a very
powerful draw-back. Such men form to themselves an art of conversation by which they may best maintain the rank in intellect they have acquired. They think
little of the eliciting truth, or a conformity to the just laws of equal society, but have trained themselves to a trick, either by an artful interruption, a

brutal retort, a pompous, full sounding and well pronounced censure, or an ingeniously supported exhibition of sarcastic mockery, to crush in the outset the

very appearance of rivalship, and to turn the admiration of bystanders entirely upon themselves. This is altogether a very pitiful policy. True literary reputation does not depend upon a man's maintaining a shining figure, in the conversations in

which he mixes. If an individual has no nobler ambition than to be the chairman of his own club, why does he commit his thoughts to paper, or send them through
the medium of the press into the world? The moment he has done this, he ought to consider himself as having pronounced his disdain of the fugitive character
of
a conversation-wit or a conversation-bully. I am inclined to believe that no one ever uniformly maintained, in various companies, the first place in subtlety

and wit, who had not cultivated this character with dishonest art, and admitted many unmanly and disingenuous subterfuges into the plan by which he pursued
it. If so, the shining man of a company is to be put down in the lowest class of persons of intellect. If men entitled to a higher place have too often submitted

to this, it is that they have inflicted on themselves a voluntary degradation.---One exception

only can I devise to this disingenuousness, which is, where a man has the absolute cacoethes loquendi 5 , and where his thoughts are so brilliant and elevated,
that all other men will be eager to listen to them. The man of genius who has delivered the fruit of his meditations and invention to the public, has nothing naturally to do with this inglorious struggle. He
converses that he may inform and be informed. He wishes to study the humours, the manners, and the opinions of mankind. He is not unwilling to take his share

in conversation, because he has nothing to conceal, and because he would contribute, as far as with modesty and propriety he can, to the amusement and
instruction of others. But his favourite place is that of a spectator. He is more eager to add to his own stock of

observation and knowledge, than to that of his neighbours. This is natural and just: since he knows better his own wants, than he can know the wants of any
other man; and since he is more sure of the uses that will be made, of the acquisitions he shall himself obtain. Among the literary men I saw in this club, or with whom I in some way became acquainted in consequence of being a member of it, I found one or two exceptions
such as I have last described; but the rest were stimulated by the love of praise in society, as much as they had been in their writings; and the traps they

laid for applause were no less gross and palpable, than those employed by a favourite actor, or the author of a modern comedy. Even such members of the club as did not sacrifice all truth and justice at the shrine of a sordid vanity, had the habit, as I heard it once expressed by a
captious

visitor at his return from one of their meetings, of speaking as if they talked out of a book. I admit that this is a fastidious objection. He who spends his
life among books, must be expected to contract something of the manner of his constant companions. He who would disentangle a knotty point, or elucidate a
grave question of taste, morals or politics, must discourse to some degree in the way of dissertation, or he would discourse in vain; and, if, like a
dissertation for popular readers, he takes care to relieve his style with something pointed and epigrammatic, paints his thoughts as he goes on, to the
imagination of his hearers, interrupts himself gracefully, and is on his guard not to say a word too much, he may be allowed to have played his part
commendably. If by talking as out of a book, is meant no more, than that a man speaks correctly, with well chosen words, in a perspicuous

style, and with phrases neatly turned, the objection is eminently unreasonable. Such is the true and sound view of the subject; but it was in vain to argue the
point; so I was made, and so I found myself affected. I was the spoiled child of the great parent, Nature. I delighted only in the bold and the free, in what was at one and the same time beautiful and lawless. What aspired to please me must be as wild as the artless warblings of the choristers of the woods. Its graces must be unexpected, and were endeared so much
the
more to me as they showed themselves in the midst of irregularity. What spoke to my heart must be a full, mellow and protracted note, or a bewitching
vibration
of sound, which seemed to come on purpose to reward me for listening for a time, to what gave no express promise of so pure a delight. But, had it been otherwise, an attendance

once a week, during the season, at a club of authors, and the occasional society of its members in the intervals, would have afforded but slender materials for
happiness. It might have answered to the confections which amuse the palate at the end of a feast, but it could never appease the appetite of him, who feels
an
uneasy and aching void within, and is in hot chase for the boon of content. Among the members of our club who were not themselves authors, there were a few who were among the most distinguished ornaments of the English senate. The
intercourse of these men was particularly delightful to me. Their manners were more urbane, attentive, flattering and uniform, than those of the professional

authors. They were gentlemen by birth and by education; and, as they had not the same goad urging them along in the pursuit of praise as those who embraced
literature as a profession, their passions, at least as seen within these walls, were less restless, their views more enlarged, and their souls possessed of

more calm and repose.--- In this comparison, be it remembered, I

speak only of the majority of the authors who were members of this club. Among them I knew some illustrious exceptions; and I should think myself highly
censurable in deciding from those I saw, upon the merits of others whom I never knew. The pleasure however I felt in the intercourse of such of our members as were senators, and the admiration with which I was impressed of their manners and
temper, inspired me with the desire of becoming myself a representative in the English parliament. It will readily be perceived, how ill my temper was suited

to the office of courting suffrages and soliciting votes. In this one instance I conquered my temper. I promised myself that it should be but for once. I
blamed myself for being so unbending to the manners of the world. I saw that the task I was undertaking, would afford me a copious opportunity of studying
the

humours and predilections of the middling and lower classes of the community: why should I quit the stage of human life without having obtained such an
opportunity? I made myself popular, and I resolved to do so. I gave entertainments, and I delivered speeches. I laughed at the rude jokes of handicraftsmen,

and I cracked my jokes in return. I smoked my pipe, and toasted Church and King, and the wooden walls of old England. I saw that, in complying with the
plain,
coarse manners of my constituents, I ran no such risk, as I had done in my former compliances with the manners of the Oxonians and the Parisians; and,
instead
of despising myself for what I did, I esteemed myself the more, in proportion as I found that I possessed one faculty which I had not before suspected, and
as
I was able thus stoically to adapt myself to a certain object, and pursue it to the end. I was elected by a

considerable majority of votes, and those who had supported me with their suffrages, or who had vociferated and huzzaed in my behalf, were satisfied that they
had gained a more important cause, than could have been secured by the deliverance of an oppressed country, or the emancipation of one quarter of the world. I entered with awe the walls of the British parliament. I recollected the illustrious men of past ages who had figured upon that scene. I recollected the
glorious struggles of our ancestors which had there been made, and by means of which greater privileges and liberties had been secured to the people of
England, than any of the neighbouring countries could boast. I looked round with complacence upon the accomplished characters who now filled some of the most

conspicuous seats on those benches. I eagerly courted the acquaintance of

these leaders. I was desirous to understand their views, and enter into their projects. There is always something more interesting, to a young and uncorrupted mind, in the cause of opposition, than in the cause of administration. The topics on
which they have to expatiate, are of a more animated and liberal cast: rhetoric ever finds a more congenial and less thorny field, in the office of attack,
than in that of defence. Liberty is the theme of their declamation; and their bosoms beat with the thought, that they are pleading the cause of the great
mass
of their countrymen, who are denied the advantage of being able to plead for themselves. Beside which, modern governments always must, or at least always do,

have recourse to various modes of proceeding, not exactly in accord with pure notions of integrity; a statesman in place cannot, but in a very limited

sense of the word, be an honest man. I therefore enlisted myself in the ranks of opposition. But, in proportion as I became more familiarly acquainted with the maxims and views of opposition, I felt my satisfaction in them diminished. I saw that their
aim was to thrust the ministers in possession out of office, that they might take their places. I became aware that they objected to many things, not because

they were bad, but because their defects, real or apparent, afforded plausible topics of declamation. I perceived that the spirit of censuring the measures
of
government grew too much into a habit, and was directed too much by the intention of bringing the immediate conductors of public affairs into discredit and
contempt. I acquitted the most considerable of the leaders from the consciousness of pursuing so pitiful a plan; men of generous minds

will always dwell upon that view of the business in which they are engaged, which is most congenial to their natural tempers. But, beside every other
disadvantage attending them in this situation, persons of merit, engaged in a party, must accommodate themselves to the views of the dullest and meanest of
their adherents, to their impatience, their perverseness, and their acrimony; they must employ a thousand arts to soothe their prejudices, and keep them in
temper; and as, in every party that ever existed, the fools greatly outnumber the men of understanding, so in matters of party it will infallibly happen,
that
the honourable and the sage must, on a thousand occasions, be made the tools and dupes of the vilest of the herd. A parliamentary leader scarcely appeared to

me the same man in a political consultation, that he had done in a literary club. In his club he was free, ingenuous and

gay; in his political character he was vigilant and uneasy, calculating with restless anxiety upon appearances and results, and still burning with ever new
disappointments. I saw that the public character of England, as it exists in the best pages of our history, was gone. I perceived that we were grown a commercial and
arithmetical nation; and that, as we extended the superficies of our empire, we lost its moral sinews and its strength. The added numbers which have been
engrafted upon both houses of parliament have destroyed the health and independence of its legislature; the wealth of either India has been poured upon us,
to
smother that free spirit which can never be preserved but in a moderate fortune; contractors, directors and upstarts, men fattened on the vitals of their
fellow-citizens, have taken the place which was once filled by the Wentworths, the Seldens,

and the Hydes. By the mere project, the most detestable and fatal that ever was devised, of England borrowing of the individuals who constitute England, and
accumulating what is called a national debt, she has mortgaged her sons to an interminable slavery. I did not however immediately see things in this point of view. I regarded my entrance into the station of an English senator, as a memorable epoch in my life. I said, I have been too long a mere spectator of the scene of existence; it is owing to this, that I have felt such a constant corroding and dissatisfaction;
I
will now take an active part. In the measures which are adopted I will have a voice; I will contribute by my advice to their improvement or their overthrow;
I
will study the principles of legislation; I will detect bad laws, and procure their abrogation; I will bring forward such regulations as the present

state of manners and policy demands. I will from time to time urge and unfold in a greater or a smaller circle, as occasion may offer, such maxims, as may
insensibly tend to the correction and elevation of the character of my country. I know not whether it was owing to any radical vice in my disposition, but I did not long persist in these gallant resolutions. The difficulties were much
greater, than at a distance I had imagined. The contrast which gradually obtruded upon me, between England as I found her in the volumes of her history, and

England as she now was, and had insensibly become for more than a hundred years, damped the ardour of my enthusiasm. Once or twice indeed I felt that animation which raised my soul to such a pitch, that I was conscious I had nothing

left, for the moment, to desire. Some measures in which I had a part, were of immediate importance to the welfare of thousands. Some struggles in which I
joined were arduous; some victories, in which I was one among the conquerors, carried transport to my heart. I witnessed situations, like that which Burke
describes upon the repeal of the American Stamp Act, "When at length, after the suitors most interested respecting the issue, had waited with a trembling and

anxious expectation, almost to a winter's return of light, the doors of the house were thrown open, and shewed them the figure of their deliverer in the
moment
of his well-earned triumph; when they jumped upon him like children on a long absent father, and clung about him as captives about their redeemer." But these

occasions were of rare occurrence; we soon fell back into the shop-keeping

and traffic-trained character I deplored; and even to these triumphs themselves, so beautiful to the eye, it was often found that treachery, calculation and
cabal had contributed their polluted aid. Displeased with the phenomena which I observed in the seat of empire, and satiated with the beauties of my paternal estate, I resolved once more to pass over
to the continent, and to seek in the spectacle of different countries, and the investigation of dissimilar manners, relief from the ennui which devoured me. This expedient seemed at first to answer my purpose. Novelty and change have a sovereign power over the human mind. But the efficacy of this remedy did not last long. Wherever I went, I carried a secret uneasiness along with me. When I left Paris for Vienna, or Vienna for
Madrid, I journeyed a solitary individual

along the tedious road; and, when I entered my inn, the same solitude and uncomfortable sensation entered along with me. I turned aside to examine remarkable objects the fame of which had reached me; I visited some celebrated convent of monks; I took the freedom to introduce
myself to some elaborate collector of curiosities, to some statesman or general retired from the busy scene, to some philosopher or poet whose lucubrations
had
delighted the world. I was generally fortunate enough to make my visit agreeable to the host I selected; I flattered his tastes; I expressed, in the honest
language of truth and feeling, the sense I entertained of his character and merits. This sort of avocation afforded me a temporary pleasure; but it often
left
me in a state of more painful sensation than it found me, and impressed upon me the melancholy conviction of

the unsubstantial nature of all human enjoyments. Sometimes I joined company with a fellow-traveller, whom chance directed to the same point, or whom I was able, by some allurement of pleasure or advantage, to
prevail upon to pursue my route. In some cases I was disappointed in my companion, found him totally different from what on a slight observation I had
conceived him to be, and either separated from him before half our journey was completed, or cursed a hundred times the obligation I had contracted, which,
perhaps for twenty days successively, rendered me the slave of a frigid civility. At other times, it may be, the conversation of my fellow-traveller afforded

me an unfeigned delight; and then I bitterly regretted the fugitive nature of our intercourse. The sensation I felt was such as has been experienced by
passengers in a stage-coach, who

have just had time to contract a liking for each other, who have whispered to themselves, how agreeable, how animated, how well-informed or how facetious is
this stranger, who have met in a domestic way at breakfast, at dinner and at supper, who have wished each other Good-night at the close of the day, and met
with salutations in the morning, when suddenly the vehicle whirls them into some vast city, the step of the carriage is let down, one passes one way and
another another, one calls for a chaise to convey him up the country, and another hastens with his baggage to the port, being engaged in some distant
voyage. Frequently I sojourned for two, three or four months in some polite or learned residence; and, when I had just had time to familiarise myself with its most
valuable inhabitants, was impelled to call to mind, that this was not my home, and

that it was time to withdraw. Why should I stay? The language, the manners and the scene were not native to me; and it was nothing but the necessity of
departing that made me regret a place, which, if I had been compelled to take up my abode in it, would speedily have lost its illusion. I saw that I was alone, and I desired to have a friend. Friends in the ordinary sense of the word, and that by no means a contemptible sense, I had many:
friends who found pleasure in my conversation, who were convinced of the integrity of my principles of conduct, and who would have trusted me in the most
important concerns. But what sort of a friend is it, whose kindness shall produce a conviction in my mind, that I do not stand alone in the world? This must
be
a friend, who is to me as another self, who joys in all my joys, and grieves in all my sorrows, not with a joy or grief that looks like compliment, not with
a
sympathy that changes into smiles when I am no longer present, though my head continues

bent to the earth with anguish.--- I do not condemn the man, upon whom a wound through my vitals acts but as a scratch; I know that his feelings are natural; I
admit him for just, honest and humane, a valuable member of society. But he is not the brother of my heart. I will not suffer myself to be beguiled, and to
fall into so wretched an error, as to mistake the friendship of good-humour or even of esteem, for the friendship which can best console a man in calamity
and
wretchedness, whether of mind or external circumstances. I walk among these men as in an agreeable promenade; I speak to one and another, and am cheered with

the sight of their honest countenances; but they are nothing to me; I know that, when death removes me from the scene for ever, their countenances will the
next day be neither less honest nor less cheerful. Friendship, in the sense in which I felt the want of

it, has been truly said to be a sentiment that can grasp but one individual in its embrace. The person who entertains this sentiment must see in his friend a
creature of a species by himself, must respect and be attached to him above all the world, and be deeply convinced that the loss of him would be a calamity,

which nothing earthly could repair. By long habit he must have made his friend a part of himself, must be incapable of any pleasure in public, in reading, in

travelling, of which he does not make his friend, at least in idea, a partaker, or of passing a day or an hour, in the conceptions of which the thought of
his
friend does not mingle itself. How many disappointments did I sustain in the search after a friend! How often this treasure appeared as it were within my grasp, and then glided away from my
eager embrace! The desire to possess it, was one of the earliest passions

of my life, and, though eternally baffled, perpetually returned to the assault. I met with men, who seemed willing to bestow their friendship upon me; but
their temper, their manners and their habits were so discordant from mine, that it was impossible the flame should be lighted in my breast. I met with men,
to
whom I could willingly have sworn an eternal partnership of soul; but they thought of me with no corresponding sentiment, they were engaged in other
pursuits,
they were occupied with other views, and had not leisure to distinguish and to love me. Some one perhaps will ask me, Why are qualities of this nature necessary in a friend? If I die, why should. I wish my friend to bear about him a heart
transfixed with anguish for my loss? Is not this wish miserably ungenerous and selfish?---God knows, in that sense I do not entertain the wish: I wish my
friend

to possess every possible enjoyment, and to be exempted from every human suffering. But let us consider the meaning of this. I require that my friend should be
poignantly affected by my death, as I require that he should be affected if I am calumniated, shipwrecked, imprisoned, robbed of my competence or my peace. Not
that I have any pleasure in his distress, simply considered; but that I know that this is the very heart and essence of an ardent friendship. I cannot be
silly
enough to believe that the man who looks on, at my calamity, or my death, without any striking interruption of his tranquillity, has a vehement affection for

me. He may be considerate and kind; he may watch by my bedside with an enlightened and active benevolence; he may even be zealous to procure every
alleviation
of my pains, and every aid for restoring me to enjoyment and health: but this is not love. No, if he can close my eyes, and then return with a free and unembarrassed mind to his ordinary business and avocations, this is not love. I know not how other men are constituted; but something of this sort seemed essential to my happiness. It is not wonderful perhaps, that I, who had been so
circumstanced from my infancy, as to accustom me to apprehend every discord to my feelings and tastes as mortal to the serenity of my mind, should have had
so
impatient a thirst for friendship. The principle of the sentiment may be explained mechanically, and is perhaps, to a considerable degree, mechanical in its

operation. The circumstances, whether allied to pleasure or pain, in which I am placed, strike upon my mind, and produce a given sensation. I do not wish to

stand alone, but to consider myself as part only of a whole. If that which produces sensation in me, produces sensation

no where else, I am substantially alone. If the lash inflicted on me, will, being inflicted on another, be attended with a similar effect, I then know that
there is a being of the same species or genus with myself. Still we are, each of us, substantive and independent. But, if there is a being who feels the blow

under which I flinch, in whom my sensations are by a kind of necessity echoed and repeated, that being is a part of myself. Every reasoning and sensitive
creature seems intuitively to require, to his perfectly just and proper state, this sort of sympathy. It is inconceivable how great an alleviation is in this

way afforded, how it mitigates the agony of every kind of distress. It is inconceivable in how deep and insurmountable a solitude that creature is involved,

who looks every where around for sympathy, but looks in vain. Society, an active and a crowded scene, is the furthest in the world from

relieving the sensation of this solitude. The more moving and variegated is the assembly in which I am present, the more full is my conviction that I am alone. I should find as much consolation and rest among what the satirist calls, the vitrified inhabitants of the planet Mercury, as here. The operation, as I have said, is in one view of it mechanical; in another it is purely intellectual and moral. To the happiness of every human creature, at
least in a civilised state, it is perhaps necessary that he should esteem himself, that he should regard himself as an object of complacency and honour. But
in
this, as well as every other species of creed, it should seem almost impossible for any one to be a firm believer, if there are no other persons in the world

of the same sect as himself. However worthy and valuable he may endeavour to consider himself, his persuasion will be attended

with little confidence and solidity, if it does not find support in the judgments of other men. The martyr, or the champion of popular pretensions, cheerfully
encounters the terrors of a public execution, provided the theatre on which he is to die is filled with his approvers. And, in this respect, the strength of

attachment and approbation in a few, or in one, will sometimes compensate the less conspicuous complacence of thousands. I remember to have heard a very vain

man say, "I have a hundred friends, any one of whom would willingly die, if it were required for my preservation or welfare:" no wonder that such a man
should
be continually buoyed up with high spirits, and enjoy the most enviable sensations. Alas, what this man was able to persuade himself he possessed in so wild
an
exuberance, I sought for through life, and found in no single instance!---

Thus I spent more than twenty years of my life, continually in search of contentment, which as invariably eluded my pursuit. My disposition was always
saturnine. I wanted something, I knew not what. I sought it in solitude and in crowds, in travel and at home, in ambition and in independence. My ideas moved

slow; I was prone to ennui . I wandered among mountains and rivers, through verdant plains, and over immense precipices; but nature had no beauties. I
plunged
into the society of the rich, the gay, the witty and the eloquent; but I sighed; disquisition did not rouse me to animation; laughter was death to my
flagging
spirits. This disease, which afflicted me at first but in a moderate degree, grew upon me perpetually from year to year. As I advanced in life, my prospects became less
gilded with the sunshine of hope; and, as the illusion of the scenes

of which I was successively a spectator wore out, I felt with deeper dejection that I was alone in the world. It will readily be supposed, that in these twenty years of my life I met with many adventures; and that, if I were so inclined, I might, instead of confining
myself as I have done to generals, have related a variety of minute circumstances, sometimes calculated to amuse the fancy, and sometimes to agitate the
sympathetic and generous feelings, of every reader. I might have described many pleasing and many pathetic incidents in Merionethshire: I might have enlarged

upon my club of authors, and thus, in place of making my volumes a moral tale, have converted them into a vehicle for personal satire: I might have expanded

the story of my political life, and presented the reader with many anecdotes of celebrated characters, that the world has

little dreamed of: I might have described the casualties of my travels, and the heart-breaking delusions and disappointments of a pretended friendship. It is
by no means for want of materials, that I have touched with so light a hand upon this large portion of my life. But I willingly sacrifice these topics. I
hasten to the events, which have pressed with so terrible a weight on my heart, and have formed my principal motive to become my own historian. I was now near forty-five years of age. Travelling on some factitious occasion near the lakes of Westmorland and Cumberland, and listening, as my custom was,
after whatever was extraordinary and interesting (I listened, as the reader has by this time perceived, with vain hope; what was called extraordinary had
scarcely the power to excite my attention; what interested others moved not me),---I was told of a gentleman, by name Macneil, that had resided much in
foreign
countries, and was supposed particularly to have possessed the confidence of the celebrated Jean Jacques Rousseau, who had been some years an inhabitant of
the
banks of the Windermere. He had a family of daughters, to the forming

whose manners and mind he and his wife had devoted themselves; so that this man who had travelled so much, and whose understanding was so highly cultivated and
refined, seemed to have no further business remaining in life, except to provide the children, the offspring of his marriage, with the motives and means of a

virtuous and happy existence. The history of his wife was somewhat uncommon. She had been born on English ground, but he met with her in the Ecclesiastical Territory in Italy. She had
eloped to her present consort, not from her parents, but from a man calling himself her husband. This man, an Italian by birth, had been her instructor in
music; he was old, deformed, avaricious and profligate. The father of the lady had considered his exterior as a sufficient security, against any injury to
which his daughter might be exposed,

and, pleased with his visitor's conversation and professional talents, had without scruple invited him to spend month after month under his roof. This
repulsive baboon however, soon conceived the plan of robbing his benefactor of his only child; and he succeeded in the attempt. He talked the language of
love
to a blooming and inexperienced girl, to whom that language had never before been addressed; his voice was harmony, and his manners specious, gentle and
insinuating. He won her regard, and, before she had completed her sixteenth year, prevailed on her to desert her paternal roof. No sooner had he conveyed her to his native country, than he threw off the mask toward her. Her fortune was entirely dependent on her father, except a small
portion, which was disputed with the worthy bridegroom in the English courts, and which he soon

found reason to believe he should never obtain. He made her a prisoner in a dismantled and unwholsome castle which he had inherited from his father, and set
over her his sister, as ugly as himself, but who, having obtained no advantages either from education or example, was in a singular degree vulgar, insolent
and
brutal. In this situation she lived when, about twelve months after the period in which she left her father's house, mr. Macneil on his travels heard something of her
story, and, like a true knight-errant, was prompted to besiege her castle. He had seen her twice under her father's roof; he had lamented, like every other
friend of the family, the vile artifices by which she had been trepanned; and, being now informed that she was shut up as a prisoner, and kept from the sight

of every human being, except her betrayer, and the hag, his sister, he determined to

offer her deliverance. By means of a bribe to one of the servants, he contrived to have a letter conveyed to her hands. The young lady had had leisure to
repent of her rashness, and to recollect with infinite remorse the endearments of her natal roof. To receive a line from her countryman, a gentleman whom she

remembered to have seen at her father's table, afforded her indescribable pleasure. She knew that the character of mr. Macneil had always been spoken of as
the
model of integrity and honour. In her perilous situation which she regarded with infinite loathing, she judged that some risk was indispensible. She wrote an

answer, enquiring respecting her father; mother she had none in existence. Being informed that he still lived, but was inconsolable for her loss, she became

not less earnest than her correspondent, that he should provide the means of her escape. She trembled to think whether her father would receive her; sometimes she represented him to herself as a stern judge, refusing her intreaties, at others as
the victim of offended love, reproaching her with eyes of death and despair: she desired however to cast herself at his feet, though that moment were to be
her
last. Mr. Macneil concerted every thing with the utmost delicacy and honour. He provided an Italian, a woman of character and of some rank, to be the companion of
his prot�g�e in her journey; he himself observed the strictest ceremony toward them, and attended them no more than was necessary for safety and
indispensible
accommodation; and he had the satisfaction to deliver this interesting female into the hands of her aged parent. The reconciliation was easily made, and was scarcely more affecting to the

parties themselves, than to the person who had been the happy means of their restoration to each other. Mr. Macneil became the declared lover of the lady he
had rescued from slavery. Her marriage with her Italian seducer was speedily dissolved; and, fortunately, no child had been the issue of this illomened
connection. Still however there was a difficulty. The beautiful penitent dwelt, with all the bitterness of remorse, upon her youthful offence, and a thousand

times protested that, as she had rendered herself unworthy, she would never consent to become the wife of an honourable man. Beside which, she continually
recollected with agony the cruel manner in which she had fled from an indulgent father, and almost broken his heart, and vowed that, so long as he lived, she

would never again quit the paternal roof. These objections, the impassioned dictates of a well-constituted

mind, dwelling with exquisiteness upon an offence so early committed, and so exemplarily atoned, were at length got over; and, after eighteen months of
struggle and sorrow, she gave her hand in second and happy marriage to the man of her father's choice, as well as of her own. I know not whether this story will be found so striking in the repetition, as it was to me when I first heard it. But I felt an uncommon desire to visit the
family which I heard thus described. My desire was increased by a conversation respecting the character of mrs. Macneil, between two ladies, within the walls

of one of the most elegant mansions on the lakes, at which I happened to be present. One of them was her opponent, and the other her admirer. The latter
spoke,
in terms of the highest applause, of the qualifications and accomplishments of the young ladies, her daughters. This drew from the gentlewoman of severer temper a pathetic lamentation over their unfortuate situation. No woman, she said, who respected her own character,
could afford them countenance; no man who was not dead to all the decencies of human life, could offer them his hand in marriage. They were devoted to misery

and dishonour by the very circumstance of their birth; and she held the father no less culpable in marrying a woman under mrs. Macneil's unfortunate
predicament, and making her the mother of his children, than if he had married a person, on whom was entailed the most loathsome hereditary disease. What
could
be thought, as a matron, of a girl who at sixteen had run away with an Italian fidler? How many clandestine provocatives to depravity must she have listened
to
from him, before she could have been prevailed upon to take so outrageous a step? When he

had conveyed her into Italy, he introduced her to his own friends, and no doubt her principal associates for two or three years had been sharpers and
prostitutes. The consequence was, that she impudently eloped with a stranger from the husband of her choice, as she had before eloped from her misguided
father. Poor, wretched miss Macneils, sealed to perdition! What lessons could they receive from such a mother, but lessons of debauchery! So impure a mind
could not instil into them sentiments of virtue, if she would, and would not, if she could. She remembered, the gentlewoman added, to have seen the young
ladies at Kendal theatre; they were fine girls; the more was the pity! The partisan of mrs. Macneil put no less warmth into her reply, than her adversary had given to her invective. She knew little of the lady herself, in
consequence of the rules of society by which

she was excluded from the visiting circles of the neighbourhood. Once however she had chanced to be her fellow-traveller in a public vehicle from York to
London; and she had heard much more of her, than she had then had an opportunity to observe. From every thing she had seen, and every thing she could
collect,
she was persuaded it was impossible for any thing in the form of a woman, to exceed the present correctness of mrs. Macneil's conversation and conduct. Why
should it be supposed that an error committed before the age of sixteen, could never be atoned? How much was a young person, at so immature an age, exposed
to
the stratagems and wiles of an experienced seducer! A better judge of morals than she could pretend to be, had pronounced, that deep and exemplary penitence

for an unwary fault, was a fuller security for rectitude, than

innocence itself 6 . Mrs. Macneil, her advocate added, had been distinguished when a child, for the strength of her judgment and the delicacy of her
sentiments; once she had fallen; but she had speedily recovered; and malice itself could not discover a blemish in her since that period. Might she not, if
her
present character was such as it was represented, be a more perfect monitor for the young, in proportion as she understood more of the evils against which
she
warned them, and had felt the calamity? The lady who maintained this side of the argument said, that she did not pretend to dispute the propriety of the
rule,
by which mrs. Macneil was given up almost exclusively to the society of the other sex, but added, that a humane judge would often drop a tear of pity, over
the
severity of the sentence he was

compelled to pronounce. Why, though mrs. Macneil could never atone to the rules of established decorum, should we refuse to believe, that she had atoned to
God, and to the principles of rectitude? Why, though she was forbidden the society of her sex, should the same prohibition be extended to her daughters? Indeed
most of the ladies in the neighbourhood of the lakes, had felt the propriety of the distinction, and had been eager to afford them every countenance in their

power. She understood from the most undoubted authority, that they were brought up with a refinement and rigidness of sentiment, in every point with which
modesty was concerned, beyond what was furnished by any other living example of female education. Their father was the most faultless and unexceptionable in

his habits, of any gentleman in all the northern counties; and, if propriety of character in young

women could be secured by the diligence, discernment and rectitude of both their parents, there were no persons of their age who bid fairer to be an ornament
to their sex than the miss Macneils. All that I heard of mr. Macneil and his family, inspired in me the wish not to quit Westmorland, till I had seen them. The father of the family was represented
as extremely attached to his wife; and, as her unfortunate history rendered her liable to little slights and affronts, he shrunk from all intercourse with
his
provincial neighbours. He would not accept any privilege from the males of a house, which might only serve to remind him of the severe law dealt out to the
partner of his life. He felt too intimately for her honour, her pleasures and her pains, to be capable of being persuaded of the justice of the treatment she

received. In truth, as I understood from the most exact information,

it was no great sacrifice he made, in giving up the conversation of his rural neighbours. He had resources enough in himself and the inmates of his own roof. They were far the most polished and elegant family, if politeness consists in intellectual refinement, in the circuit of the lakes. He had accumulated from
the
living society of men of genius, the materials and the principles of thinking. The young ladies excelled in the arts of music and design. The mother had paid

dear for her progress in the former of these; but her progress was conspicuous. They frequently made little concerts under their own roof. They read
together,
and compared the impressions they received from, and the judgments they formed upon, what they read. They spent solitary hours enough in the sobriety of the

morning, to inspire them with a zest for each other's society in the latter part of the day. Mr. Macneil, as

I have said, had no object which he had at present so earnestly at heart, as his children's improvement. He shut up therefore no knowledge, no tasteful
feeling, no moral sentiment, no speculation or deduction which his sagacity inspired, in his own bosom.