When he was seated thereon, and, as was his wont in
conversation, had placed both his hands on the top of his staff, and
leant his chin on the same, I subjoined. "Mr Peevie, I need not tell to a man of your experience, that folk in
public stations cannot always venture to lay before the world the reasons
of their conduct on particular occasions; and therefore, when men who
have been long in the station that I have filled in this town, are seen
to step aside from what has been in time past, it is to be hoped that
grave and sensible persons like you, Mr Peevie, will no rashly condemn
them unheard; nevertheless, my good friend, I am very happy that ye have
spoken to me anent the stinted allowance of wine and punch at the dinner,
because the like thing from any other would have made me jealouse that
the complaint was altogether owing to a disappointed appetite, which is a
corrupt thing, that I am sure would never affect a man of such a public
spirit as you are well known to be." Mr Peevie, at this, lifted his chin from off his hands, and dropping his
arms down upon his knees, held his staff by the middle, as he replied,
looking upward to me,

"What ye say, Provost Pawkie, has in it a solid commodity of judgment and
sensibility; and ye may be sure that I was not without a cogitation of
reflection, that there had been a discreet argument of economy at the
bottom of the revolution which was brought to a criticism yesterday's
afternoon. Weel aware am I, that men in authority cannot appease and
quell the inordinate concupiscence of the multitude, and that in a'
stations of life there are persons who would mumpileese the retinue of
the king and government for their own behoof and eeteration, without any
regard to the cause or effect of such manifest predilections. But ye do
me no more than a judicature, in supposing that, in this matter, I am
habituated wi' the best intentions. For I can assure you, Mr Pawkie,
that no man in this community has a more literal respect for your
character than I have, or is more disposed for a judicious example of
continence in the way of public enterteenment than I have ever been; for,
as you know, I am of a constipent principle towards every extravagant and
costive outlay. Therefore, on my own account, I had a satisfaction at
seeing the abridgement which you made of our former inebrieties; but
there are other persons of a conjugal nature, who look upon such
castrations as a deficiency of their rights, and the like of them will
find fault with the best procedures." "Very true, Mr Peevie," said I, "that's very true; but if his Majesty's
government, in this war for all that is dear to us as men and Britons,
wish us, who are in authority under them, to pare and save, in order that
the means of bringing the war to a happy end may not be wasted, an
example must be set, and that example, as a loyal subject and a
magistrate, it's my intent so to give, in the hope and confidence of
being backed by every person of a right way of thinking." "It's no to be deputed, Provost Pawkie," replied my friend, somewhat
puzzled by what I had said; "it's no to be deputed, that we live in a
gigantic vortex, and that every man is bound to make an energetic
dispensation for the good of his country; but I could not have thought
that our means had come to sic an alteration and extremity, as that the
reverent homage of the Michaelmas dinners could have been enacted, and
declared absolute and abolished, by any interpolation less than the
omnipotence of parliament." "Not abolished, Mr Peevie," cried I, interrupting him; "that would indeed
be a stretch of power. No, no; I hope we're both ordained to partake of
many a Michaelmas dinner thegether yet; but with a meted measure of
sobriety. For we neither live in the auld time nor the golden age, and
it would not do now for the like of you and me, Mr Peevie, to be seen in
the dusk of the evening, toddling home from the town-hall wi' goggling
een and havering tongues, and one of the town-officers following at a
distance in case of accidents; sic things ye ken, hae been, but nobody
would plead for their continuance." Mr Peevie did not relish this, for in truth it came near his own doors,
it having been his annual practice for some years at the Michaelmas
dinner to give a sixpence to James Hound, the officer, to see him safe
home, and the very time before he had sat so long, that honest James was
obligated to cleek and oxter him the whole way; and in the way home, the
old man, cagie with what he had gotten, stood in the causey opposite to
Mr M'Vest's door, then deacon of the taylors, and trying to snap his
fingers, sang like a daft man,

   'The sheets they were thin and the blankets were sma',
   And the taylor fell through the bed, thimble and a'." So that he was disconcerted by my innuendo, and shortly after left the
shop, I trow, with small inclination to propagate any sedition against
me, for the abbreviation I had made of the Michaelmas galravitching. I had long been sensible that, in getting Mr Pittle the kirk, I had acted
with the levity and indiscretion of a young man; but at that time I
understood not the nature of public trust, nor, indeed, did the community
at large. Men in power then ruled more for their own ends than in these
latter times; and use and wont sanctioned and sanctified many doings,
from the days of our ancestors, that, but to imagine, will astonish and
startle posterity. Accordingly, when Mr Pittle, after a lingering
illness, was removed from us, which happened in the first year of my
third provostry, I bethought me of the consequences which had ensued from
his presentation, and resolved within myself to act a very different part
in the filling up of the vacancy. With this intent, as soon as the
breath was out of his body, I sent round for some of the most weighty and
best considered of the councillors and elders, and told them that a great
trust was, by the death of the minister, placed in our hands, and that,
in these times, we ought to do what in us lay to get a shepherd that
would gather back to the establishment the flock which had been scattered
among the seceders, by the feckless crook and ill-guiding of their former
pastor. They all agreed with me in this, and named one eminent divine after
another; but the majority of voices were in favour of Dr Whackdeil of
Kirkbogle, a man of weight and example, both in and out the pulpit, so
that it was resolved to give the call to him, which was done accordingly. It however came out that the Kirkbogle stipend was better than ours, and
the consequence was, that having given the call, it became necessary to
make up the deficiency; for it was not reasonable to expect that the
reverend doctor, with his small family of nine children, would remove to
us at a loss. How to accomplish this was a work of some difficulty, for
the town revenues were all eaten up with one thing and another; but upon
an examination of the income, arising from what had been levied on the
seats for the repair of the church, it was discovered that, by doing away
a sinking fund, which had been set apart to redeem the debt incurred for
the same, and by the town taking the debt on itself, we could make up a
sufficiency to bring the doctor among us. And in so far as having an
orthodox preacher, and a very excellent man for our minister, there was
great cause to be satisfied with that arrangement. But the payment of the interest on the public debt, with which the town
was burdened, began soon after to press heavily on us, and we were
obligated to take on more borrowed money, in order to keep our credit,
and likewise to devise ways and means, in the shape of public
improvements, to raise an income to make up what was required. This led
me to suggest the building of the new bridge, the cost of which, by
contract, there was no reason to complain of, and the toll thereon, while
the war lasted, not only paid the interest of the borrowed money by which
it was built, but left a good penny in the nook of the treasurer's box
for other purposes. Had the war continued, and the nation to prosper thereby as it did,
nobody can doubt that a great source of wealth and income was opened to
the town; but when peace came round, and our prosperity began to fall
off, the traffic on the bridge grew less and less, insomuch that the
toll, as I now understand, (for since my resignation, I meddle not with
public concerns,) does not yield enough to pay the five per cent on the
prime cost of the bridge, by which my successors suffer much molestation
in raising the needful money to do the same. However, every body
continues well satisfied with Dr Whackdeil, who was the original cause of
this perplexity; and it is to be hoped that, in time, things will grow
better, and the revenues come round again to idemnify the town for its
present tribulation. As I have said, my third provostry was undertaken in a spirit of
sincerity, different in some degree from that of the two former; but
strange and singular as it may seem, I really think I got less credit for
the purity of my intents, than I did even in the first. During the whole
term from the election in the year 1813 to the Michaelmas following, I
verily believe that no one proposal which I made to the council was
construed in a right sense; this was partly owing to the repute I had
acquired for canny management, but chiefly to the perverse views and
misconceptions of that Yankee thorn-in-the-side, Mr Hickery, who never
desisted from setting himself against every thing that sprang from me,
and as often found some show of plausibility to maintain his
argumentations. And yet, for all that, he was a man held in no esteem or
respect in the town; for he had wearied every body out by his everlasting
contradictions. Mr Plan was likewise a source of great tribulation to
me; for he was ever and anon coming forward with some new device, either
for ornament or profit, as he said, to the burgh; and no small portion of
my time, that might have been more advantageously employed, was wasted in
the thriftless consideration of his schemes: all which, with my advanced
years, begat in me a sort of distaste to the bickerings of the council
chamber; so I conferred and communed with myself, anent the possibility
of ruling the town without having recourse to so unwieldy a vehicle as
the wheels within wheels of the factions which the Yankee reformator, and
that projectile Mr Plan, as he was called by Mr Peevie, had inserted
among us. I will no equivocate that there was, in this notion, an appearance of
taking more on me than the laws allowed; but then my motives were so
clean to my conscience, and I was so sure of satisfying the people by the
methods I intended to pursue, that there could be no moral fault in the
trifle of illegality which, may be, I might have been led on to commit. However, I was fortunately spared from the experiment, by a sudden change
in the council.--One day Mr Hickery and Mr Plan, who had been for years
colleaguing together for their own ends, happened to differ in opinion,
and the one suspecting that this difference was the fruit of some secret
corruption, they taunted each other, and came to high words, and finally
to an open quarrel, actually shaking their neeves across the table, and,
I'll no venture to deny, maybe exchanging blows. Such a convulsion in the sober councils of a burgh town was never heard
of. It was a thing not to be endured, and so I saw at the time, and was
resolved to turn it to the public advantage. Accordingly, when the two
angry men had sat back in their seats, bleached in the face with passion,
and panting and out of breath, I rose up in my chair at the head of the
table, and with a judicial solemnity addressed the council, saying, that
what we had witnessed was a disgrace not to be tolerated in a Christian
land; that unless we obtained indemnity for the past, and security for
the future, I would resign; but in doing so I would bring the cause
thereof before the Fifteen at Edinburgh, yea, even to the House of Lords
at London; so I gave the offending parties notice, as well as those who,
from motives of personal friendship, might be disposed to overlook the
insult that had been given to the constituted authority of the king, so
imperfectly represented in my person, as it would seem, by the audacious
conflict and misdemeanour which had just taken place. This was striking while the iron was hot: every one looked at my
sternness with surprise, and some begged me to be seated, and to consider
the matter calmly.--"Gentlemen," quo' I, "dinna mistake me. I never was
in more composure all my life.--It's indeed no on my own account that I
feel on this occasion. The gross violation of all the decent decorum of
magisterial authority, is not a thing that affects me in my own person;
it's an outrage against the state; the prerogatives of the king's crown
are endamaged; atonement must be made, or punishment must ensue. It's a
thing that by no possibility can be overlooked: it's an offence committed
in open court, and we cannot but take cognizance thereof." I saw that what I said was operating to an effect, and that the two
troublesome members were confounded. Mr Hickery rose to offer some
apology; but, perceiving I had now got him in a girn, I interposed my
authority, and would not permit him to proceed. "Mr Hickery," said I, "it's of no use to address yourself to me. I am
very sensible that ye are sorry for your fault; but that will not do. The
law knows no such thing as repentance; and it is the law, not me nor our
worthy friends here, that ye have offended. In short, Mr Hickery, the
matter is such that, in one word, either you and Mr Plan must quit your
seats at this table of your own free-will, or I must quit mine, and mine
I will not give up without letting the public know the shame on your part
that has compelled me." He sat down and I sat down; and for some time the other councillors
looked at one another in silence and wonder. Seeing, however, that my
gentle hint was not likely to be taken, I said to the town-clerk, who was
sitting at the bottom of the table,

"Sir, it's your duty to make a minute of everything that is done and said
at the sederunts of the council; and as provost, I hereby require of you
to record the particularities of this melancholy crisis." Mr Keelevine made an endeavour to dissuade me; but I set him down with a
stern voice, striking the table at the same time with all my birr, as I
said, "Sir, you have no voice here. Do you refuse to perform what I
order? At your peril I command the thing to be done." Never had such austerity been seen in my conduct before.