Temperance and the habit of daily exercise have preserved, and probably long will preserve to me these inexpensive and invaluable pleasures. My host pointed out the various beauties of the successive landscapes which from the different points of the rock were presented to my view. It was a boundless
magazine of the most ravishing objects. He directed my attention to the different towns, and villages like towns, which were discoverable from various
distances, descanted on the ingenuity of manufactures, and the vigilance and expedients of agriculture. This whole territory, said he, is one continued
monument of the triumph of temperance, industry and independence. The second day after my arrival M. Ruffigny conducted me on a little tour to the lake of Uri. My country, said he, makes but a petty figure in the map of the
globe; and perhaps it may be a frivolous sort of pride in me, that makes me feel complacency in recollecting that I am a burgher of Uri. I do not merely
exult
that I am a Swiss, but I sometimes indulge myself in a fastidious comparison between my native canton and the more spacious and opulent republics of Zurich
and
Berne. The little state which I inhabit is nearly one cluster of rugged and inhospitable mountains; yet this is the district in which the Swiss liberty was
engendered, and from hence as a centre it has spread on every side to

the furthest boundaries of the union. I am myself descended from the patriots who secured independence to my native soil. As William Tell married the younger
of the daughters of Walter Furst, one of the three immortal leaders, who in 1308 conspired for the deliverance of their country, so an ancestor of mine in
the
direct line married the elder. I know that the pretension of an illustrious ancestry is too often a chimerical boast. I know that, wherever a pedigree is
preserved, or a distinguishing compellation is conferred, it is in the nature of things almost impossible that in a few generations a race should not
degenerate, and that fools or villains should not corrupt the blood of the profoundest sages and the most disinterested citizens. I know that, wherever this
is
the case, wherever licentiousness or imbecility has crossed the glorious breed, every time such a descendant hears the repetition of

his name, he hears a more deadly and outrageous satire, than the malice of his worst enemy could invent against him. Forgive me, my friend---I feel that this
censure does not fasten on me. If I have not the public merits of a Furst and a Tell, I have their innocence of manners, and my life has been usefully and
honourably spent. Zurich, and Basle, and some of our more opulent cantons, are full of manufactures and industry; they contain many citizens who are comparatively wealthy; and
the style of living of several of these would not shame the capitals of Paris or London. My co-burghers are all feeders of flocks or cultivators of the
earth;
there are among them none who are opulent, and none who suffer the evils of poverty; and their tables are such as bring before us the uncorrupted plainness
of
patriarchal times. I have visited many countries of the globe; but

this, instead of distasting me toward the simplicity of my early years, has made me relish it the more. Like a true Swiss of the earlier times, I have returned
home, and bidden adieu without a sigh to the refinements and ostentation of other climates. In the course of our excursion M. Ruffigny pointed out to me the various spots still so dear to the genius of freedom: Gruti, the village where the three
heroes of Switzerland planned their undertaking; Brunnen, where the fundamental league between their respective cantons was concluded; Kussnacht, the scene
where an arrow from the bow of Tell reached the heart of Gesler, his own oppressor, and the oppressor of his country; and Morgarten and Sempach, the fields
in
which those celebrated combats were fought, that fixed the liberties of Switzerland on a basis which has endured the shock of ages. All these

places were within such a distance, that we either actually visited them in the course of the day, or discerned them, almost in full detail, from the tops of
the neighbouring eminences. After having sated my curiosity in the examination of these venerable scenes, we returned in the afternoon by the lake of Uri. It was along this lake that Tell
is related to have been conveyed in fetters by Gesler, that he might be removed from his countrymen, and shut up in one of the dungeons reserved by the
tyrant
for the intrepid and the honest. As they rowed along, a violent tempest arose. The shores on both sides are extremely craggy and dangerous; and the tyrant
began to fear that his boat would be dashed to pieces against these insuperable precipices. Tell, perfect in the accomplishments of a Swiss peasant, and
endowed with a firm and adventurous temper, surpassed his contemporaries in

the art of navigating his native lakes. Gesler knew this, and, trembling for his coward life, ordered the fetters to be struck off from his prisoner, and the
helm to be put into his hand. Tell used the opportunity which was given him. There are not above two or three points in the whole circumference of this lake,

where it is practicable to land. Tell steered his boat toward the most rugged of these, leaped suddenly upon the rock, climbed with inconceivable adroitness
up
the precipice, and returned once more to his longing countrymen and confederates. A chapel, erected by admiring posterity on the spot, consecrates the memory

of this magnanimous and important achievement. One thing surprised me upon reflection in the conduct of M. Ruffigny. He had received me with particular kindness; yet he did not so much as mention to me the
name of my father. I

knew that the connection between them was of the most confidential nature, and including a variety of important obligations, though I was a stranger to the
particulars. My host did not enquire when I had heard from my father. He might indeed have received letters as lately as I could have done. But he did not
ask
me respecting his health, his vigour, his sentiments, his habits, a thousand minuti� to which ocular inspection alone can qualify a man to speak. It is so
natural for a friend to be anxious about these, and to think he can never talk or hear enough upon these interesting topics! After having busily employed ourselves in discovering and examining the various memorable objects which occurred in our route, we now passed quietly and
silently along the lake. It was a deep and narrow water, about nine miles in length, and skirted on both sides with

rocks uncommonly wild and romantic, some perpendicular, some stretching over our heads, and intercepting the view of the upper sky, and clothed for the most
part with forests of beech and pine, that extended themselves down to the very edge of the water. The lake was as smooth as crystal, and the arching
precipices
that inclosed it gave a peculiar solemnity to the gloom. As we passed near the chapel of Tell, the bell happened to toll forth, as if for a funeral. The
sound
was full; the effect melancholy; each reverberation of the metal was prolonged among the echoes of the rocks. This continued for about fifteen minutes, and
then ceased. We were attended by only two rowers and a steersman, labourers in the corn fields and garden of M. Ruffigny. Shortly after we had passed the chapel, the rowers
suspended their labour, and we glided in silence over the water. We

had been so busied in action and conversation during the whole morning, that the stillness which now succeeded seemed perfectly unforced and natural. I sunk
into a deep reverie. I thought of William Tell, and the glorious founders of the Swiss liberty; I thought of the simple manners which still prevail in the
primitive cantons; I felt as if I were in the wildest and most luxuriant of the uninhabited islands of the South Sea. I was lost in visions of paradise, of
habitations and bowers among the celestial orbs, of things supernatural and remote, of the unincumbered spirits of the virtuous and the just, of the pure
rewards and enjoyments of a happier state. I had forgotten Switzerland, and M. Ruffigny, and the world, and myself. Accidentally I lifted my eye, and saw the countenance of my host fixed upon me with peculiar intentness; a tear

moistened the furrows of his cheeks. This spectacle recalled me to the reality of things about me; but my heart was softened by the images which had passed
through my thoughts, and I could not speak. I have not named your father to you, said M. Ruffigny. My dear father!---His name, uttered at that moment, awakened the best feelings of my soul. Casimir! Casimir Fleetwood! exclaimed my host, where have you been? In France: at Paris. How have you been employed? Not well. My father sent me forth for improvement; but I have been employed in libertinism and dissipation. Fleetwood, I also am your father. And I will not be less indulgent, scarcely less anxious, than your natural parent. You know in gross, though you do not know
in detail, the peculiar attachment

I feel for every thing that bears the name of Fleetwood. Am I not your father? This, sir, is the third day that I have ever seen you; I know little of you yet; the little I have observed has scarcely had time to strike its fibres deep in
my bosom. But all that I do know makes me presume that, were I worthy of the honour, you are the person of all mankind whom I should prefer for an adoptive
parent. Casimir! my dear Casimir! let not your ears for ever abhor the sound of my voice; let not my form and my visage be for ever loathsome in your sight! ---I
cannot speak---
I understand you, sir. My father is dead! Ruffigny held forward to me a letter. I took it from him; I gazed mechanically on the superscription, but could not make out a syllable. My friend drew nearer
to me; he put his arm round me,

as I sat; I rested my head on his shoulder, and burst into a flood of tears. The communication of this melancholy intelligence no doubt affected me very
differently from what it would otherwise have done, in consequence of the frame of mind, which this day's excursion, and the various objects I had beheld,
produced in me. My sensibility was increased by the preparation, and the impression I received was by so much the deeper. I do not pretend to divine
Ruffigny's
motives for so contriving the scene. Perhaps he knew enough of human nature to believe that it rarely happened to a son in the bloom of life, to break his
heart for the loss of an aged parent. Perhaps he understood and disapproved of the train of life in which I had lately been engaged, and thought the thus
softening my heart the most effectual way of recalling me to my better self. Why, sir, cried I mournfully, did you suffer me to remain a moment in ignorance of this dreadful intelligence? Why all this pomp of preparation? What are
scenery, and patriotism, and heroes, and the achievements of past ages to me? What have I to do with all this world? ---My father! my only friend!---Where
have
I been? Losing myself, while your stood in need of my consolation! Breaking through every plan that was arranged, loitering away my time among the
frivolities
and licentiousness of Paris, while you laid down an aching head in solitude, while your pulses failed, and your eyes were closed in darkness! Would to God it

were in my power to recal a few past months!---No matter! My prospects and my pleasures are finished; my life is tarnished; my peace is destroyed; I shall
never again think of myself with approbation, or with patience! I did not say all this aloud, though a part of it I did. The short time I had passed with Ruffigny was yet long enough to make me feel no sort of constraint in
his presence. On the present occasion he did not attempt to console me; he left my grief to its natural course; we finished our voyage in silence. By
degrees,
as I recovered the use of my reason, I felt myself grateful for his kindness, and respected his judgement in this forbearance. The night of the day I have described did not pass in repose. Amidst short and disturbed slumbers I saw my father, I heard his voice. I roused myself, and
returned to recollection. Dead? said I. Impossible!---Let the reader remember what I have already said of him, "He was the wisest and best man I knew. He had

all those advantages from nature, and from the external endowments of fortune, which were calculated to

maintain my reverence. We had gradually become more qualified for each other's society and confidence. Our characters had many points of resemblance: we were
both serious, both contemplative, both averse to the commerce of the world." ---This dear friend, this sharer in all my interests, should I never meet again? The well-known mansion in Merionethshire, in which I had passed all my boyish days, should I find it vacant of its respected inhabitant? That mild and
affectionate countenance, which for many years I had beheld every day, almost at every hour, should I never again behold it? Sometimes he was my play-fellow,

and even shared in my childish amusements. The little implements and mechanical contrivances upon which my boyish thoughts were employed, and which my
desires
panted to realise, he would often lend his hand to assist me to form. His lessons were so

paternal, so indulgent, so considerate, so well adapted to my opening powers! The confidences he occasionally reposed in me, were so cordial! His descriptions
and pictures of things to excite my curiosity and emulation were so admirable! I remembered how his manner successively adapted itself to my growing years
and
demands, from prattling infancy to the full stature of man. All these things rose at first confusedly to my mind, and jostled each other. Sometimes I
endeavoured with melancholy industry to arrange them; at other times I threw the reins on the neck of my imagination, and resigned myself to the guidance of

fortuitous associations. My life, said I, under the roof of my father was the reality of life. The period I spent at Oxford and Paris was an interval of
incoherence and inebriety. And this is all now ended! The reality of existence is for ever gone! Why is it that, from the hour I heard of my father's decease to the present distant period, the remembrance of that melancholy event has always become
associated in my mind, with the rocks of Switzerland, and the lake of Uri? One of the most affecting of the catastrophes that beset this mortal existence,
with
what is most solemn and sublime in the aspect of the universe? Grief in all human minds soon assumes the character of a luxury to be indulged, as well as of
a
pain to be endured. The mourner recollects with complacency the tenderness of his heart and the purity of his feelings. The conscious recurrence of the scene

in which my grief began, gave in my case to the grief itself a new merit at the tribunal of sentiment and taste. Honoured, beloved, ever-to-be-regretted
author
of my life! Never were the ashes of an eastern monarch attended with so magnificent a funeral! The deep glen of the

dark and tranquil lake of Uri was the cathedral in which the rites were solemnised! The chapel of the immortal Tell tolled out its bell to proclaim the
ceremony! The patriots who, five centuries ago, established the independence of Switzerland, composed the procession that attended thee to the grave! All
these
images are for ever worked up together, and constitute in my memory one melancholy and indelible scene! It was many days after the communication of this intelligence before my mind could recover any tolerable composure. How various circumstances combined to make
this a terrible blow to me! I felt naked and unsheltered from the blasts of the world. I was like a vine that had long twined itself round the trunk of a
sturdy oak, and from which at length the support and alliance of the oak is taken away. The shoots of my emulation and enterprise lay prostrate

on the ground, and the fibres of my heart were torn and bleeding. If I had been present on this melancholy occasion, if I had heard from my father the accents
of a last farewel, if it had been permitted me to soften the last pangs of expiring life, to say to myself, I now see the friend whom I shall see no more, to

kiss his clay-cold forehead, to feel the affectionate pressure of his hand for the last time, my remorse would have been less. I remembered with
insupportable
anguish the manner in which my absence had been employed. Not in wholsome and salutary studies, not in useful and improving meditation, not in sound
observations upon the varieties of man and the distinguishing features of nations; but in vice, in dissipation, in what I was sure my father would least of
all
have approved, in a timid and ignominious sacrifice to the licentious maxims

of a nation among whom I was a sojourner. The day after that of the lake of Uri, I did not come out of my chamber. I had no courage to lift up my head, and my passion once and again relieved itself by
a flood of tears. I sat for hours immoveable, engrossed in dim and inexplicable reverie. This blunting of the senses was grateful and life-giving; the brief

intervals in which I returned to myself were filled with intolerable anguish. How happy was I yesterday! exclaimed I to myself: how desolate to-day! Nevertheless, I was yesterday as fatherless as I am to-day; my dear parent for more than two months has been no more: but I did not know my misfortune! With

what pleasure did I receive the kindness, observe the habits, and speculate upon the propensities, of my father's friend! With what interest did I

set out yesterday morning upon the little excursion we had planned! How much did I enjoy the scenery, as it was formed by the all-directing hand of nature, and
as it was modified by the recollection of the human acts which had there been performed! Cruel Ruffigny, how could you suffer me to live under this delusion! How could you look on, enjoying in malicious sport my blindness, and see me amuse myself with straws, while the rock, upon which my habitation had rested,
was
dissolved away beneath its foundations!---Yet, why, ah, why has this delusion ever been taken away! Yesterday, and the day preceding, and the days before, I

did not know my misfortune, and I was happy! Oh, that this dream could have lasted for ever!---I shall never again see my father, ---never, never!---yet why

might I not have been led on with the pleasing hope, and have said, To-morrow, and to-morrow,

---a short time yet,---and we shall meet! How happy, to have pursued an interminable route, and still have believed that I was almost at my journey's end! to
have trusted for ever, and confided, as long as I continued to live! My kind host sent me my morning's repast, but it stood by me untouched. Ever since I had received the news, I had a sensation within me, that rejected food, as
peremptorily as the glands of a person labouring under a hydrophobia, throw back the water he might attempt to absorb. Dinner-time came; and hunger at length

subdued the obstinacy of my grief. With bitter scorn of my own frailty, I swallowed a few morsels of the food which was set before me. In the evening
Ruffigny
entered my chamber. He sat down, and for some minutes continued silent. At length he spoke. He did not ask me how I had rested, or how I felt myself. He
began
with

words concerning my father; he made a calculation of their respective ages. I could not stand this; to myself I had repeated my father's name a hundred times;
but I could not bear to hear it formed by the voice of another. Ruffigny desisted. A few minutes more, and he returned to the same topic with some variation. I
now endured it better. He pronounced an eulogium of my father's virtues. This was not altogether without a soothing sensation; though from time to time I
covered my face with my hands, struck my forehead with my clenched fist, and broke into other mechanical gestures of impatience. Ruffigny spoke of the years
he
had spent in society with my father. He recollected a variety of little incidents and adventures, which had served to display his judgment and humanity, the

resources of his mind, and the generousness of his temper. If all this discourse had been

artificial, if it had resembled the funeral encomium of a venal orator, it would only have irritated my impatience, and increased my sorrows. But Ruffigny
loved my father only less than I loved him. The chief differences were, that he had not seen him for years, and this had served him for a weaning; and that
the
instinct of blood, or that prejudice and sentiment which amply supply the place of instinct, was in full ascendancy in me, and was wanting in him. We mingled

our tears. His discourse was the overflowing of his heart, a relief that was necessary to the anguish he felt, and to the restraint he had imposed upon
himself
in the two first days of my visit. His sorrow would have produced more injurious effects upon him, had it not been that he felt it as a duty incumbent upon
him
to console mine. Ruffigny went on. A most valuable life has been terminated, and you do well

to weep. A great gap has been made in society; and, though you are the principal loser, yet all who knew your father, particularly all who were within reach of
his wisdom or beneficence, are losers too. He has left a considerable estate, and there is need of some one to look into its condition and prosperity. He has

left tenants, and they will miss his superintendence and indulgence. Because they have lost him, I hope that will not be a reason that they should lose you. Your father has perished from the face of the earth, but it is not your design that his memory should perish with him! Strangers no doubt have already given

him a grave. But shall not his son enquire what they have done, and supply what they may have left deficient? Shall no stone mark the place where his ashes
rest? Shall no filial curiosity demand, from those who were on the spot, the history of his last moments,

the paroxysms he suffered, the consolations that relieved them, the last words which were breathed from his dying lips? Shall no one endeavour to draw out an
image of his life, by enquiring into his injunctions, and perpetuating the execution of those plans upon which, it may be, his affections were bent? These
are
the duties of survivors; it is in this way that our offspring prove their attachment to those, to whom they were bound in a thousand obligations. The discourse of Ruffigny produced in me the revolution he meditated. I will set out for England this moment! cried I. Would it, answered Ruffigny, be any increase to your satisfaction that I should accompany you? Good Heaven! venerable old man, exclaimed I, you cannot entertain the thought? The wish to perform a pilgrimage to

the tomb of my ancient friend is uppermost in my heart. Will you permit me to occupy a corner in the chaise that is to convey you to England? I threw myself into his arms; I burst into tears; I even sobbed upon his bosom. ---My father is not wholly dead! What must be my obligation to the friend, who
at such a moment is willing to supply his place! When my first surprise at this generous proposal had subsided, I argued with Ruffigny: I objected his age and infirmities; I intreated him to consider well the
extent of so unexampled a sacrifice. My arguments were not urged with all the force of which they were capable; my heart betrayed me; my very soul thrilled
with pleasure, and yearned over the old man who said, Shall I not accompany you to England? My host concealed from me one part

of the motive that induced him to this extraordinary resolution. My father, as I have said, had furnished me with a most exemplary letter of introduction to
his Swiss friend, and had trusted much to his affectionate and benevolent wisdom for the perfecting my character. When I least suspected it, my deceased
parent
had obtained accurate accounts of my proceedings in Oxford and at Paris, and had transmitted a faithful abstract of these accounts to M. Ruffigny. He was
exceedingly anxious for the future purity of my character and honour of my transactions, and was of opinion that a violent interference and a rude check put

upon my excesses, was by no means the most effectual method for my reformation. He therefore scarcely seemed to be aware of my errors, at the time that he
was
most exactly informed of, and most disapproved them. He believed that an unsuccessful attempt to

place them before me in their full light, would be infinitely more injurious than if no attempt were made. His great dependence was upon my visit to
Switzerland. He had the most exalted notion of the talents, the virtues and the zeal of his friend in this corner of the world. He persuaded himself that the

operation of novelty would be highly favourable to the accomplishment of his wishes, and that the unexpected meeting with a man so qualified, and the yet
untried expedients which Ruffigny would employ for my improvement, would produce the happiest effects. My father was now dead; and my host felt the task which had devolved upon him as of double obligation. I was a legacy which the friend most dear to him on
earth had bequeathed to him, and a trust which with his last breath he had consigned to his care. As a legacy,

the long attachment he had felt to the name of Fleetwood made him regard me as the most valuable estate that could have been conveyed to him; and as a trust,
there was nothing for which he more desired to live, than the faithful discharge of what the person conferring that trust expected from him. When the choice
of
various means were in my late father's power, he had fixed upon the vigilance and discretion of Ruffigny, as that by which he desired to secure my
improvement
and happiness. Had fate not bereaved me thus untimely of a father's care, he would no doubt have employed various engines and instruments for the same end. While a parent's eye was upon me, however much he trusted to the discretion of this friend, Ruffigny would still have been a deputy, not a principal. Now the

task became entirely his, and every engagement

that he felt to the virtues and the memory of my father, called upon him, as the last tribute of friendship, to leave no effort unexerted for my welfare. During our journey, Ruffigny communicated to me at large the particulars of his connection with my family, of which I had before heard in general terms, but
knew nothing distinctly. While I was yet a child, said my fellow-traveller, I had the misfortune to lose both my parents. By this event I fell under the care of an uncle, a brother of
my father. Hypocrisy and fraud are natives of every climate; and there are villains even in Switzerland. My uncle was copious in his professions of affection

and fidelity during the last illness of my father, and protested a thousand times that he would in all respects treat me as if I had been sprung of his own
loins. It was at about seven years of

age that I was delivered to his guardianship. Unfortunately this uncle of mine had a numerous family, and had been unprosperous in several of his attempts for
the improvement of his property. He was naturally of an impatient, discontented and reserved disposition, yet with a considerable mixture of vanity. He had
disbursed in several instances more money than he could well command. He had been restless, and eager to engage in various projects; and his projects had
failed. My father on the contrary, who was of an open and free disposition, cool in his temper, and sagacious in his determinations, had constantly
prospered. Beside which, my father was greatly and universally beloved; every one consulted, every one distinguished him; he was courted by all his neighbours, made an

umpire in every controversy, and on all hands admitted to be the most enlightened citizen

in the canton of which he was a native. His brother, sullen in his disposition, perplexed and obscure in his intellect, and rude and unconciliating in his
manners, was as generally avoided. The common observation respecting him among the candid and good-humoured Swiss was, Our dislike is more than we can give a

reason for; we agree to look upon him as a bad man, but where is the guilt he has committed? Such was the guardian, into whose family I was at this time removed. He saw me in the circle of his own children with a scowling eye. Why, said he to himself,
should this little vagabond be entitled to more property, than all my children put together? He will come into possession of superfluity, while his cousins,

not less worthy than he, will see their lives withered, by the scantiness of means which I have in vain exerted myself to increase. The observations my uncle had occasion to make upon me in the sequel, did not by any means tend to tranquillise the storm already swelling in his bosom. His
children inherited the same slowness and perplexity of intellect which characterised their father; I was remarked to have that facility of apprehension and
quickness of parts which distinguished my deceased parent. Whatever we learned as pupils, we learned together; but I excelled them all. Whenever, which was
not
often, any visitor honoured our roof, we put ourselves forward with the easy frankness of Swiss manners, but I constantly bore away the prize. In the little

exercises of the adjoining hamlet, in the questions proposed, and the remarks delivered, by the aged peasantry of the vicinage, the preference still fell to

me. This was too much for my uncle's unquiet temper to endure. Does the same

fate, murmured he in his meditations, still pursue me? As I was constantly eclipsed by this urchin's father, so shall my children be for ever surpassed by the
son? Is there a fatality entailed upon our race? Surely from the womb there has been an antipathy between us; and, as long as the descendants of either
exist,
my progeny will for ever be made slaves to that of my brother! About twelve months after the death of my father, my uncle had occasion to make a journey into France, and to my great surprise proposed to take me with him. My father had so disposed of his property, as to vest in his brother, the full possession of the income during my minority, under the notion of a
compensation
for his expence and trouble in the care of my education. Other parents in other countries would have been anxious that the greater part of the income should

accumulate, for the purpose of

supplying me with a more ample fortune when I came of age. But this idea is foreign to the simplicity of the country in which I was born. The property of which
my father died possessed was, without farther improvement, fully equal to any estate in the canton; and it would have been more agreeable to his modes of
thinking, that I should, when arrived at years of discretion, come into possession of the very income that he had received, than of a larger. One evil however originated in this mode of settling his estate. My guardian found immediately after the decease of my father a considerable improvement to his
own resources. The expences which were in any way necessary to me at this tender age were extremely small, and my uncle had of consequence the whole present

emolument of my property. This circumstance increased the strong dislike he entertained for me. His avaricious disposition caused him to look forward with horror to the time when it would be required of him to disburse large sums in the progress of my
education, and with still greater horror to the period when it would be necessary to resign the whole. In our journey to France we were also accompanied by my eldest cousin, a youth of about seventeen years of age. This lad had always treated me with singular
unkindness; and at his age he was less under restraint from the laws of decorum, and less capable of disguising his antipathies, than his father was. He
never
looked upon me but with a scowl of dislike; he never spoke to me but in a tone of severity and harshness. Some of his brothers were as young as myself, and
to
these he was a sour and unripened tyrant. Nevertheless, when it was my misfortune to have any difference with them (and indeed we never agreed), he

was always, when appealed to, of the party against me, and his decisions were announced by cuffs and blows innumerable. When we arrived at Lyons, my uncle laid aside his proper name, and caused himself to be called M. Mouchard. Upon this occasion he called me in, and addressed
me in a style of unusual seriousness. He had taken me round the town of Lyons, shown me the best buildings, and the handsomest of the suburbs, conducted me
to
the public gardens and the theatres, and endeavoured by every means to make it appear in my eyes an agreeable residence. It was indeed a perfect contrast to

the wild and severe faces exhibited by the canton of Uri; and to my foolish and inexperienced heart the populous streets, the thronged exchange, the crowded

walks and the illuminated theatres appeared like fairy-land. When I return home, said my uncle, it is my intention to leave you at Lyons. My heart leaped within me at the intelligence, and I expressed my delight in
unequivocal terms. Unfortunate as I was, I had no prepossessions to attach me to my native land. While my parents lived, I indeed loved it. All my hours had

been winged with joy, and I experienced those pleasing emotions which arise in the human heart, when we perceive that we are looked on with partiality and
affection by all around us. But the last of my parents had now been dead more than a year, and since that time the scene had been completely reversed. It was

indeed an irksome and a melancholy year to me. Till then I had been a spoiled child; but in my new situation I was neglected and disliked by all. Wherever I

was, I was one too much; whatever I did, my uncle and my cousins were sure to disapprove. I did not feel this so much at first; perhaps the unkindness I experienced was at first not so great as it afterward became. I made those exertions which have
already been mentioned, and gained the applause of the neighbourhood and the envy of my cousins. But mine perhaps was not an age to struggle with
discouragement; nor had the tenderness and indulgence of my first education prepared me for it. The volatility of youthful spirits in part supported me; but
I
had fits of melancholy and depression, greater than might have been expected at so early a period of life. Gradually I came to hate the scenery about me, and

to loath the routine of the passing day. "Your father," continued my uncle, "left you to my care, and many have been the anxious hours which this guardianship has cost me. My brother was a very
foolish man, and has bred you in

such a manner that you will be a great trouble to any one who has to do with you. If you had been brought up soberly and strictly like your cousins, you would
have been a very different sort of a boy; but that, poor child, is not your fault. I have tried to bring you into order; but I see it is necessary you should

go out into the world. My brother, with all his mistakes, was my brother still; and you must needs think that I will do every thing in my power for the
service
of his child. "William, you must be aware that, if I had not a good opinion of your capacity, I should not talk thus to a child of your years. You certainly do not want for
capacity, though you are a very perverse and wicked boy. I must own that I do not expect any good of you; but, if you come to harm, it shall not be through
my
fault. You will live, I hope, to thank me from the bottom of

your heart for what I am now doing for you. "There is one thing more I have to say to you, a part of which you can understand, and a part you cannot. The part you can understand, I will explain to you:
the part you cannot, you must trust for to my superior judgment, and to the paternal care I have ever shown for you. "You have observed, that, since I came to this city, I have called myself Mr. Mouchard. That is to be your name; you are to be called William Mouchard. You are
a native of Bellinzone; that is the story I shall tell of you, and that you are to uphold. There are many things that a child of your years cannot
comprehend;
you do not know what is good for you, and must trust to the better discernment of your elders. This I have to tell you; you must never on any account mention

my real name

or your own; you must never mention the canton of Uri, or any one of the mountains and valleys among which you have been brought up. You must never write to me
or to any creature in Switzerland; you must never make any enquiries, or give the least sign that you are alive. I shall have my eyes on you; I shall provide

generously for your support; and, when I please, shall write to you, or come myself to see how you are going on. Upon this point, boy, I must deal plainly
with
you. All my attention is directed to your welfare, and I have only this injunction to give you. Upon your observance of it, depends every thing that is dear
to
you. The moment you break it in the minutest particle, the most terrible misfortunes will instantly overwhelm you. I cannot tell you what they are; they are
so
great, that your understanding would be wholly unable to comprehend them. But be sure of

this, all I do is for your advantage. When you least expect it, you will see that it is so. Remember and tremble! I put the happiness of your whole life into
your own disposal." It is inconceivable with what strange sensations I listened to this harangue. The phrases my uncle had employed, of the superior judgment of our elders, the
incapacity and blindness of children, and every thing that older people do being calculated for our good, was the cant which I had incessantly heard during
the
last year; and, though these phrases certainly were never employed upon a more unworthy occasion, they excited in me a mysterious sensation of reverence and

awe, which I felt incapable to shake off. A doubtful opinion, Was this genuine kindness? Was it a masked hostility? hung about me, and perplexed my
resolutions. I was not however long in doubt. I was delighted with the city

of Lyons; I could not endure the thought of returning to my uncle and his family. I looked upon my native home, now that my parents were removed from the stage
of life, with horror; but I was in the morning of my days, and was inclined to regard every thing new, with hope, with exultation, and a bounding heart. One thing appeared to me singular. My uncle told me that Lyons was to be the place of my abode; but he mentioned nothing to me of the particular situation in
which I was to be placed. Was I to be put en pension at a boarding-school, or how? If I were, methought I should like to have seen beforehand the house in
which I was to reside, the master who was to instruct me, the youths who were to be my companions. But I was totally destitute of every sort of knowledge of

the world, and was in the hands of my envious and bad-hearted uncle to dispose of as he pleased. This

might, for aught I knew, be the established mode of proceeding in all similar cases. It was perhaps one of those points, which were reserved for the wisdom of
our elders to decide upon, and which the capacity of a child like me was held unable to comprehend. We had been now ten days at Lyons, and the next morning was fixed for my uncle and my cousin to set out upon their return. In the evening a M. Vaublanc visited
us in our hotel.