No doubt mrs. Fleetwood is asleep. Sit you here, while I go and fetch the keys, and make the
search I have resolved on. I entered the bed-chamber. I hastily drew back one of the curtains. She was in a sweet sleep; I saw no mark of the grief and uneasiness she had endured. There
she lay, all unsuspecting of the mischief that impended over her! In my agitation I threw down a candlestick. She moved. She murmured something indistinctly

with her lips. I stooped down that I might catch the words. Fleetwood, my love! she said. Good God! is her hypocrisy perfect even while she sleeps? She thinks I hear her!---No, it is impossible! For one moment, perhaps for the last moment so long as
we both shall live, I will believe her innocent! I stole a balmy kiss from the ripest lips that nature ever formed. She stretched out her arms toward me. I kissed her again. I felt one flash of the joys of
heaven, on the verge of the abyss. I drank-in madness as I stood. I drew back precipitately; I found the keys, and hastened to my wife's dressing-room. A variety of drawers and boxes engaged my attention. I found no letter from Kenrick, no fresh evidence of their familiarity, in any one of them. At first, this
circumstance, which ought to have given me pleasure, was felt by me like a calamity. I said, they are eluding my search; their wary guilt will

come off with impunity!---By degrees my ideas took another turn. I forgot the letter which had first inflamed me. I said, Here is nothing! There is no guilt! If there were, they must have written. If there were letters, they could not escape me.---I turned to the toilet; I looked at the toilet-box, which had
contained the first evidence of their perfidy, and to which by the advice of Gifford I had carefully restored it; the letter was no longer there! Nothing remained to be examined, but a small casket, in which Mary kept her most valuable trinkets. I no sooner opened this, than the first thing which met my
eye was the miniature of Kenrick. I looked stedfastly at it: I burst into an idiot laugh. I examined it again. What lovely features; what an air of
integrity! said I.---No, it is not so! Do not you see those lines of dissimulation and craft? Now I consider it more

attentively, I mark the devil peeping out from behind the beauteous mask, and laughing in my face! I carried the picture to Gifford. I threw it upon the table before him, and then rushed to a sopha on the further side of the room. I buried my face in
darkness. Ha! ha! said Gifford. Where did you find this? I answered him with a groan. Where are the letters? There are no letters. I am sorry for that!---What will you do with the picture? I was silent. Strike it! said Gifford. Strike it! What do you mean? Break the glass! What then? Break the glass, and return it to the place in which you found it! This will be a means to ascertain the guilt or innocence

of the possessor. If she is innocent, she will enquire how it came by this accident; she will express her anger against the carelessness of her maid. If she is
guilty, and retains this portrait to foster her guilt, she will not utter a word. This picture, pursued my adviser, is a circumstance that may well prove distressing to your mind. But it does not carry you forward in the design in which you
were engaged. It is no evidence. A married woman may possess the portrait of her young kinsman, may even in such a place as Bath, have caused it to be
painted
unknown to her husband, in perfect innocence. What shall I do? Advise me to no delay! Do not bid me wait the progress of events! I cannot bear it. Dispose of the picture as I told you. If mrs. Fleetwood says not a word on the subject, that will be something. But, if you are impatient to bring the affair to an immediate conclusion, I could advise a measure---I do not like the office. What have I to do, to destroy
mrs. Fleetwood and my brother? Gifford, when you see me in this terrible situation, if you refuse me your aid, you are not my friend! I am conquered!---Let Kenrick be invited here into Berkshire. When I was a school-boy, I had a particular facility in the imitation of hands. I am sure I could
imitate mrs. Fleetwood's with the utmost nicety. If you approve of it, I will write a letter in her name to my brother. It shall speak unequivocally the
language of a mistress to a favoured lover; it shall intreat him for private reasons, to come down incognito into Berkshire, and grant her an interview. If
he
comes, this will be to you the most incontestible evidence of their mutual crime; and the interview, of the very

day and hour of which you will be apprised, and can provide yourself witnesses of it accordingly, will probably produce something, that will at once place the
criminals under the lash of the law. I consented to this perfidious measure. My mind was in a state of too violent ferment, to perceive all the marks of a degraded and dangerous character, which
this proposal betrayed. Gifford artfully led to another part of the subject.---Mary was with child. From what time did she date the commencement of her pregnancy? From October. Full three months after your marriage! It was before you removed to Bath? It was. I do not know whether you recollect, ---I am not sure indeed that you observed, ---when mrs. Fleetwood and Kenrick met at Bath, that they did not

meet, like persons who saw each other for the first time? I did observe it. I saw it with surprise, and, to confess the truth, not without perturbation. Well! Did they ever account to you for this? My wife told me she had seen him in Merionethshire. She reminded me of the person, whom she had spoken of as rescuing her from the waves, when she laboured
under that terrible alienation of mind at the period of the equinox. From that period their intercourse commenced. It was kept a secret from you, till you invited Kenrick to come and reside under your roof. Perhaps indeed you
were never told how frequently they met. Thus did this damnable calumniator lead me on, with half-words, with broken sentences, and "ambiguous givings-out," to the most horrible conclusions. All the while, he interspersed his innuendoes, with the remark, that this was nothing, that these were particulars which had no necessary connection, and
adjured me to draw no inferences which might disturb my future peace, or urge me to any unjust proceeding. These cautions of Gifford persuaded me, that he
was
a conscientious and scrupulous observer, that I might trust all my interests to his hands, and that he "saw and knew more, much more, than he unfolded." Only this aggravation could have been added to my calamity. With what feelings had I gazed on my wife in a state of pregnancy? I had anticipated a successor to
the Macneils and the Fleetwoods with emotions of extacy. If I looked upon my individual existence with little complacency, and regarded myself as a
degenerate
shoot, I was determined that my child should not be so. He should be a genuine representative of the benefactors of the citizen of Uri. The lowest wretch that lives, the offender who is just going to expiate his
crimes at the gallows, yet loves his offspring, and rejoices that he shall thus survive himself in an innocent infant. To be cheated here, was the cruellest
of
all impostures. To strain to one's bosom the thing that we hold as our own flesh and blood, while that thing is in reality the impure brood of unhallowed
lust,
the enduring monument of the worst of crimes! Already I had begun to conceive that, if Mary proved unworthy, and were cast out, I might find some small
refuge
from despair in this child, who, in spite of her degeneracy, I judged was truly mine. This I believed would be an unadulterate Macneil, the substance in
which
the innocent Mary, the wife I had so fervently loved, would survive her fall. That last consolation Gifford

tore from me. I could never again return to serenity and fearless confidence. I who had been so wretchedly deceived in one point nearest my heart, had a right
to believe all the rest: it was the proper and legitimate second part to the imposition that had been acted. All was done as Gifford had projected. The picture, with its glass broken, was restored to Mary's casket. The letter to invite Kenrick to a secret interview,
was written. I never saw so exquisite a forgery. You might have taken a letter of Mary's, and placed it by the side of the counterfeit, without discovering a

single character that, by the imperfectness of imitation, could have led to a suspicion. This letter was never sent. Our consultations and proceedings took up the greater part of the night. Toward morning I threw myself upon my bed. To sleep I had not the smallest

inclination. My eyelids were weighed down with the anguish of my tortured heart; but they shut out, instead of receiving within their folds, the balm of
repose. Every articulation of my frame seemed to beat with a separate pulse; I was in a high fever. I tossed and turned from side to side; my eagerness to
make
an end of the scene which engaged my thoughts was inexpressible. Mary rose with the dawn of the morning. She was invigorated with repose; she had an animation and alacrity, the symbols of conscious innocence. She approached
my bed; in the gentlest and sweetest voice that ever came from a human organ, she pronounced my name. I feigned sleep. She stole out of the room, and shut
the
door softly after her. No sooner was she gone, than I started from my bed. I paced the room with

strides of rage and despair. The breakfast-parlour, to which my wife had bent hersteps, was in a distant part of the house. In about an hour Mary came to me again. I could no longer persuade myself to play the farce of sleep. I looked at her with eyes that glared. She spoke in the
most soothing and affectionate accents. She enquired for my health, whither I had gone yester-evening, and at what hour I had returned. She tried by smiles
and
little sallies of cheerfulness to excite me. I muttered between my teeth, Hypocrite! monster! devil! woman! but I retained sufficient command of my passions

not to break out into open extravagance. I answered with coldness and indifference. I regarded what she did as a perfect scene. The manner was like that
which
had subdued me, on the evening of the day when we read Fletcher's Wife for a Month. But the present case was out

of the reach of such remedies. It was thus that Cleopatra inveigled Mark Antony to his ruin, when she had determined to play him false with his confident
Dolabella. As my wife left the room, I saw her apply her handkerchief to her eyes, for anguish that she could not please me, and conscious that it was some
unjust displeasure against her that was at the bottom of my conduct. I steeled my heart against her sorrow; I said, she must perceive that I am animated with

some resentment, and were she not cowed with guilt, she would certainly demand an explanation. The next time she approached me, she said, My love, I am sure all this disturbance proceeds from some groundless resentment you have conceived against me. Acquaint me with the cause, and I have no doubt I shall be able to satisfy you.---This I found I could bear least of all. It seemed to me the most
incredible

degree of effrontery, to challenge a discussion. The proofs of her crime were too certain. The very child that existed in her womb witnessed that she was
unfaithful. In spite however of the tortures I suffered, I constrained myself, and played the dissembler. I told her, No, it was nothing; I was perfectly
satisfied; I had no complaint to make. I then kissed her. Oh, such a kiss was transport, was frenzy! My lips seemed to feel again the Mary that I had adored. I
then recollected, that Kenrick had planted a thousand miscreant kisses upon that very spot. I wished that my lips could have made a brand upon her cheek, as

broad, as deep, as horrid and distempered, as her guilt. I added with a sepulchral voice, that she should be informed what it was that had weighed upon my
mind. I waited all the morning for the event of Gifford's stratagem of the picture. Mary spent a full hour in her dressing-room. This apartment had a glass-door with a curtain. Gifford assured me, that, passing accidentally by this door, and
the curtain being displaced about a quarter of an inch at the bottom, he had seen Mary open the casket with some caution, examine the glass of the picture
with
marks of surprise, and then return it to its place. Certain it is, she made no enquiries or remarks upon the subject of the accident. We made a silent dinner; and, soon after it was over, I walked into the garden. The weather was bleak and severe; but I felt it not. A sharp north-wind blew in
my face; it only seemed to increase the heat within me. By and by I saw Mary come down the avenue. The day was so exceedingly disagreeable, that there could
be
no question her sole errand was to seek me; I turned into another walk to avoid her. I thought

she was gone in. Presently, having taken a small circuit, she was close upon me before I was aware. My dear Fleetwood, she said, you are not well. Why do you expose yourself to the weather on such a day? Mary, take care of yourself. You are tender and open to impression. It will do me no harm. She took hold of my hand.---Bless me, how cold you are! Come in, my love! Mary, I cannot go in. Leave me. You do not love me! Love you!---Why do you talk thus? ---By God, I love you to madness. Those eyes, those lips, these arms, why were they formed so beautiful? I feel you through
my soul; and your idea lives in every fibre of my heart. If you loved me, you would not make me a stranger to your thoughts. I have told you, you shall know them. You will know them too soon. And in the mean time I see you pale, indisposed, and uneasy in mind! Fleetwood, I am your wife. What did you mean when you made me so? I have a right to know
your thoughts, and share your sorrows. Think how we stand toward each other, if you deny me this! You claim then justice and your rights? Have a care! I will claim nothing. I will accept every thing as favour and indulgence. Fleetwood, my life, do not distract me with uncertainty and fears! If you have any
compassion for me, tell me what it is that distresses you! Open your bosom to your faithful wife, and let me soothe your sorrows! I will smooth your pillow,

and cover you with my arms; I will take care, by my assiduties, to deserve your confidence. I turned upon her, enraged at her duplicity.---Be gone! How dare you torment me thus! I intended to have been gentle and forbearing with you; but you compel me
to be severe. Learn not to intrude upon my privacy, when I chuse to be alone! By the eternal God, you shall repent your officiousness! Mary heard me with astonishment, and burst into tears.---Fleetwood---is it come to this?---This is too much---too much! I listened to her with an unmoved heart. I said to myself, These tears are Kenrick's! She took hold of my arm.---If ever you had compassion on the wife of your bosom---! I shook her from me. I said, Will you not leave me? She trembled, and fell with one knee and one hand upon the ground. I hurried to another part of the garden. When I was got to

a distance, I could not help looking back after her. I saw her return with staggering steps to the house. I said to myself, I did not wish for this. No, though
I will be severely just, I would not be a brute!---I recollected she was with child. Demons of hell! why was I reserved to this? What an insupportable, what a damnable situation!---Why was she formed so beautiful? Why are innocence and truth
written on her front? How like a saint, how like the purest of all mortal creatures, she talked!---With child!---the child is Kenrick's!---Grant,
all-merciful
heaven, that it may never see the light! Would God, it could be intercepted in its entrance into existence! ---Why did I marry? I, that had already passed
the
middle stage of life? I, that knew the sex so well, that had gained my knowledge by such bitter experience? ---What shall I do? How shall I signalise

the terribleness of my justice? And in what dungeon shall I afterward hide myself? Mary did not yet suspect any connection between the disorder in which she saw me, and the accident of the picture. Her innocent heart failed to suggest to her
that I could be jealous of my kinsman. I spent this night from home, at an obscure inn, where I was entirely unknown, and returned in the morning. About two o'clock I walked out with Gifford. He was
my confident; and I consulted him a little respecting the past, and talked somewhat by broken sentences in gloomy anticipations of the future. But my heart
was
too heavy to allow me to say much. My steps were those of despair; my frame was worn out with watching and perturbation. Gifford led me unawares toward a
little remote public-house. Come in here, he said. It may be worth your while. I followed mechanically. I paid no heed to what he said; I scarcely heard

it. I was totally indifferent whither he led me. He conducted me to a room on the first floor. Beneath the window there was a double row of elms with a smooth and regular turf between them. The afternoon was
fine. It was a clear, frosty day; and the sun, as it now approached to the west, painted the clouds with brilliant colours. These things I scarcely perceived

at the time; but I have recollected them since. After a time I heard the sound of voices at a little distance from the window. It was not natural that in my state of mind I should have paid attention to
this; but, though the voices were low, there was something in the accents, that arrested my soul. After a minute's earnest and impatient listening, I rushed
to
the window. I saw the speakers. They were Kenrick and my wife! Astonishing,

soul-blasting sight! They appeared to be in the act of parting. I rushed down stairs in a state of frenzy. Before I could get round to the spot, they were at some distance from each other. I pursued the villain. I called to
him to stop. He stood still, but did not advance toward me. As I came up to him, he seemed to be in great confusion. My uncle! Kenrick, how came you here? I beg your pardon, sir. You shall know all. Indeed you shall. Know all?---Am I of so little consequence to you? Have not you received the commissions I sent you? Did not you protest that your life would be too little to
show your devotedness? Ungrateful villain! I am afraid I have been wrong. Do not be angry with me! Be gone, sir!---I shall find a time for you! Only one word, uncle. Do not betray me! Do not tell any one that you saw me! It may do me the greatest injury in the world. Scornful boy! insolent wretch! I command you to leave me. I only wanted to be sure it was you. Go; I will be obeyed! Kenrick was aghast at the vehemence of my manner. He would have expostulated. But I would not hear him. I even raved at so shameless a persistence, till at
length he became convinced that this was no time for conference, and departed. I was alone. Gifford presently came and joined me.---Oh, God! oh, God! I cried; could I have believed it? It was but yesterday that I discovered the last proof
of her falshood! It was but yesterday that I confounded her with the

bitterness of my reproaches upon her guilt! And to-day she meets him here! How came he here? What is the meaning---? Gifford, leave me! For a moment, leave
me! I dare not. In the state of mind in which I see you, I am afraid lest you should do some act of desperation upon yourself! Upon myself!---Ha! ha, ha! I value them not a straw. I have no love for my wife; I never did love her! I hold myself at a price greater than ten thousand such
strumpets and profligates! They have no power to ruffle my thoughts. I am calm! perfectly calm! They thought to sting me! I never possessed my soul in more
entire tranquillity than at this moment!---Go into the house; I will join you instantly.---Gifford left me. Shall I go to my wife, and confront her with this new evidence of her guilt? ---No, I will never speak with her, never see her more. It is a condescension unworthy of an injured husband, ever to admit his prostituted consort into his
presence! It is as if God should go down and visit Satan in his polluted, sulphureous abodes!---How from my inmost soul I abhor her! How I will hold her up
to
the abhorrence of the world! How I should like to see her torn with red-hot pincers!---To what a height I have loved her! No, no, no, no, no---never! Presently the words which Kenrick had uttered came back to my ears. What did he mean, by asking me not to betray him, not to let any one know I had seen him? Was he mad?