I had wandered in my search to some distance from the spot on which I had been cast, and came to
one of those watch-towers, which at stated distances line the Italian shore. I was glad of shelter, glad
to find a work of human hands, after I had gazed so long on nature's drear barrenness; so I entered,
and ascended the rough winding staircase into the guard-room. So far was fate kind, that no
harrowing vestige remained of its former inhabitants; a few planks laid across two iron tressels, and
strewed with the dried leaves of Indian corn, was the bed presented to me; and an open chest,
containing some half mouldered biscuit, awakened an appetite, which perhaps existed before, but of
which, until now, I was not aware. Thirst also, violent and parching, the result of the sea-water I had
drank, and of the exhaustion of my frame, tormented me. Kind nature had gifted the supply of these
wants with pleasurable sensations, so that I-even I!-was refreshed and calmed, as I ate of this
sorry fare, and drank a little of the sour wine which half filled a flask left in this abandoned dwelling. Then I stretched myself on the bed, not to be disdained by the victim of shipwreck. The earthy smell
of the dried leaves was balm to my sense after the hateful odour of sea-weed. I forgot my state of
loneliness. I neither looked backward nor forward; my senses were hushed to repose; I fell asleep
and dreamed of all dear inland scenes, of hay-makers, of the shepherd's whistle to his dog, when he
demanded his help to drive the flock to fold; of sights and sounds peculiar to my boyhood's mountain
life, which I had long forgotten. I awoke in a painful agony-for I fancied that ocean, breaking its bounds, carried away the fixed
continent and deep rooted mountains, together with the streams I loved, the woods, and the
flocks-it raged around, with that continued and dreadful roar which had accompanied the last
wreck of surviving humanity. As my waking sense returned, the bare walls of the guard room closed
round me, and the rain pattered against the single window. How dreadful it is, to emerge from the
oblivion of slumber, and to receive as a good morrow the mute wailing of one's own hapless heart -
to return from the land of deceptive dreams, to the heavy knowledge of unchanged disaster!-Thus
was it with me, now, and for ever! The sting of other griefs might be blunted by time; and even mine
yielded sometimes during the day, to the pleasure inspired by the imagination or the senses; but I
never look first upon the morning-light but with my fingers pressed tight on my bursting heart, and
my soul deluged with the interminable flood of hopeless misery. Now I awoke for the first time in the
dead world-I awoke alone-and the dull dirge of the sea, heard even amidst the rain, recalled me to
the reflection of the wretch I had become. The sound came like a reproach, a scoff-like the sting of
remorse in the soul-I gasped-the veins and muscles of my throat swelled, suffocating me. I put my
fingers to my ears, I buried my head in the leaves of my couch, I would have dived to the centre to
lose hearing of that hideous moan. But another task must be mine-again I visited the detested beach- again I vainly looked far and
wide-again I raised my unanswered cry, lifting up the only voice that could ever again force the
mute air to syllable the human thought. What a pitiable, forlorn, disconsolate being I was! My very aspect and garb told the tale of my
despair. My hair was matted and wild-my limbs soiled with salt ooze; while at sea, I had thrown off
those of my garments that encumbered me, and the rain drenched the thin summer-clothing I had
retained-my feet were bare, and the stunted reeds and broken shells made them bleed-the while,
I hurried to and fro, now looking earnestly on some distant rock which, islanded in the sands, bore
for a moment a deceptive appearance-now with flashing eyes reproaching the murderous ocean for
its unutterable cruelty. For a moment I compared myself to that monarch of the waste-Robinson Crusoe. We had been
both thrown companionless-he on the shore of a desolate island: I on that of a desolate world. I
was rich in the so called goods of life. If I turned my steps from the near barren scene, and entered
any of the earth's million cities, I should find their wealth stored up for my accommodation-clothes,
food, books, and a choice of dwelling beyond the command of the princes of former times-every
climate was subject to my selection, while he was obliged to toil in the acquirement of every
necessary, and was the inhabitant of a tropical island, against whose heats and storms he could
obtain small shelter.-Viewing the question thus, who would not have preferred the Sybarite
enjoyments I could command, the philosophic leisure, and ample intellectual resources, to his life of
labour and peril? Yet he was far happier than I: for he could hope, nor hope in vain-the destined
vessel at last arrived, to bear him to countrymen and kindred, where the events of his solitude
became a fire-side tale. To none could I ever relate the story of my adversity; no hope had I. He knew
that, beyond the ocean which begirt his lonely island, thousands lived whom the sun enlightened
when it shone also on him: beneath the meridian sun and visiting moon, I alone bore human
features; I alone could give articulation to thought; and, when I slept, both day and night were
unbeheld of any. He had fled from his fellows, and was transported with terror at the print of a
human foot. I would have knelt down and worshipped the same. The wild and cruel Caribbee, the
merciless Cannibal-or worse than these, the uncouth, brute, and remorseless veteran in the vices of
civilization, would have been to me a beloved companion, a treasure dearly prized-his nature would
be kin to mine; his form cast in the same mould; human blood would flow in his veins; a human
sympathy must link us for ever. It cannot be that I shall never behold a fellow being more!-never! -
never!-not in the course of years!-Shall I wake, and speak to none, pass the interminable hours,
my soul, islanded in the world, a solitary point, surrounded by vacuum? Will day follow day endlessly
thus? -No! no! a God rules the world-providence has not exchanged its golden sceptre for an
aspic's sting. Away! let me fly from the ocean-grave, let me depart from this barren nook, paled in, as
it is, from access by its own desolateness; let me tread once again the paved towns; step over the
threshold of man's dwellings, and most certainly I shall find this thought a horrible vision-a
maddening, but evanescent dream. I entered Ravenna, (the town nearest to the spot whereon I had been cast), before the second sun
had set on the empty world; I saw many living creatures; oxen, and horses, and dogs, but there was
no man among them; I entered a cottage, it was vacant; I ascended the marble stairs of a palace, the
bats and the owls were nestled in the tapestry; I stepped softly, not to awaken the sleeping town: I
rebuked a dog, that by yelping disturbed the sacred stillness; I would not believe that all was as it
seemed-The world was not dead, but I was mad; I was deprived of sight, hearing, and sense of
touch; I was labouring under the force of a spell, which permitted me to behold all sights of earth,
except its human inhabitants; they were pursuing their ordinary labours. Every house had its inmate;
but I could not perceive them. If I could have deluded myself into a belief of this kind, I should have
been far more satisfied. But my brain, tenacious of its reason, refused to lend itself to such
imaginations-and though I endeavoured to play the antic to myself, I knew that I, the offspring of
man, during long years one among many-now remained sole survivor of my species. The sun sank behind the western hills; I had fasted since the preceding evening, but, though faint and
weary, I loathed food, nor ceased, while yet a ray of light remained, to pace the lonely streets. Night
came on, and sent every living creature but me to the bosom of its mate. It was my solace, to blunt
my mental agony by personal hardship-of the thousand beds around, I would not seek the luxury of
one; I lay down on the pavement,-a cold marble step served me for a pillow-midnight came; and
then, though not before, did my wearied lids shut out the sight of the twinkling stars, and their reflex
on the pavement near. Thus I passed the second night of my desolation. I AWOKE in the morning, just as the higher windows of the lofty houses received the first beams of
the rising sun. The birds were chirping, perched on the windows sills and deserted thresholds of the
doors. I awoke, and my first thought was, Adrian and Clara are dead. I no longer shall be hailed by
their good-morrow-or pass the long day in their society. I shall never see them more. The ocean has
robbed me of them-stolen their hearts of love from their breasts, and given over to corruption what
was dearer to me than light, or life, or hope. I was an untaught shepherd-boy, when Adrian deigned to confer on me his friendship. The best years
of my life had been passed with him. All I had possessed of this world's goods, of happiness,
knowledge, or virtue-I owed to him. He had, in his person, his intellect, and rare qualities, given a
glory to my life, which without him it had never known. Beyond all other beings he had taught me,
that goodness, pure and single, can be an attribute of man. It was a sight for angels to congregate to
behold, to view him lead, govern, and solace, the last days of the human race. My lovely Clara also was lost to me-she who last of the daughters of man, exhibited all those
feminine and maiden virtues, which poets, painters, and sculptors, have in their various languages
strove to express. Yet, as far as she was concerned, could I lament that she was removed in early
youth from the certain advent of misery? Pure she was of soul, and all her intents were holy. But her
heart was the throne of love, and the sensibility her lovely countenance expressed, was the prophet
of many woes, not the less deep and drear, because she would have for ever concealed them. These two wondrously endowed beings had been spared from the universal wreck, to be my
companions during the last year of solitude. I had felt, while they were with me, all their worth. I was
conscious that every other sentiment, regret, or passion had by degrees merged into a yearning,
clinging affection for them. I had not forgotten the sweet partner of my youth, mother of my
children, my adored Idris; but I saw at least a part of her spirit alive again in her brother; and after,
that by Evelyn's death I had lost what most dearly recalled her to me; I enshrined her memory in
Adrian's form, and endeavoured to confound the two dear ideas. I sound the depths of my heart, and
try in vain to draw thence the expressions that can typify my love for these remnants of my race. If
regret and sorrow came athwart me, as well it might in our solitary and uncertain state, the clear
tones of Adrian's voice, and his fervent look, dissipated the gloom; or I was cheered unaware by the
mild content and sweet resignation Clara's cloudless brow and deep blue eyes expressed. They were
all to me-the suns of my benighted soul-repose in my weariness-slumber in my sleepless woe. Ill,
most ill, with disjointed words, bare and weak, have I expressed the feeling with which I clung to
them. I would have wound myself like ivy inextricably round them, so that the same blow might
destroy us. I would have entered and been a part of them-so that
If the dull substance of my flesh were thought,
even now I had accompanied them to their new and incommunicable abode. Never shall I see them more. I am bereft of their dear converse-bereft of sight of them. I am a tree
rent by lightning; never will the bark close over the bared fibres-never will their quivering life, torn
by the winds, receive the opiate of a moment's balm. I am alone in the world- but that expression
as yet was less pregnant with misery, than that Adrian and Clara are dead. The tide of thought and feeling rolls on for ever the same, though the banks and shapes around,
which govern its course, and the reflection in the wave, vary. Thus the sentiment of immediate loss in
some sort decayed, while that of utter, irremediable loneliness grew on me with time. Three days I
wandered through Ravenna-now thinking only of the beloved beings who slept in the oozy caves of
ocean-now looking forward on the dread blank before me; shuddering to make an onward step-
writhing at each change that marked the progress of the hours. For three days I wandered to and fro in this melancholy town. I passed whole hours in going from
house to house, listening whether I could detect some lurking sign of human existence. Sometimes I
rang at a bell; it tinkled through the vaulted rooms, and silence succeeded to the sound. I called
myself hopeless, yet still I hoped; and still disappointment ushered in the hours, intruding the cold,
sharp steel which first pierced me, into the aching festering wound. I fed like a wild beast, which
seizes its food only when stung by intolerable hunger. I did not change my garb, or seek the shelter of
a roof, during all those days. Burning heats, nervous irritation, a ceaseless, but confused flow of
thought, sleepless nights, and days instinct with a frenzy of agitation, possessed me during that time. As the fever of my blood encreased, a desire of wandering came upon me. I remember, that the sun
had set on the fifth day after my wreck, when, without purpose or aim, I quitted the town of
Ravenna. I must have been very ill. Had I been possessed by more or less of delirium, that night had
surely been my last; for, as I continued to walk on the banks of the Mantone, whose upward course I
followed, I looked wistfully on the stream, acknowledging to myself that its pellucid waves could
medicine my woes for ever, and was unable to account to myself for my tardiness in seeking their
shelter from the poisoned arrows of thought, that were piercing me through and through. I walked a
considerable part of the night, and excessive weariness at length conquered my repugnance to the
availing myself of the deserted habitations of my species. The waning moon, which had just risen,
shewed me a cottage, whose neat entrance and trim garden reminded me of my own England. I
lifted up the latch of the door and entered. A kitchen first presented itself, where, guided by the
moon beams, I found materials for striking a light. Within this was a bed room; the couch was
furnished with sheets of snowy whiteness; the wood piled on the hearth, and an array as for a meal,
might almost have deceived me into the dear belief that I had here found what I had so long
sought-one survivor, a companion for my loneliness, a solace to my despair. I steeled myself against
the delusion; the room itself was vacant: it was only prudent, I repeated to myself, to examine the
rest of the house. I fancied that I was proof against the expectation; yet my heart beat audibly, as I
laid my hand on the lock of each door, and it sunk again, when I perceived in each the same vacancy. Dark and silent they were as vaults; so I returned to the first chamber, wondering what sightless host
had spread the materials for my repast, and my repose. I drew a chair to the table, and examined
what the viands were of which I was to partake. In truth it was a death feast! The bread was blue and
mouldy; the cheese lay a heap of dust. I did not dare examine the other dishes; a troop of ants
passed in a double line across the table cloth; every utensil was covered with dust, with cobwebs,
and myriads of dead flies: these were objects each and all betokening the fallaciousness of my
expectations. Tears rushed into my eyes; surely this was a wanton display of the power of the
destroyer. What had I done, that each sensitive nerve was thus to be anatomized? Yet why complain
more now than ever? This vacant cottage revealed no new sorrow- the world was empty; mankind
was dead-I knew it well-why quarrel therefore with an acknowledged and stale truth? Yet, as I
said, I had hoped in the very heart of despair, so that every new impression of the hard-cut reality on
my soul brought with it a fresh pang, telling me the yet unstudied lesson, that neither change of
place nor time could bring alleviation to my misery, but that, as I now was, I must continue, day after
day, month after month, year after year, while I lived. I hardly dared conjecture what space of time
that expression implied. It is true, I was no longer in the first blush of manhood; neither had I
declined far in the vale of years-men have accounted mine the prime of life: I had just entered my
thirty-seventh year; every limb was as well knit, every articulation as true, as when I had acted the
shepherd on the hills of Cumberland; and with these advantages I was to commence the train of
solitary life. Such were the reflections that ushered in my slumber on that night. The shelter, however, and less disturbed repose which I enjoyed, restored me the following morning
to a greater portion of health and strength, than I had experienced since my fatal shipwreck. Among
the stores I had discovered on searching the cottage the preceding night, was a quantity of dried
grapes; these refreshed me in the morning, as I left my lodging and proceeded towards a town which
I discerned at no great distance. As far as I could divine, it must have been Forli. I entered with
pleasure its wide and grassy streets. All, it is true, pictured the excess of desolation; yet I loved to find
myself in those spots which had been the abode of my fellow creatures. I delighted to traverse street
after street, to look up at the tall houses, and repeat to myself, once they contained beings similar to
myself-I was not always the wretch I am now. The wide square of Forli, the arcade around it, its
light and pleasant aspect cheered me. I was pleased with the idea, that, if the earth should be again
peopled, we, the lost race, would, in the relics left behind, present no contemptible exhibition of our
powers to the new comers. I entered one of the palaces, and opened the door of a magnificent saloon. I started-I looked again
with renewed wonder. What wild-looking, unkempt, half-naked savage was that before me? The
surprise was momentary. I perceived that it was I myself whom I beheld in a large mirror at the end of the hall. No wonder that
the lover of the princely Idris should fail to recognize himself in the miserable object there
pourtrayed. My tattered dress was that in which I had crawled half alive from the tempestuous sea. My long and tangled hair hung in elf locks on my brow-my dark eyes, now hollow and wild, gleamed
from under them-my cheeks were discoloured by the jaundice, which (the effect of misery and
neglect) suffused my skin, and were half hid by a beard of many days' growth. Yet why should I not remain thus, I thought; the world is dead, and this squalid attire is a fitter
mourning garb than the foppery of a black suit. And thus, methinks, I should have remained, had not
hope, without which I do not believe man could exist, whispered to me, that, in such a plight, I
should be an object of fear and aversion to the being, preserved I knew not where, but I fondly
trusted, at length, to be found by me. Will my readers scorn the vanity, that made me attire myself
with some care, for the sake of this visionary being? Or will they forgive the freaks of a half crazed
imagination? I can easily forgive myself-for hope, however vague, was so dear to me, and a
sentiment of pleasure of so rare occurrence, that I yielded readily to any idea, that cherished the
one, or promised any recurrence of the former to my sorrowing heart. After such occupation, I
visited every street, alley, and nook of Forli. These Italian towns presented an appearance of still
greater desolation, than those of England or France. Plague had appeared here earlier-it had
finished its course, and achieved its work much sooner than with us. Probably the last summer had
found no human being alive, in all the track included between the shores of Calabria and the
northern Alps. My search was utterly vain, yet I did not despond. Reason methought was on my side;
and the chances were by no means contemptible, that there should exist in some part of Italy a
survivor like myself-of a wasted, depopulate land. As therefore I rambled through the empty town, I
formed my plan for future operations. I would continue to journey on towards Rome. After I should
have satisfied myself, by a narrow search, that I left behind no human being in the towns through
which I passed, I would write up in a conspicuous part of each, with white paint, in three languages,
that "Verney, the last of the race of Englishmen, had taken up his abode in Rome." In pursuance of this scheme, I entered a painter's shop, and procured myself the paint. It is strange
that so trivial an occupation should have consoled, and even enlivened me. But grief renders one
childish, despair fantastic. To this simple inscription, I merely added the adjuration, "Friend, come! I
wait for thee!-Deh, vieni! ti aspetto!" On the following morning, with something like hope for my
companion, I quitted Forli on my way to Rome. Until now, agonizing retrospect, and dreary prospects
for the future, had stung me when awake, and cradled me to my repose. Many times I had delivered
myself up to the tyranny of anguish- many times I resolved a speedy end to my woes; and death by
my own hands was a remedy, whose practicability was even cheering to me. What could I fear in the
other world? If there were an hell, and I were doomed to it, I should come an adept to the sufferance
of its tortures-the act were easy, the speedy and certain end of my deplorable tragedy. But now
these thoughts faded before the new born expectation. I went on my way, not as before, feeling
each hour, each minute, to be an age instinct with incalculable pain. As I wandered along the plain, at the foot of the Appennines-through their vallies, and over their
bleak summits, my path led me through a country which had been trodden by heroes, visited and
admired by thousands. They had, as a tide, receded, leaving me blank and bare in the midst. But why
complain? Did I not hope?-so I schooled myself, even after the enlivening spirit had really deserted
me, and thus I was obliged to call up all the fortitude I could command, and that was not much, to
prevent a recurrence of that chaotic and intolerable despair, that had succeeded to the miserable
shipwreck, that had consummated every fear, and dashed to annihilation every joy. I rose each day with the morning sun, and left my desolate inn. As my feet strayed through the
unpeopled country, my thoughts rambled through the universe, and I was least miserable when I
could, absorbed in reverie, forget the passage of the hours. Each evening, in spite of weariness, I
detested to enter any dwelling, there to take up my nightly abode-I have sat, hour after hour, at the
door of the cottage I had selected, unable to lift the latch, and meet face to face blank desertion
within. Many nights, though autumnal mists were spread around, I passed under an ilex-many
times I have supped on arbutus berries and chestnuts, making a fire, gypsy-like, on the ground-
because wild natural scenery reminded me less acutely of my hopeless state of loneliness. I counted
the days, and bore with me a peeled willow-wand, on which, as well as I could remember, I had
notched the days that had elapsed since my wreck, and each night I added another unit to the
melancholy sum. I had toiled up a hill which led to Spoleto. Around was spread a plain, encircled by the chestnut-
covered Appennines. A dark ravine was on one side, spanned by an aqueduct, whose tall arches were
rooted in the dell below, and attested that man had once deigned to bestow labour and thought
here, to adorn and civilize nature. Savage, ungrateful nature, which in wild sport defaced his remains,
protruding her easily renewed, and fragile growth of wild flowers and parasite plants around his
eternal edifices. I sat on a fragment of rock, and looked round. The sun had bathed in gold the
western atmosphere, and in the east the clouds caught the radiance, and budded into transient
loveliness. It set on a world that contained me alone for its inhabitant. I took out my wand-I
counted the marks. Twenty-five were already traced-twenty-five days had already elapsed, since
human voice had gladdened my ears, or human countenance met my gaze. Twenty-five long, weary
days, succeeded by dark and lonesome nights, had mingled with foregone years, and had become a
part of the past-the never to be recalled-a real, undeniable portion of my life-twenty-five long,
long days. Why this was not a month!-Why talk of days-or weeks-or months-I must grasp years in my
imagination, if I would truly picture the future to myself-three, five, ten, twenty, fifty anniversaries
of that fatal epoch might elapse-every year containing twelve months, each of more numerous
calculation in a diary, than the twenty-five days gone by-Can it be? Will it be?-We had been used
to look forward to death tremulously- wherefore, but because its place was obscure? But more
terrible, and far more obscure, was the unveiled course of my lone futurity. I broke my wand; I threw
it from me. I needed no recorder of the inch and barley-corn growth of my life, while my unquiet
thoughts created other divisions, than those ruled over by the planets-and, in looking back on the
age that had elapsed since I had been alone, I disdained to give the name of days and hours to the
throes of agony which had in truth portioned it out. I hid my face in my hands. The twitter of the young birds going to rest, and their rustling among the
trees, disturbed the still evening-air-the crickets chirped-the aziolo cooed at intervals. My
thoughts had been of death-these sounds spoke to me of life. I lifted up my eyes-a bat wheeled
round-the sun had sunk behind the jagged line of mountains, and the paly, crescent moon was
visible, silver white, amidst the orange sunset, and accompanied by one bright star, prolonged thus
the twilight. A herd of cattle passed along in the dell below, untended, towards their watering
place-the grass was rustled by a gentle breeze, and the olive-woods, mellowed into soft masses by
the moonlight, contrasted their sea-green with the dark chestnut foliage. Yes, this is the earth; there
is no change-no ruin-no rent made in her verdurous expanse; she continues to wheel round and
round, with alternate night and day, through the sky, though man is not her adorner or inhabitant. Why could I not forget myself like one of those animals, and no longer suffer the wild tumult of
misery that I endure? Yet, ah! what a deadly breach yawns between their state and mine! Have not
they companions? Have not they each their mate-their cherished young, their home, which, though
unexpressed to us, is, I doubt not, endeared and enriched, even in their eyes, by the society which
kind nature has created for them? It is I only that am alone-I, on this little hill top, gazing on plain
and mountain recess-on sky, and its starry population, listening to every sound of earth, and air,
and murmuring wave,-I only cannot express to any companion my many thoughts, nor lay my
throbbing head on any loved bosom, nor drink from meeting eyes an intoxicating dew, that
transcends the fabulous nectar of the gods. Shall I not then complain? Shall I not curse the
murderous engine which has mowed down the children of men, my brethren? Shall I not bestow a
malediction on every other of nature's offspring, which dares live and enjoy, while I live and suffer? Ah, no! I will discipline my sorrowing heart to sympathy in your joys; I will be happy, because ye are
so. Live on, ye innocents, nature's selected darlings; I am not much unlike to you. Nerves, pulse,
brain, joint, and flesh, of such am I composed, and ye are organized by the same laws. I have
something beyond this, but I will call it a defect, not an endowment, if it leads me to misery, while ye
are happy. Just then, there emerged from a near copse two goats and a little kid, by the mother's
side; they began to browze the herbage of the hill. I approached near to them, without their
perceiving me; I gathered a handful of fresh grass, and held it out; the little one nestled close to its
mother, while she timidly withdrew. The male stepped forward, fixing his eyes on me: I drew near,
still holding out my lure, while he, depressing his head, rushed at me with his horns. I was a very fool;
I knew it, yet I yielded to my rage. I snatched up a huge fragment of rock; it would have crushed my
rash foe. I poized it-aimed it-then my heart failed me. I hurled it wide of the mark; it rolled
clattering among the bushes into dell. My little visitants, all aghast, galloped back into the covert of
the wood; while I, my very heart bleeding and torn, rushed down the hill, and by the violence of
bodily exertion, sought to escape from my miserable self. No, no, I will not live among the wild scenes of nature, the enemy of all that lives. I will seek the
towns-Rome, the capital of the world, the crown of man's achievements. Among its storied streets,
hallowed ruins, and stupendous remains of human exertion, I shall not, as here, find every thing
forgetful of man; trampling on his memory, defacing his works, proclaiming from hill to hill, and vale
to vale,-by the torrents freed from the boundaries which he imposed-by the vegetation liberated
from the laws which he enforced-by his habitation abandoned to mildew and weeds, that his power
is lost, his race annihilated for ever. I hailed the Tiber, for that was as it were an unalienable possession of humanity. I hailed the wild
Campagna, for every rood had been trod by man; and its savage uncultivation, of no recent date,
only proclaimed more distinctly his power, since he had given an honourable name and sacred title
to what else would have been a worthless, barren track. I entered Eternal Rome by the Porta del
Popolo, and saluted with awe its time-honoured space. The wide square, the churches near, the long
extent of the Corso, the near eminence of Trinita de' Monti appeared like fairy work, they were so
silent, so peaceful, and so very fair. It was evening; and the population of animals which still existed
in this mighty city, had gone to rest; there was no sound, save the murmur of its many fountains,
whose soft monotony was harmony to my soul. The knowledge that I was in Rome, soothed me; that
wondrous city, hardly more illustrious for its heroes and sages, than for the power it exercised over
the imaginations of men. I went to rest that night; the eternal burning of my heart quenched,-my
senses tranquil. The next morning I eagerly began my rambles in search of oblivion. I ascended the many terraces of
the garden of the Colonna Palace, under whose roof I had been sleeping; and passing out from it at
its summit, I found myself on Monte Cavallo. The fountain sparkled in the sun; the obelisk above
pierced the clear dark-blue air. The statues on each side, the works, as they are inscribed, of Phidias
and Praxiteles, stood in undiminished grandeur, representing Castor and Pollux, who with majestic
power tamed the rearing animal at their side. If those illustrious artists had in truth chiselled these
forms, how many passing generations had their giant proportions outlived! and now they were
viewed by the last of the species they were sculptured to represent and deify. I had shrunk into
insignificance in my own eyes, as I considered the multitudinous beings these stone demigods had
outlived, but this after-thought restored me to dignity in my own conception. The sight of the poetry
eternized in these statues, took the sting from the thought, arraying it only in poetic ideality. I repeated to myself,-I am in Rome! I behold, and as it were, familiarly converse with the wonder of
the world, sovereign mistress of the imagination, majestic and eternal survivor of millions of
generations of extinct men. I endeavoured to quiet the sorrows of my aching heart, by even now
taking an interest in what in my youth I had ardently longed to see. Every part of Rome is replete
with relics of ancient times. The meanest streets are strewed with truncated columns, broken
capitals-Corinthian and Ionic, and sparkling fragments of granite or porphyry. The walls of the most
penurious dwellings enclose a fluted pillar or ponderous stone, which once made part of the palace
of the Caesars; and the voice of dead time, in still vibrations, is breathed from these dumb things,
animated and glorified as they were by man. I embraced the vast columns of the temple of Jupiter Stator, which survives in the open space that
was the Forum, and leaning my burning cheek against its cold durability, I tried to lose the sense of
present misery and present desertion, by recalling to the haunted cell of my brain vivid memories of
times gone by. I rejoiced at my success, as I figured Camillus, the Gracchi, Cato, and last the heroes of
Tacitus, which shine meteors of surpassing brightness during the murky night of the empire;-as the
verses of Horace and Virgil, or the glowing periods of Cicero thronged into the opened gates of my
mind, I felt myself exalted by long forgotten enthusiasm. I was delighted to know that I beheld the
scene which they beheld-the scene which their wives and mothers, and crowds of the unnamed
witnessed, while at the same time they honoured, applauded, or wept for these matchless
specimens of humanity. At length, then, I had found a consolation. I had not vainly sought the storied
precincts of Rome-I had discovered a medicine for my many and vital wounds. I sat at the foot of these vast columns. The Coliseum, whose naked ruin is robed by nature in a
verdurous and glowing veil, lay in the sunlight on my right. Not far off, to the left, was the Tower of
the Capitol. Triumphal arches, the falling walls of many temples, strewed the ground at my feet. I
strove, I resolved, to force myself to see the Plebeian multitude and lofty Patrician forms
congregated around; and, as the Diorama of ages passed across my subdued fancy, they were
replaced by the modern Roman; the Pope, in his white stole, distributing benedictions to the
kneeling worshippers; the friar in his cowl; the dark-eyed girl, veiled by her mezzera; the noisy, sun-
burnt rustic, leading his herd of buffaloes and oxen to the Campo Vaccino. The romance with which,
dipping our pencils in the rainbow hues of sky and transcendent nature, we to a degree gratuitously
endow the Italians, replaced the solemn grandeur of antiquity. I remembered the dark monk, and
floating figures of "The Italian," and how my boyish blood had thrilled at the description. I called to
mind Corinna ascending the Capitol to be crowned, and, passing from the heroine to the author,
reflected how the Enchantress Spirit of Rome held sovereign sway over the minds of the imaginative,
until it rested on me-sole remaining spectator of its wonders. I was long wrapt by such ideas; but the soul wearies of a pauseless flight; and, stooping from its
wheeling circuits round and round this spot, suddenly it fell ten thousand fathom deep, into the
abyss of the present- into self-knowledge-into tenfold sadness. I roused myself-I cast off my
waking dreams; and I, who just now could almost hear the shouts of the Roman throng, and was
hustled by countless multitudes, now beheld the desart ruins of Rome sleeping under its own blue
sky; the shadows lay tranquilly on the ground; sheep were grazing untended on the Palatine, and a
buffalo stalked down the Sacred Way that led to the Capitol. I was alone in the Forum; alone in
Rome; alone in the world. Would not one living man -one companion in my weary solitude, be
worth all the glory and remembered power of this time-honoured city? Double sorrow-sadness,
bred in Cimmerian caves, robed my soul in a mourning garb. The generations I had conjured up to my
fancy, contrasted more strongly with the end of all -the single point in which, as a pyramid, the
mighty fabric of society had ended, while I, on the giddy height, saw vacant space around me. From such vague laments I turned to the contemplation of the minutiae of my situation. So far, I had
not succeeded in the sole object of my desires, the finding a companion for my desolation. Yet I did
not despair. It is true that my inscriptions were set up for the most part, in insignificant towns and
villages; yet, even without these memorials, it was possible that the person, who like me should find
himself alone in a depopulate land, should, like me, come to Rome. The more slender my expectation
was, the more I chose to build on it, and to accommodate my actions to this vague possibility. It became necessary therefore, that for a time I should domesticate myself at Rome. It became
necessary, that I should look my disaster in the face- not playing the school-boy's part of obedience
without submission; enduring life, and yet rebelling against the laws by which I lived. Yet how could I resign myself? Without love, without sympathy, without communion with any, how
could I meet the morning sun, and with it trace its oft repeated journey to the evening shades? Why
did I continue to live- why not throw off the weary weight of time, and with my own hand, let out
the fluttering prisoner from my agonized breast?-It was not cowardice that withheld me; for the
true fortitude was to endure; and death had a soothing sound accompanying it, that would easily
entice me to enter its demesne. But this I would not do. I had, from the moment I had reasoned on
the subject, instituted myself the subject to fate, and the servant of necessity, the visible laws of the
invisible God-I believed that my obedience was the result of sound reasoning, pure feeling, and an
exalted sense of the true excellence and nobility of my nature. Could I have seen in this empty earth,
in the seasons and their change, the hand of a blind power only, most willingly would I have placed
my head on the sod, and closed my eyes on its loveliness for ever. But fate had administered life to
me, when the plague had already seized on its prey-she had dragged me by the hair from out the
strangling waves-By such miracles she had bought me for her own; I admitted her authority, and
bowed to her decrees. If, after mature consideration, such was my resolve, it was doubly necessary
that I should not lose the end of life, the improvement of my faculties, and poison its flow by
repinings without end. Yet how cease to repine, since there was no hand near to extract the barbed
spear that had entered my heart of hearts? I stretched out my hand, and it touched none whose
sensations were responsive to mine. I was girded, walled in, vaulted over, by seven-fold barriers of
loneliness. Occupation alone, if I could deliver myself up to it, would be capable of affording an
opiate to my sleepless sense of woe. Having determined to make Rome my abode, at least for some
months, I made arrangements for my accommodation-I selected my home. The Colonna Palace was
well adapted for my purpose. Its grandeur- its treasure of paintings, its magnificent halls were
objects soothing and even exhilarating. I found the granaries of Rome well stored with grain, and particularly with Indian corn; this product
requiring less art in its preparation for food, I selected as my principal support. I now found the
hardships and lawlessness of my youth turn to account. A man cannot throw off the habits of sixteen
years. Since that age, it is true, I had lived luxuriously, or at least surrounded by all the conveniences
civilization afforded. But before that time, I had been "as uncouth a savage, as the wolf-bred founder
of old Rome"-and now, in Rome itself, robber and shepherd propensities, similar to those of its
founder, were of advantage to its sole inhabitant. I spent the morning riding and shooting in the
Campagna-I passed long hours in the various galleries-I gazed at each statue, and lost myself in a
reverie before many a fair Madonna or beauteous nymph. I haunted the Vatican, and stood
surrounded by marble forms of divine beauty. Each stone deity was possessed by sacred gladness,
and the eternal fruition of love. They looked on me with unsympathizing complacency, and often in
wild accents I reproached them for their supreme indifference-for they were human shapes, the
human form divine was manifest in each fairest limb and lineament. The perfect moulding brought
with it the idea of colour and motion; often, half in bitter mockery, half in self-delusion, I clasped
their icy proportions, and, coming between Cupid and his Psyche's lips, pressed the unconceiving
marble. I endeavoured to read. I visited the libraries of Rome. I selected a volume, and, choosing some
sequestered, shady nook, on the banks of the Tiber, or opposite the fair temple in the Borghese
Gardens, or under the old pyramid of Cestius, I endeavoured to conceal me from myself, and
immerse myself in the subject traced on the pages before me. As if in the same soil you plant
nightshade and a myrtle tree, they will each appropriate the mould, moisture, and air administered,
for the fostering their several properties-so did my grief find sustenance, and power of existence,
and growth, in what else had been divine manna, to feed radiant meditation. Ah! while I streak this
paper with the tale of what my so named occupations were-while I shape the skeleton of my days-
my hand trembles-my heart pants, and my brain refuses to lend expression, or phrase, or idea, by
which to image forth the veil of unutterable woe that clothed these bare realities. O, worn and
beating heart, may I dissect thy fibres, and tell how in each unmitigable misery, sadness dire,
repinings, and despair, existed? May I record my many ravings-the wild curses I hurled at torturing
nature-and how I have passed days shut out from light and food-from all except the burning hell
alive in my own bosom? I was presented, meantime, with one other occupation, the one best fitted to discipline my
melancholy thoughts, which strayed backwards, over many a ruin, and through many a flowery
glade, even to the mountain recess, from which in early youth I had first emerged. During one of my rambles through the habitations of Rome, I found writing materials on a table in an
author's study. Parts of a manuscript lay scattered about. It contained a learned disquisition on the
Italian language; one page an unfinished dedication to posterity, for whose profit the writer had
sifted and selected the niceties of this harmonious language -to whose everlasting benefit he
bequeathed his labours. I also will write a book, I cried-for whom to read?-to whom dedicated? And then with silly flourish
(what so capricious and childish as despair?) I wrote, DEDICATION TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS DEAD. SHADOWS, ARISE, AND READ YOUR FALL! BEHOLD THE HISTORY OF THE LAST MAN. Yet, will not this world be re-peopled, and the children of a saved pair of lovers, in some to me
unknown and unattainable seclusion, wandering to these prodigious relics of the ante-pestilential
race, seek to learn how beings so wondrous in their achievements, with imaginations infinite, and
powers godlike, had departed from their home to an unknown country? I will write and leave in this most ancient city, this "world's sole monument," a record of these things. I will leave a monument of the existence of Verney, the Last Man. At first I thought only to speak of
plague, of death, and last, of desertion; but I lingered fondly on my early years, and recorded with
sacred zeal the virtues of my companions. They have been with me during the fulfilment of my task. I
have brought it to an end-I lift my eyes from my paper-again they are lost to me. Again I feel that I
am alone. A year has passed since I have been thus occupied. The seasons have made their wonted round, and
decked this eternal city in a changeful robe of surpassing beauty. A year has passed; and I no longer
guess at my state or my prospects-loneliness is my familiar, sorrow my inseparable companion. I
have endeavoured to brave the storm-I have endeavoured to school myself to fortitude-I have
sought to imbue myself with the lessons of wisdom. It will not do. My hair has become nearly grey-
my voice, unused now to utter sound, comes strangely on my ears. My person, with its human
powers and features, seem to me a monstrous excrescence of nature. How express in human
language a woe human being until this hour never knew! How give intelligible expression to a pang
none but I could ever understand!- No one has entered Rome. None will ever come. I smile bitterly
at the delusion I have so long nourished, and still more, when I reflect that I have exchanged it for
another as delusive, as false, but to which I now cling with the same fond trust. Winter has come again; and the gardens of Rome have lost their leaves- the sharp air comes over
the Campagna, and has driven its brute inhabitants to take up their abode in the many dwellings of
the deserted city-frost has suspended the gushing fountains-and Trevi has stilled her eternal
music. I had made a rough calculation, aided by the stars, by which I endeavoured to ascertain the
first day of the new year. In the old out-worn age, the Sovereign Pontiff was used to go in solemn
pomp, and mark the renewal of the year by driving a nail in the gate of the temple of Janus. On that
day I ascended St. Peter's, and carved on its topmost stone the aera 2100, last year of the world! My only companion was a dog, a shaggy fellow, half water and half shepherd's dog, whom I found
tending sheep in the Campagna. His master was dead, but nevertheless he continued fulfilling his
duties in expectation of his return. If a sheep strayed from the rest, he forced it to return to the flock,
and sedulously kept off every intruder. Riding in the Campagna I had come upon his sheep-walk, and
for some time observed his repetition of lessons learned from man, now useless, though
unforgotten. His delight was excessive when he saw me. He sprung up to my knees; he capered
round and round, wagging his tail, with the short, quick bark of pleasure: he left his fold to follow me,
and from that day has never neglected to watch by and attend on me, shewing boisterous gratitude
whenever I caressed or talked to him. His pattering steps and mine alone were heard, when we
entered the magnificent extent of nave and aisle of St. Peter's. We ascended the myriad steps
together, when on the summit I achieved my design, and in rough figures noted the date of the last
year. I then turned to gaze on the country, and to take leave of Rome. I had long determined to quit
it, and I now formed the plan I would adopt for my future career, after I had left this magnificent
abode. A solitary being is by instinct a wanderer, and that I would become. A hope of amelioration always
attends on change of place, which would even lighten the burthen of my life. I had been a fool to
remain in Rome all this time: Rome noted for Malaria, the famous caterer for death. But it was still
possible, that, could I visit the whole extent of earth, I should find in some part of the wide extent a
survivor. Methought the sea-side was the most probable retreat to be chosen by such a one. If left
alone in an inland district, still they could not continue in the spot where their last hopes had been
extinguished; they would journey on, like me, in search of a partner for their solitude, till the watery
barrier stopped their further progress. To that water-cause of my woes, perhaps now to be their cure, I would betake myself. Farewell,
Italy!-farewell, thou ornament of the world, matchless Rome, the retreat of the solitary one during
long months!-to civilized life-to the settled home and succession of monotonous days, farewell! Peril will now be mine; and I hail her as a friend-death will perpetually cross my path, and I will
meet him as a benefactor; hardship, inclement weather, and dangerous tempests will be my sworn
mates. Ye spirits of storm, receive me! ye powers of destruction, open wide your arms, and clasp me
for ever! if a kinder power have not decreed another end, so that after long endurance I may reap
my reward, and again feel my heart beat near the heart of another like to me. Tiber, the road which is spread by nature's own hand, threading her continent, was at my feet, and
many a boat was tethered to the banks.