She therefore took care that whatever she provided for
the table, besides the simplest fare, should be for Berrendale alone;
and she flattered herself that he would be shamed into repentance of
what he had observed, by seeing her scrupulous self-denial:--she even
resolved, if he pressed her to partake of his dainties, that she would,
to show that she forgave him, accept what he offered. But Berrendale gave her no such opportunity of showing her
generosity;--busy in the gratification of his own appetite, he never
observed whether any other persons ate or not, except when by eating
they curtailed his share of good things:--besides, to have an exclusive
dish to himself seemed to him quite natural and proper; he had been a
pampered child; and, being no advocate for the equality of the sexes, he
thought it only a matter of course that he should fare better than his
wife. Adeline, though more surprised and more shocked than ever, could not
help laughing internally, at her not being able to put her projected
generosity in practice; but her laughter and indignation soon yielding
to contempt, she ate her simple meal in silence: and while her pampered
husband sought to lose the fumes of indigestion in sleep, she blessed
God that temperance, industry and health went hand-in-hand, and,
retiring to her own room, sat down to write, in order to increase, if
possible, her means of living, and consequently her power of being
generous to others. But though Adeline resolved to forget, if possible, the petty conduct
of Berrendale, the mulatto, who, from the door's being open, had heard
every word of the conversation which had so disturbed Adeline, neither
could nor would forget it; and though she did not vow eternal hatred to
her master, she felt herself very capable of indulging it, and from that
moment it was her resolution to thwart him. Whenever he was present, she was always urging Adeline to eat some
refreshments between meals, and drink wine or lemonade, and tempting
her weak appetite with some pleasant but expensive sweetmeats. In vain
did Adeline refuse them; sometimes they were bought, sometimes only
threatened to be bought; and once when Adeline had accepted some, rather
than mortify Savanna by a refusal, and Berrendale, by his accent and
expression, showed how much he grudged the supposed expense,--the
mulatto, snapping her fingers in his face, and looking at him with an
expression of indignant contempt, exclaimed, 'I buy dem, and pay for dem
wid mine nown money; and my angel lady sall no be oblige to you!' This was a declaration of war against Berrendale, which Adeline heard
with anger and sorrow, and her husband with rage. In vain did Adeline
promise that she would seriously reprove Savanna (who had disappeared)
for her impertinence; Berrendale insisted on her being discharged
immediately; and nothing but Adeline's assurances that she, for slender
wages, did more work than two other servants would do for enormous ones,
could pacify his displeasure: but at length he was appeased. And as
Berrendale, from a principle of economy, resumed his old habit of dining
out amongst his friends, getting good dinners by that means without
paying for them, family expenses ceased to disturb the quiet of their
marriage; and after she had been ten months a wife Adeline gave birth to
a daughter. That moment, the moment when she heard her infant's first cry, seem
to repay her for all she had suffered; every feeling was lost in the
maternal one; and she almost fancied that she loved, fondly loved, the
father of her child: but this idea vanished when she saw the languid
pleasure, if pleasure it could be called, with which Berrendale
congratulated her on her pain and danger being passed, and received his
child in his arms. The mulatto was wild with joy: she almost stifled the babe with her
kisses, and talked even the next day of sending for the tawny boy to
come and see his new mistress, and vow to her, as he had done to her
mother, eternal fealty and allegiance. But Adeline saw on Berrendale's countenance a mixed expression,--and he
had mixed feelings. True, he rejoiced in Adeline's safety; but he said
within himself, 'Children are expensive things, and we may have a large
family;' and, leaving the bedside as soon as he could, he retired, to
endeavour to lose in an afternoon's nap his unpleasant reflections. 'How different,' thought Adeline, 'would have been HIS feelings and HIS
expressions of them at such a time! Oh!--' but the name of Glenmurray
died away on her lips; and hastily turning to gaze on her sleeping babe,
she tried to forget the disappointed emotions of the wife in the
gratified feelings of the mother. Still Adeline, who had been used to attentions, could not but feel the
neglect of Berrendale. Even while she kept her room he passed only a few
hours in her society, and dined out; and when she was well enough to
have accompanied him on his visits, she found that he never even wished
her to go with him, though the friends whom he visited were married;
and he met, from his own confessions, other ladies at their tables. She
therefore began to suspect that Berrendale did not mean to introduce her
as his wife; nay, she doubted whether he avowed her to be such; and at
last she brought him to own that, ashamed of having married what the
world must consider as a kept mistress, he resolved to keep her still in
the retirement to which she was habituated. This was a severe disappointment indeed to Adeline: she longed for the
society of the amiable and accomplished of her own sex; and hoped that,
as Mr Berrendale's wife, that intercourse with her own sex might be
restored to her which she had forfeited as the mistress of Glenmurray. Nor could she help reproaching Berrendale for the selfish ease and
indifference with which he saw her deprived of those social enjoyments
which he daily enjoyed himself, convinced as she was that he might, if
he chose, have introduced her at least to his intimate friends. But she pleaded and reasoned in vain. Contented with the access which he
had to the tables of his friends, it was of little importance to him
that his wife ate her humble meal alone. His habits of enjoyment had
ever been solitary: the school-boy, who had at school eaten his tart and
cake by stealth in a corner, that he might not be asked to share them
with another, had grown up with the same dispositions to manhood: and as
his parents, thought opulent, were vulgar in their manners and low in
their origin, he had never been taught those graceful self-denials
inculcated into the children of polished life, which, though taught from
factitious and not real benevolence, have certainly a tendency, by long
habit, to make that benevolence real which at first was only artificial. Adeline had both sorts of kindness and affection, those untaught of
the heart, and those of education;--she was polite from the situation
into which the accident of birth had thrown her, and also from the
generous impulse of her nature. To her, therefore, the uncultivated and
unblushing _personnalité_, as the French call it, of Berrendale, was a
source of constant wonder and distress: and often, very often did she
feel the utmost surprise at Berrendale's having appeared to Glenmurray
a man likely to make her happy. Often did she wonder how the defects of
Berrendale's character could have escaped his penetrating eyes. Adeline forgot that the faults of her husband were such as could be
known only by an intimate connexion, and which cohabitation could alone
call forth;--faults, the existence of which such a man as Glenmurray,
who never considered himself in any transaction whatever, could not
suppose possible; and which, though they inflicted the most bitter pangs
on Adeline, and gradually untwisted the slender thread which had began
to unite her heart with Berrendale's, were of so slight a fabric as
almost to elude the touch, and of a nature to appear almost too trivial
to be mentioned in the narration of a biographer. But though it has been long said that trifles make the sum of human
things, inattention to trifles continues to be the vice of every one;
and many a conjugal union which has never been assailed by the battery
of crime, has fallen a victim to the slowly undermining power of petty
quarrels, trivial unkindnesses and thoughtless neglect;--like the
gallant officer, who, after escaping unhurt all the rage of battle by
land and water, tempest on sea and earthquake on shore, returns perhaps
to his native country, and perishes by the power of a slow fever. But Adeline, who, amidst all the chimaeras of her fancy and singularities
of her opinions, had happily held fast her religion, began at this
moment to entertain a belief that soothed in some measure the sorrows
which it could not cure. She fancied that all the sufferings she
underwent were trials which she was doomed to undergo, as punishments
for the crime she had committed in leaving her mother and living with
Glenmurray. She therefore welcomed her afflictions, and lifted up her
meek eyes to her God and Saviour, in every hour of her trials, with the
look of tearful but grateful resignation. Meanwhile her child, whom, after her mother, she called Editha, was
nursed at her own bosom, and thrived even beyond her expectations. Even
Berrendale beheld its growing beauty with delight, and the mulatto was
wild in praise of it; while Adeline, wholly taken up all day in nursing
and in working for it, and every evening in writing stories and hymns to
publish, which would, she hoped, one day be useful to her own child as
well as to the children of others, soon ceased to regret her seclusion
from society; and by the time Editha was a year old she had learnt to
bear with patience the disappointment she had experienced in Berrendale. Soon after she became a mother she again wrote to Mrs Pemberton, as she
longed to impart to her sympathizing bosom those feelings of parental
delight which Berrendale could not understand, and the expression of
which he witnessed with contemptuous and chilling gravity. To this
letter she anticipated a most gratifying return; but month after month
passed away, and no letter from Lisbon arrived. 'No doubt my letter
miscarried,' said Adeline to Savanna, 'and I will write again:' but
she never had resolution to do so; for she felt that her prospects of
conjugal happiness were obscured, and she shrunk equally from the task
of expressing the comfort which she did not feel, or unveiling to
another the errors of her husband. The little regard, meanwhile, which
she had endeavoured to return for Berrendale soon vanished, being unable
to withstand a new violence offered to it. Editha was seized with the hooping-cough; and as Adeline had sold her
last little volume to advantage, Berrendale allowed her to take a
lodging at a short distance from town, as change of air was good for the
complaint. She did so, and remained there two months. At her return she
had the mortification to find that her husband, during her absence, had
intrigued with the servant of the house:--a circumstance of which she
would probably have remained ignorant, but for the indiscreet affection
of Savanna, who, in the first transports of her indignation on
discovering the connexion, had been unable to conceal from her mistress
what drove her almost frantic with indignation. But Adeline, though she felt disgust and aversion swallowing up the few
remaining sparks of regard for Berrendale which she felt, had one great
consolation under this new calamity.--Berrendale had not been the choice
of her heart: 'But, thank Heaven! I never loved this man,' escaped her
lips as she ran into her own room; and pressing her child to her bosom,
she shed on its unconscious cheeks the tears which resentment and a deep
sense of injury wrung from her.--'Oh! had I loved him,' she exclaimed,
'this blow would have been mortal!' She, however, found herself in one respect the better for Berrendale's
guilt. Conscious that the mulatto was aware of what had passed, and
afraid lest she should have mentioned her discovery to Adeline,
Berrendale endeavoured to make amends for his infidelity by attention
such as he had never shown her since the first weeks of his marriage;
and had she not been aware of the motive, the change in his behaviour
would have re-awakened her tenderness. However, it claimed at least
complaisance and gentleness from her while it lasted: which was not
long; for Berrendale, fancying from the apparent tranquillity of Adeline
(the result of indifference, not ignorance,) that she was not informed
of his fault, and that the mulatto was too prudent to betray him, began
to relapse into his old habits; and one day, forgetting his assumed
liberality, he ventured, when alone with Savanna, who was airing one of
Editha's caps, to expatiate on the needless extravagance of his wife in
trimming her child's caps with lace. This was enough to rouse the quick feelings of the mulatto, and she
poured forth all her long concealed wrath in a torrent of broken
English, but plain enough to be well understood.--'You man!' she cried
at last, 'you will kill her; she pine at your no kindness;--and if she
die, mind me, man! never you marry aden.--You marry, forsoot! you marry
a lady! true bred lady like mine! No, man!--You best get a cheap miss
from de street and be content--'

As she said this, and in an accent so provoking that Berrendale was pale
and speechless with rage, Adeline entered the room; and Savanna,
self-condemned already from what she had uttered, was terrified when
Adeline, in a tone of voice unusually severe, said, 'Leave the room; you
have offended me past forgiveness.' These words, in a great measure, softened the angry feelings of
Berrendale, as they proved that Adeline resented the insult offered to
him as deeply as he could wish; and with some calmness he exclaimed,
'Then I conclude, Mrs Berrendale, that you will have no objection to
discharge your mulatto directly?' This conclusion, though a very natural one, was both a shock and a
surprise to Adeline; nor could she at first reply. 'You are _silent_, madam,' said Berrendale; 'what is your answer? Yes,
or No?' 'Yes,--yes,--certainly,' faltered out Adeline; 'she--she ought to go--I
mean that she has used very improper language to you.' 'And, therefore, a wife who resents as she ought to do, injuries offered
to her husband cannot hesitate for a moment to discharge her.' 'True, very true in some measure,' replied Adeline; 'but--'

'But what?' demanded Berrendale. 'O Berrendale!' cried Adeline, bursting
into an agony of frantic sorrow, 'if she leaves me, what will become of
me! I shall lose the only person now in the world, perhaps, who loves me
with sincere and faithful affection!' Berrendale was wholly unprepared for an appeal like this; and,
speechless from surprise not unmixed with confusion, staggered into the
next chair. He was conscious, indeed, that his fidelity to his wife had
not been proof against a few weeks' absence; but then, being, like most
men, not over delicate in his idea on such subjects, as soon as Adeline
returned he had given up the connexion which he had formed, and
therefore he thought she had not much reason to complain. In all other
respects he was sure that he was an exemplary husband, and she had no
just grounds for doubting his affection. He was sure that she had no
reason to accuse him of unkindness; and, unless she wished him to be
always tied to her apron-string, he was certain he had never omitted to
pay her all proper attention. Alas! he felt not the many wounds he had inflicted by

  'The word whose meaning kills; yet, told,
  The speaker wonders that you thought it cold.' and he had yet to learn, that in order to excite or testify affection,
it is necessary to seem to derive exclusive enjoyment from the society
of the object avowed to be beloved, and to seek its gratification in
preference to one's own, even in the most trivial things. He knew
not that opportunities of conferring large benefits, like bank-bills
for £1,000, rarely come into use; but little attentions, friendly
participations and kindnesses, are wanted daily, and like small change,
are necessary to carry on the business of life and happiness. A minute more perhaps, elapsed, before Berrendale recovered himself
sufficiently to speak: and the silence was made still more awful to
Adeline, by her hearing from the adjoining room the sobs of the mulatto. At length, 'I cannot find words to express my surprise at what you have
just uttered,' exclaimed Berrendale. 'My conscience does not reproach me
with deserving the reproof it contained.' 'Indeed!' replied Adeline, fixing her penetrating eyes on his, which
shrunk downcast and abashed from her gaze. Adeline saw her advantage,
and pursued it. 'Mr Berrendale,' continued she, 'it is indeed true, that the mulatto has
offended both of us; for in offending _you_ she has offended _me_; but,
have you committed no fault, nothing for _me_ to forgive? I know that
you are too great a lover of truth, too honourable a man, to declare
that you have not deserved the just anger of your wife: but you know
that I have never reproached you, nor should you ever have been aware
that I was privy to the distressing circumstance to which I allude, but
for what has just passed: and, now, do but forgive the poor mulatto, who
sinned only from regard for me, and from supposed slight offered to her
mistress, and I will not only assure you of my forgiveness, but, from
this moment, will strenuously endeavour to blot from my remembrance
every trace of what has passed.' Berrendale, conscious and self-condemned, scarcely knew what to answer;
but, thinking that it was better to accept Adeline's offer even on her
own conditions, he said, that if Savanna would make a proper apology,
and Adeline would convince her that she was seriously displeased with
her, he would allow her to stay; and Adeline having promised every thing
which he asked, peace was again restored. 'But what can you mean, Adeline,' said Berrendale, 'by doubting my
affection? I think I gave a sufficient proof of that, when, disregarding
the opinion of the world, I married you, though you had been the
mistress of another: and I really think that, by accusing me of
unkindness, you make me a very ungrateful return.' To this indelicate
and unfeeling remark Adeline vainly endeavoured to reply; but, starting
from her chair, she paced the room in violent agitation. 'Answer me,'
continued Berrendale, 'name one instance in which I have been unkind to
you.' Adeline suddenly stopped, and, looking steadfastly at him, smiled
with a sort of contemptuous pity, and was on the point of saying, 'Is
not what you have now said an instance of unkindness?' But she saw that
the same want of delicacy, and of that fine moral _tact_ which led him
to commit this and similar assaults on her feelings, made him
unconscious of the violence which he offered. Finding, therefore, that he could not understand her causes of
complaint, even if it were possible for her to define them, she replied,
'Well, perhaps I was too hasty, and in a degree unjust: so let us drop
the subject; and, indeed, my dear Berrendale, you must bear with my
weakness: remember, I have always been a spoiled child.' Here the image of Glenmurray and that of _home_, the home which she once
knew, the home of her childhood, and of her _earliest_ youth, pressed
on her recollection. She thought of her mother, of the indulgencies
which she had once known, of the advantages, of opulence, the value of
which she had never felt till deprived of them; and, struck with the
comparative forlornness of her situation--united for life to a being
whose sluggish sensibilities could not understand, and consequently not
soothe, the quick feelings and jealous susceptibility of her nature--she
could hardly forbear falling at the feet of her husband, and conjuring
him to behave, at least, with forbearance to her, and to speak and look
at her with kindness. She did stretch out her hand to him with a look of mournful entreaty,
which, though not understood by Berrendale, was not lost upon him
entirely. He thought it was a confession of her weakness and his
superiority; and, flattered by the thought into unusual softness, he
caught her fondly to his bosom, and gave up an engagement to sup at an
oyster club, in order to spend the evening tête-à-tête with his wife. Nay, he allowed the little Editha to remain in the room for a whole
hour, though she cried when he attempted to take her in his arms, and,
observing that it was a cold evening, allowed Adeline her due share of
the fire-side. These circumstances, trivial as they were, had more than their due
effect on Adeline, whose heart was more alive to kindness than
unkindness; and those paltry attentions of which happy wives would not
have been conscious, were to her a source of unfeigned pleasure.--As
sailors are grateful, after a voyage unexpectedly long, for the muddy
water which at their first embarking they would have turned from with
disgust. That very night Adeline remonstrated with the mulatto on the impropriety
of her conduct; and, having convinced her that in insulting her husband
she failed in respect to her, Savanna was prevailed upon the next
morning to ask pardon of Berrendale; and, out of love for her mistress,
she took care in future to do nothing that required forgiveness. As Adeline's way of life admitted of but little variety, Berrendale
having persisted in not introducing her to his friends, on the plea of
not being rich enough to receive company in return, I shall pass over in
silence what occurred to her till Editha was two years old; premising
that a series of little injuries on the part of Berrendale, and a quick
resentment of them on the part of Adeline, which not even her habitual
good humour could prevent, had, during that time, nearly eradicated
every trace of love for each other from their hearts. One evening Adeline as usual, in the absence of her husband, undressed
Editha by the parlour fire, and, playing with the laughing child, was
enjoying the rapturous praises which Savanna put forth of its growing
beauty; while the tawny boy, who had spent the day with them, built
houses with cards on the table, which Editha threw down as soon as they
were built, and he with good-humoured perseverance raised up again. Adeline, alive only to the maternal feeling, at this moment had
forgotten all her cares; she saw nothing but the happy group around her,
and her countenance wore the expression of recovered serenity. At this moment a loud knock was heard at the door, and Adeline, starting
up, exclaimed, 'It is my husband's knock!' 'O! no:--he never come so soon,' replied the mulatto running to the
door; but she was mistaken--it was Berrendale: and Adeline, hearing his
voice, began instantly to snatch up Editha's clothes, and to knock down
the tawny boy's newly-raised edifice: but order was not restored when
Berrendale entered; and, with a look and tone of impatience, he said,
'So! fine confusion indeed! Here's a fire-side to come to! Pretty
amusement too, for a literary lady--building houses of cards! Shame on
your extravagance, Mrs Berrendale, to let that brat spoil cards in that
way!' The sunshine of Adeline's countenance on hearing this vanished: to be
sure, she was accustomed to such speeches; but the moment before she had
felt happy, for the first time, for years. She, however, replied not;
but hurrying Editha to bed, ordering the reluctant tawny boy into the
kitchen, and setting Berrendale's chair, as usual, in the warmest place,
she ventured in a faint voice to ask, what had brought him home so
early. 'More early than welcome,' replied Berrendale, 'if I may judge from the
bustle I have occasioned.' 'It is very true,' replied Adeline, 'that, had I expected you, I should
have been better prepared for your reception; and then you, perhaps,
would have spoken more kindly to me.' 'There--there you go again.--If I say but a word to you, then I am
called unkind, though I never speak without just provocation: and, I
declare, I came home in the best humour possible, to tell you what
may turn out of great profit to us both:--but when a man has an
uncomfortable home to come to, it is enough to put him out of humour.' The mulatto, who was staying to gather up the cards which had fallen,
turned herself round on hearing this, and exclaimed, 'Home was very
comfortable till you come;' and then with a look of the most angry
contempt she left the room, and threw the door to with great violence. 'But what is this good news, my dear?' said Adeline, eager to turn
Berrendale's attention from Savanna's insolent reply. 'I have received a letter,' he replied, 'which, by the by, I ought to
have had some weeks ago, from my father-in-law in Jamaica, authorizing
me to draw on his banker for £900, and inviting me to come over to him;
as he feels himself declining, and wishes to give me the care of his
estate, and of my son, to whom all his fortune will descend: and of
whose interest, he properly thinks, no one can be so likely to take good
care as his own father.' 'And do you mean that I and Editha should go with you?' said Adeline
turning pale. 'No, to be sure not,' eagerly replied Berrendale; 'I must first see how
the land lies. But if I go--as the old man no doubt will make a handsome
settlement on me--I shall be able to remit to you a very respectable
annuity.' Adeline's heart, spite of herself, bounded with joy at this discovery;
but she had resolution to add,--and if duplicity can ever be pardonable,
this was,--'So then the good news which you had to impart to me was,
that we were going to be separated!' But as she said this, the
consciousness that she was artfully trying to impress Berrendale with
an idea of her feeling a sorrow which was foreign to her heart, overcame
her; and affected also at being under the necessity of rejoicing at the
departure of that being who ought to be the source of her comfort, she
vainly struggled to regain composure, and burst into an agony of tears. But her consternation cannot be expressed, when she found that
Berrendale imputed her tears to tender anguish at the idea of parting
with him: and when, his vanity being delighted by this homage to his
attractions, he felt all his fondness for her revive, and, overwhelming
her with caresses, he declared that he would reject the offer entirely
if by accepting it he should give her a moment's uneasiness; Adeline,
shocked at his error, yet not daring to set him right, could only weep
on his shoulder in silence: but, in order to make real the distress
which he only fancied so, she enumerated to herself all the diseases
incident to the climate, and the danger of the voyage. Still the idea of
Berrendale's departure was so full of comfort to her, that, though her
tears continued to flow, they flowed not for his approaching absence. At
length, ashamed of fortifying him in so gross an error, she made an
effort to regain her calmness, and found words to assure him, that she
would no longer give way to such unpardonable weakness, as she could
assure him that she wished his acceptance of his father-in-law's offer,
and had no desire to oppose a scheme so just and so profitable. But Berrendale, to whose vanity she had never before offered such a
tribute as her tears seemed to be, imputed these assurances to
disinterested love and female delicacy, afraid to own the fondness which
it felt; and the rest of the evening was spent in professions of love on
his part, which, on Adeline's, called forth at least some grateful and
kind expressions in return. Still, however, she persisted in urging Berrendale to go to Jamaica:
but, at the same time, she earnestly begged him to remember, that
temperance could alone preserve his health in such a climate:--'or the
use of pepper in great quantities,' replied he, 'to counteract the
effects of good living?' --and Adeline, though convinced temperance was
the _best_ preservation, was forced to give up the point, especially as
Berrendale began to enumerate the number of delicious things for the
table which Jamaica afforded. To be brief: Berrendale, after taking a most affectionate leave of his
wife and child, a leave which almost made the mulatto his friend, and
promising to allow them £200, a-year till he should be able to send
over for them, set sail for Jamaica; while Adeline, the night of his
departure, endeavoured, by conjuring up all the horrors of a tempest at
sea on his passage, and of a hurricane and an earthquake on shore when
he arrived, to force herself to feel such sorrow as the tenderness which
he had expressed at the moment of parting seemed to make it her duty to
feel. But morning came, and with it a feeling of liberty and independence so
delightful, that she no longer tried to grieve on speculation as it
were; but giving up her whole soul to the joys of maternal fondness, she
looked forward with pious gratitude to days of tranquil repose, save
when she thought with bitter regret of the obdurate anger of her mother,
and with tender regret of the lost and ever lamented Glenmurray. Berrendale had been arrived at Jamaica some months, when Adeline
observed a most alarming change in Savanna. She became thin, her
appetite entirely failed, and she looked the image of despondence. In
vain did Adeline ask the reason of a change so apparent: the only answer
she could obtain was, 'Me better soon;' and, continuing every day to
give this answer, she in a short time became so languid as to be obliged
to lie down half the day. Adeline then found that it was necessary to be more serious in her
interrogatories; but the mulatto at first only answered, 'No, me die,
but me never break my duty vow to you: no, me die, but never leave you.' These words implying a wish to leave her, with a resolution not to
do so how much soever it might cost her, alarmed in a moment the ever
disinterested sensibility of Adeline; and she at length wrung from her a
confession that her dear William, who was gone to Jamaica as a servant
to a gentleman, was, she was credibly informed, very ill and like to
die. 'You therefore wish to go and nurse him, I suppose, Savanna?' 'Oh! me no wish; me only tink dat me like to go to Jamaica, see if be
true dat he be so bad; and if he die, I den return and die wid you.' 'Live with me, you mean, Savanna; for, indeed, I cannot spare you. Remember, you have given me a right to claim your life as mine; nor can
I allow you to throw away my property in fruitless lamentations, and the
indolent indulgence of regret. You shall go to Jamaica, Savanna: Heaven
forbid that I should keep a wife from her duty! You shall see and try
to recover William if he be really ill,' (Savanna here threw herself
on Adeline's neck,) 'and then you shall return to me, who will either
warmly share in your satisfaction or fondly sooth your distress.' 'Den you do love poor Savanna?' 'Love you! Indeed I do, next to my child, and,--and my mother,' replied
Adeline, her voice faltering. 'Name not dat woman,' cried Savanna hastily; 'me will never see, never
speak to her even in heaven.' 'Savanna, remember, she is my mother.' 'Yes, and Mr Berrendale be your husban; and yet, who dat love you can
love dem?' 'Savanna,' replied Adeline, 'these proofs of your regard, though
reprehensible, are not likely to reconcile me to your departure; and I
already feel that in losing you--' Here she paused, unable to proceed. 'Den me no go--me no go:--yet, dearest lady, you have love yourself.' 'Aye, Savanna, and can feel for you: so say no more. The only difficulty
will be to raise money enough to pay for your passage, and expenses
while there.' 'Oh! me once nurse the captain's wife who now going to Jamaica, and
she love me very much; and he tell me yesterday that he let me go
for nothing, because I am good nurse to his wife, if me wish to see
William.' 'Enough,' replied Adeline: 'then all I have to do is to provide you with
money for your maintenance when you arrive; and I have no doubt but that
what I cannot supply the tawny boy's generous patroness will.' Adeline was not mistaken. Savanna obtained from her son's benefactress
a sum equal to her wants; and almost instantly restored to her wonted
health, by her mind's being lightened of the load which oppressed it,
she took her passage on board her friend's vessel, and set sail for
Jamaica, carrying with her letters from Adeline to Berrendale; while
Adeline felt the want of Savanna in various ways, so forcibly, that not
even Editha could, for a time at least, console her for her loss. It had
been so grateful to her feelings to meet every day the eyes of one being
fixed with never-varying affection on hers, that, when she beheld those
eyes no longer, she felt alone in the universe,--nor had she a single
female friend to whom she could turn for relief or consolation. Mrs Beauclerc, to whose society she had expected to be restored by
her marriage, had been forced to give up all intercourse with her, in
compliance with the peremptory wishes of a rich old maid, from whom her
children had great expectations, and who threatened to leave her fortune
away from them, if Mrs Beauclerc persisted in corresponding with a woman
so bad in principle, and so wicked in practice, as Adeline appeared to
her to be. But, at length, from a mother's employments, from writing, and, above
all, from the idea that by suffering she was making some atonement for
her past sins, she derived consolation, and became resigned to every
evil that had befallen, and to every evil that might still befall her. Perhaps she did not consider as an evil what now took place: increasing
coldness in the letters of Berrendale, till he said openly at last, that
as they were, he was forced to confess, far from happy together, and
as the air of Jamaica agreed with him, and as he was resolved to stay
there, he thought she had better remain in England, and he would remit
her as much money occasionally as his circumstances would admit of. But she thought this a greater evil than it at first appeared; when
an agent of Berrendale's father-in-law in England, and a friend of
Berrendale himself, called on her, pretending that he came to inquire
concerning her health, and raised in her mind suspicions of a very
painful nature. After the usual compliments:--'I find, madam,' said Mr Drury, 'that our
friend is very much admired by the ladies in Jamaica.' 'I am glad to hear it, sir,' coolly answered Adeline. 'Well, that's kind and generous now,' replied Drury, 'and very
disinterested.' 'I see no virtue, sir, in my rejoicing of what must make Mr Berrendale's
abode in Jamaica pleasant to him.' 'May be so; but most women, I believe, would be apt to be jealous on the
occasion.' 'But it has been the study of my life, sir, to endeavour to consider my
own interest, when it comes in competition with another's, as little as
possible;--I doubt I have not always succeeded in my endeavours: but on
this occasion I am certain that I have expressed no sentiment which I do
not feel.' 'Then, madam, if my friend should have an opportunity, as indeed I
believe he has, of forming a most agreeable and advantageous marriage,
you would not try to prevent it?' 'Good heavens! sir,' replied Adeline; 'What can you mean? Mr Berrendale
form an advantageous marriage when he is already married to me?' 'Married to you, ma'am!' answered Mr Drury with a look of incredulity. 'Excuse me, but I know that such marriages as yours may be easily
dissolved.' At first Adeline was startled at this assertion; but recollecting that
it was impossible any form or ceremony should have been wanting at the
marriage, she recovered herself, and demanded, with an air of severity,
what Mr Drury meant by so alarming and ill-founded a speech. 'My meaning, ma'am,' replied he, 'must be pretty evident to you: I mean
that I do not look upon you, though you bear Mr Berrendale's name, to be
his lawful wife; but that you live with him on the same terms on which
you lived with Mr Glenmurray.' 'And on what, sir, could you build such an erroneous supposition?' 'On Mr Berrendale's own words, madam; who always spoke of his connexion
with you, as of a connexion which he had formed in compliance with love
and in defiance of prudence.' 'And is it possible that he could be such a villain?' exclaimed
Adeline. 'Oh my child! and does thy father brand thee with the stain of
illegitimacy?--But, sir, whatever appellation Mr Berrendale might choose
to give his union with me to his friends in England, I am sure he will
not dare to incur the penalty attendant on a man's marrying one wife
while he has another living; for, that I am his wife, I can bring pretty
sufficient evidence to prove.' 'Indeed, madam! You can produce a witness of the ceremony, then, I
presume?' 'No, sir; the woman who attended me to the altar, and the clergyman who
married us, are dead; and the only witness is a child now only ten years
old.' 'That is unfortunate!' (with a look of incredulity) 'but, no doubt, when
you hear that Mr Berrendale is married to a West Indian heiress, you
will come forward with incontrovertible proofs of your prior claims; and
if you do that, madam, you may command my good offices:--but, till then,
I humbly take my leave.' --Saying this, with a very visible sneer on his
countenance he departed, leaving Adeline in a state of distress--the
more painful to endure from her having none to participate in it,--no
one to whom she could impart the cause of it. That Mr Drury did not speak of the possible marriage of Berrendale from
mere conjecture, was very apparent; and Adeline resolved not to delay
writing to her husband immediately, to inform him of what had passed,
and put before his eyes, in the strongest possible manner, the guilt of
what he was about to do; and also the utter impossibility of its being
successful guilt, as she was resolved to assert her claims for the sake
of her child, if not for her own. This letter she concluded, and with
truth too, with protestations of believing all Mr Drury said to be
false: for, indeed, the more she considered Berrendale's character,
the more she was convinced that, however selfish and defective his
disposition might be, it was more likely Mr Drury should be mistaken,
than Berrendale be a villain. But, where a man's conduct is not founded on virtuous motives and
immutable principles, he may not err while temptation is absent; but
once expose him to her presence, and he is capable of falling into the
very vices the most abhorrent to his nature: and though Adeline knew it
not, such a man was Berrendale. Adeline, having relieved her mind by this appeal to her husband, and
being assured that Berrendale could not be married before her letter
could reach him, as it was impossible that he should dare to marry while
the mulatto was in the very town near which he resided, felt herself
capable of attending to her usual employments again, and had recovered
her tranquillity, when an answer to her letter arrived; and Adeline,
being certain that the letter itself would be a proof of the marriage,
had resolved to show it, in justification of her claims, to Mr Drury.