Self-interest then induces sympathetic compassion towards the conquered, and displeasure towards the conqueror, who is affectedly admired and inwardly condemned. The frequent altercations between Lady Courtney and Lady Rosamond, gave the greatest pain to the judicious and affectionate Claudina, who saw her beloved Everilda daily losing by petulance, and wilful misapprehension, that influence amongst her new friends, which her talents and manners would otherwise have preserved. Edmund was not less uneasy, for the kind reception that his sister had met with, and the delicate attention with which she was treated,

ought at least, he thought, to claim her forbearance, as strongly as his gratitude; and he was mortified and distressed to the utmost, when he saw her degrading her talents, and accomplishments, by seeking to lessen those of Lady Rosamond, in a comparison with them; for he well knew, that her antagonist was too nearly her equal, to be insulted with impunity, or conquered with facility. He naturally confided his uneasiness to Lady Emma, who endeavoured to console him, by representing the frequent arguments between the fair antagonists, as mere trials of skill, produced by curiosity to know which was the most powerful in conducting them. “Then the best consolation you can give me,” replied he sorrowfully, “is, that their disputes originate in vanity, but in what may they end?” “In what can they end,” returned Emma, “but admiration of your sister? Every one who sees, must admire her; and every one who knows, must love her; for she requires only to be known, and then what appears to you as a serious fault, would be acknowledged only as the effervescence of her brilliant genius, and lively imagination.” “Ah!” replied he, “you are partial even to her faults; I love my sister, and am proud of her; but I can see, and condemn her errors.” “And why am I partial?” asked Lady Emma, in the sweetest accents, “I have little merit in acknowledging perfection, when it is allied to you.” Edmund kissed her hand with fervor, and the gloom of his countenance was dispersed, as he gazed on the speaking sensibility, tenderness, and modesty, depicted in that of his Emma. Amidst these family feuds, Lord Courtney was the most unconcerned of any of the party; he adored his wife, loved his sister, and treated every altercation between them, as a jest; telling them that occasional discords made harmony more pleasing, and that they would not appear half so charming separate: that they were flint and steel to each other’s wit, and he was sure only pretended to differ in opinion, in order to shew it to the most advantage. This he would say with so much good humour, that they were often persuaded into the belief that it actually was so. Lady Courtney would then generously make some concession, which Lady Rosamond would as generously accept, and thus was amity restored, till a difference of opinion maintained too tenaciously, and controverted too warmly, would plunge them into yet deeper opposition. The decline of Lady Courtney’s health, however, produced a cessation of hostilities; for Lady Rosamond had too just a confidence in her own powers, to attack her antagonist on unequal grounds; anxiety for her recovery, was a point in which there was no division of sentiment, and to effect this, the hotwells were proposed by the physicians, who seemed to think that her ladyship’s indisposition might arise from the change of climate. Notwithstanding Lord Drelincourt’s aversion from all places of public rendezvous for cheapening the sex, he on this occasion willingly waved his prejudice, and consented to accompany the invalid with his family. Before they had been long at the delightful village of Clifton, where the votaries of health are rewarded for their search, by the beauties of nature, which are there scattered with her most liberal hand, —Lady Courtney’s indisposition was discovered to be owing to a cause, which gave her new claims on the affection of her lord, and additional consequence among relatives, whose esteem already knew no bounds, but what her own caprice occasionally prescribed. In Lady Courtney, however, the pleasure arising from this wished-for circumstance, was considerably alloyed, by the restraints which it occasioned. If she wished to ride on horseback, Lady Drelincourt intreated her to forego so dangerous an exercise, speaking with such affectionate anxiety, and relating so many bad consequences which it might produce, that she

was obliged to relinquish her desire. She was fond of walking, and was charmed with the variety and beauty of the surrounding country, which would tempt the most indolent to explore it; but if she went out of sight of the house, Lord Drelincourt himself followed her, and used such warm intreaties for her return, and looked so anxiously on every step she took, that she gave up the pleasure of walking, that she might not keep him in a state of painful suspence. Company would fatigue, and solitude depress her. Staying in the house relaxed her, and going out of it exposed her to cold; in short, wearied with remonstrances, her patience failed, and she declared in pretty strong terms, that she would for the future, take the trouble of conducting herself, and would be answerable for every consequence, as no imprudence of which she might be guilty, could do her more harm, than the impatience that she felt of such constant contradiction; and to prove the truth of her assertion, she talked herself angry, and then fell into hysterics, and by that means effectually alarmed Lord and Lady Drelincourt into submission. The reins once given into her own hands, she commenced her career with additional ardour, from the restraint that she had suffered; her spirits acquired new elasticity from contrasting the alacrity of returning health, with the languor of past indisposition; her friends were too happy in seeing her so, to complain of the means by which the change had been produced; and it was not till her extended pedestrian excursions in the morning, and dancing until a late hour in the evening, produced the loss of all their hopes, that they severely repented having trusted her to her own guidance. Lady Courtney was as highly mortified as any of the party, at this unlucky accident; but she fancied that she could perceive resentment, when she ought only to have met with compassion, and this unjust idea, took such strong possession of her mind, that she counterfeited an indifference in the presence of Lord and Lady Drelincourt, which she was far from feeling, and which naturally added to their vexation. As soon as Lady Courtney was sufficiently recovered to travel, the family returned to the Castle; conscious that her behavior had deserved reprehension, she tormented herself with fancying that she could read it in every word and look, and with her natural impatience of control, encreased by the excessive indulgence always shewn by her parents, even to her faults, instead of averting by gentleness and acknowledgment, the censure for which she confessed to herself there was room, she braved it by additional haughtiness of behaviour, and provoked it by expressing innumerable foolish or unreasonable desires, which she never felt. Among the rest she affected a childish eagerness to be presented at court, and enquired every day, when the happy one would arrive, that was to convey them to town. Lord Drelincourt was at length displeased, and thought the respect due to himself, called on him to take notice of a rudeness, which he could no longer pretend to overlook. “I am sorry Lady Courtney,” said he very gravely, “that your residence under my roof, should be unpleasant to you. I am only consoled for so mortifying a discovery, by the hope that you are the first guest to whom I ever made it so; and I must apologize for the dulness of which you so openly complain, by candidly acknowledging, that, in imagining you would be pleased with rational amusements, and family concord, I entirely mistook your character.” He paused, and the profoundest silence ensued; a silence the more painful, as it shewed that every one considered the subject too serious, to intrude any remark. Lady Courtney shrunk from the reproof that she had courted. She had always looked up to Lord Drelincourt with affectionate reverence, and ardently desired his esteem, though her behaviour

had of late too often been calculated to deprive her of it. Her heart told her that this was now the case, and the blood forsook her cheeks, to support the pang it felt at the idea. Claudina saw her friend’s emotions, she saw pride struggling with contrition in her breast, and she saw Lord Drelincourt leaving the room in displeasure; anxiety conquered her natural timidity; she fell at his feet, and bursting into tears, exclaimed, “Oh! my lord, believe me it is now that you mistake Lady Courtney’s character; you think her sullen, now when she is miserable; you believe her wilfully continuing in error, when she is deprived of the power of acknowledging her fault by the anguish with which she feels it.” Claudina’s impassioned manner roused Everilda, who was too nobly independant to accept a pardon by proxy. She went up to the Earl, and entreated his forgiveness, saying, “I have no claim but on your kindness. I know I must have forfeited your esteem, yet suffer me to hope an avowal of my fault, and an altered conduct, may in time regain it. I should be too severely punished,” added she, bursting into tears, “if I thought you would with-hold it from me for ever; alas! do not deprive me of a hope, that will encourage all my best resolutions.”
Two such graceful pleaders would have gained pardon for much more weighty faults. The Earl embraced them both, every one was affected, and Emma throwing herself into Lady Courtney’s arms, sobbed through the excess of her emotions. The next morning at breakfast, the Earl informed his family that he meant to set off to town the ensuing week; and hoped that they would be in readiness to accompany him. This generous behaviour, effectually overcame Lady Courtney, who never judged her own faults so severely, as when others treated them with lenity: she took his hand, and pressing it to her lips, whilst her tears fell on it. “Ah! my lord, how shall I ever be worthy of the kindness with which you treat me;” she exclaimed, “how odious your indulgence makes my conduct appear, in my own eyes.” “My dearest Everilda,” the Earl replied, “I have not quite forgiven you; I mean to exact a pledge of your future good behaviour, and that is, that you will gratify me by approving my present arrangement. We shall arrive in town just before the birth-day; and after all, I am I acknowledge, selfish enough to be impatient for the pleasure of presenting so lovely an addition to my family.” “You are too good my lord,” answered Everilda, “you must in time make me worthy of you. Forgive me dear madam,” continued she, addressing Lady Drelincourt, “and you my dear Lady Rosamond, forgive me all whom I may have offended; and ascribe my conduct to my inferiority, when compared with such amiable and exalted characters.” “And you do not ask my forgiveness whilst you are playing the fair penitent so prettily,” said Lord Courtney, “nor should I grant it if you did; for these sudden amendments, are generally followed by relapses, which are worse than the original disorder.” “If mine should be so,” replied Lady Courtney, smiling through her tears, “the effect will all fall upon you, for that saucy speech, but I ask pardon only of those whom I have offended, and you are not one of the number; any more than my pretty little Emma, whom it is as difficult to displease, as be displeased with; or my dear Claudina and Edmund, who bear with all my faults, because they know how much I love them.” “But I protest against any exceptions,” said Lady Drelincourt, affectionately interrupting her, “and however you may love those whom you have mentioned, I will dispute the palm of loving you, with any of them.”



Shalle I wasting in dispaire
Dye because a woman’s faire? Shalle my cheeks growe pale with care, That another’s rosie are? Be she fairer than the daye,
Or the opening fields in Maye,
If she be not faire for me,
hat care I how faire she bee! MARLOWE. ON account of leaving Castle Drelincourt earlier than the Earl had at first intended, the preparations for Lord Courtney’s establishment, were not compleated; and it was agreed that he should continue under his parental roof, a few months longer. It is unnecessary after the description we have given of Everilda’s attractions, to say that she was universally admired, in the circles of fashion; and we are afraid it is equally unnecessary to add, that the admiration which she met with, was highly gratifying to her. Perhaps her fondness for it, might be encreased by observing Lord Courtney’s pleasure at the attention that she gained; for he was naturally flattered to hear his own opinion, ecoed by the voice of public approbation, and his taste made the standard of perfection. One morning a letter was brought to Lady Courtney, who immediately recognized in the direction, the writing of Sir Edward Clayton; she mentioned this before she broke the seal, and Claudina turned pale on hearing a name, which her heart incessantly repeated, though it never passed her lips:—the contents were read aloud by Lady Courtney, with her usual frankness, and were as follows:
“MADAM,
If during the happy period, in which I was honored with your ladyship’s acquaintance, my heart became too fully sensible of the influence of your charms, to patiently bear the idea of any other possessing them, the change in your situation yet taught me too well what was due to it, to intrude myself on your ladyship’s recollection, until a necessary alteration in my sentiments, might enable me to do it with propriety to you, and comparative ease to myself. The past, (however painful the task) I have taught myself to forget; and I trust my conduct for the future, will convince you, that my admiration of Everilda di Rodalvi, is at least equalled by my respect for Lady Courtney; which I hope you will grant me permission to testify in person, among your other friends; and I have the honor to remain,
madam,

 your ladyship’s
most obedient,
and humble servant,
“Generous Clayton,” exclaimed Claudina, “how nobly has he endeavoured to conquer a passion so ill requited.” The animation with which she spoke, was unusual in her; and Lady Rosamond’s eyes meeting hers, expressed a degree of sympathy in her feelings, which convinced her that they were understood, and tinged her cheeks with crimson, until Lady Courtney replied, “Compassion my dear Claudina, is sister to love; you had better therefore console the deserted swain, for my cruelty, which believe me he would not then regret.” This speech drove the blood back to Claudina’s agitated heart, and vainly endeavouring to smile, she was going to leave the room, when she met Lord Courtney, who said, gaily taking her hand. “You must not run away, for I am going to read an epistle from the valiant knight-errant, who in magnanimously rescuing one lady from violence, was himself taken willing captive by another, who generously resigned him when she found a slave yet more humble; and hear how he thanks her for his freedom.” He then read aloud:
“MY LORD,
You would, I am certain, neither believe nor esteem me, were I to declare, that I never felt any resentment against you, for being as successful with the object of our mutual admiration, as I had once hoped to be. Your lordship is fortunate in possessing a prize, too estimable to be resigned without anguish; but affection cannot be decided by the sword; and I considered my wretched life, of which I was weary, and in which, no one was interested, as a very inadequate stake against yours, which presented to you every charm, and endearing tie. I was not base enough to wish to deprive the woman I had loved, of the object for whom she forsook me, and with whom I could not but acknowledge, that probability she had of enjoying that happiness, which she can confer in as eminent a degree as she is deserving of it; nor was I selfish enough to remember the only injury you ever offered me, and forget the innumerable kindnesses which I had received from you, and your worthy and amiable family: I felt that your fault was excused by its cause; alas! I felt my own wounds too acutely, to wonder that you were vulnerable to the same fatal, unerring weapons. “When you were acquitted to me by the impartial evidence of my own judgment, I was not consious of my obligation to submit the cause to that of the world, whose opinion I despise: instead therefore of inviting you to combat with me, I resolved to combat with myself; and am happy to inform you, that I am compleatly victorious. I have conquered the sense of my misfortune, by considering that it is now irremediable; I have opposed reason to passion, hope to disappointment. The remembrance of my past attachment I have subdued, by the resolution of forming another; and if I must not expect to meet again with an object so capable of creating one
“EDWARD CLAYTON.”

ardent as lasting, I shall be equally released from the fear of another rival so irresistible. “That you may not think me a vain boaster of courage which I do not possess, or of
success which I have not had, I trust you will give me leave to convince you of my victory, by paying my respects to you;
I remain my lord,
“yours most obediently,
“EDWARD CLAYTON.”
“There now,” exclaimed Courtney, “there is style for you; and a style which I like; it is noble, generous and independent. I shall write to him and tell him that my Everilda will be as happy to see him as I shall.” “Indeed,” said Lady Courtney, giving him her own letter, “I should be very remiss, if I did not desire you to say something extremely polite for me, in answer to that epistle.” “Ah! what he has written to you too,” replied Courtney, “already the world knows how you keep me in subjection, and he was obliged to flatter you into goodhumour, that you might give me permission to say I should be glad to see him. Well, I will shew him that if I am afraid, I am not jealous of you, and so with your leave, my Everilda, I will say that we shall be impatient for the pleasure of his society. “You can never be jealous,” replied Lady Courtney, with a most fascinating smile, “whilst you know that you are so amiable, and so superior to the rest of the world.” “And I can never cease to know it whilst I have such an insinuating flatterer, who so often tells me it,” returned her husband: he affectionately embraced her in saying this, and then went to take his morning ride with Edmund. Of mortal glory, oh soon darken’d ray! Oh winged joys of man, more swift than wind! Oh fond desires, which in our fancies stray! Oh traitrous hopes, which do our judgments blind! DRUMMOND OF HAWTHORNDEN. OUR readers will easily conceive the emotions felt by Sir Edward Clayton, on his first visit to Lady Courtney. But his feelings were not betrayed in his conduct, which was governed by the most rigid propriety. He conversed on the topics of the day with an air of tolerable ease; and if his lips involuntarily trembled as he addressed an object to whom he had been so fondly attached, he took care that his words at least should be under the control of reason. Not daring to trust himself to converse very long with Lady Courtney, he naturally paid a great degree of attention to the other ladies, with whom he could discourse some-what cheerfully, for with them the efforts of his mind to amuse, were not interrupted by the feelings of his heart. The unfortunate Claudina was too well versed in the effects of love, since she had become a prey to it, to be gratified by an attention, bestowed without a thought of the object, to whom it was paid. She could judge of his feelings at that moment, by the acuteness of her own: disappointed hopes, and fruitless regrets, inspired those of each party, but similarity of misfortune, did not in this instance, produce the sympathy which generally results from it. Claudina’s mind was too much agitated to attend to trifling conversation; her heart was too much occupied to be interested in mere complimentary forms of politeness. Her answers were so short, and manners so cold, that Sir Edward imagined he must have unintentionally offended her; and for a moment the idea started into his mind, that she might have communicated to Everilda, the dislike with which he had inspired her. It is natural to wish to ascribe a disappointment, to the misconduct of any other person, rather than to our own. Self-love made Sir Edward cherish this idea; and under its influence he treated Claudina with coldness, at least equal to that which she had expressed towards him. The change in his manner, did not escape the quick observation of Lady Rosamond, any more than the cause by which it was produced; and which confirmed her in her suspicions, relative to the state of Claudina’s heart. A marked coldness, is as flattering as a marked attention, for it is only the same cause producing different effects; and perhaps each mode of conduct, may be inspired by the hope of attracting the notice of the object to whom it is directed. The discovery however, effectually chased from Lady Rosamond’s mind, the intention of endeavouring to reclaim her faithless lover; an idea which had often obtruded on it, and for which her remaining, or rather revived affection for him, strongly pleaded, though her pride was equally eloquent in urging her to refuse him, should he voluntarily seek to return to his allegiance. But she was too generous to hesitate, when she became sensible that another was deeply interested in her decision; and she would have regarded herself as guilty of a breach of trust, had she persisted in her original intentions, a

moment after the discovery of Claudina’s partiality. She therefore directed her conversation chiefly to Mr. Fletcher; who had become extremely assiduous in his attentions to her; and perhaps the conquest of her own wishes, on which she had so generously resolved, was facilitated by the pleasure of shewing her cidevantamant, that the assiduities of another had become agreeable to her. They who examine very deeply into the sources of their best actions, must have great confidence in themselves, if they expect to be satisfied with the result of their enquiry. It is melancholy to hear people lament, the small portion of virtue there is in the world; and still more melancholy to reflect, how much smaller it would appear, were the motives by which it is prompted generally known. After Sir Edward had conquered the unpleasant sensations of an introductory visit, his former intimacy in Lord Drelincourt’s family was easily revived. The Earl had always held him in high estimation, and his powers of pleasing, when he suffered the brilliancy of his genius to pierce the gloom, in which a too ardent sensibility sometimes involved it, were too fascinating to be easily relinquished, where they had once been displayed. But this renewed intercourse, was on the whole inimical to his happiness. The regrets which he had hushed into tranquillity at a distance, were awakened to keener anguish, as his opportunities increased of contemplating the various charms of the woman whom he had so irrecoverably lost. In absence he had dwelt solely on her faults, and seeing them through the distorting medium of resentment, they appeared sufficiently numerous to reconcile him to her desertion. But in her presence, he remembered only that she had once promised to be his, and was now another’s. He had resolved never to see her till he could think of her with composure; to effect this, he thought of her unceasingly, and the very hope of seeing her again, largely contributed to the tranquillity, which he had made the test of his security. He deceived himself; and unhappily he wilfully continued the deception. He felt that he lived but in her presence; when ever he left her, he said to himself, “I am not with her, and I do not feel uneasy, I may therefore visit her again.” But he did not inform himself, that his composure arose from his previous resolution to do so. One whole day he stayed away; the day appeared so long, and he felt so wretched during its course, that he resolved to try the dangerous experiment no more. “By accustoming myself to her society,” he said, “its charms will become familiar to me; but by abstaining from it, I see how insupportable it makes all other appear.” He thought no doubt that he argued admirably; for every one naturally likes the arguments which suit his inclinations. His respectful homage could not fail to flatter Lady Courtney, who relying entirely on her own principles, and his honor, soon neglected to pay to society, the debt due from all who are protected by its laws, a regard to its opinons, and to the propriety of appearance required for its support. Sir Edward was her constant attendant, in public; did she dance, he was her partner; did she play or sing, he accompanied her; at cards or table, he invariably took his seat near her; and if he sometimes hesitated, through fear of exposing to censure the woman whom he loved, a smile from her, put every wise and virtuous resolve to flight, and the desire of pleasing her reigned triumphant in his breast. Perhaps Lord Courtney would have been better satisfied, to see less particular attention paid to his wife, tho’ he had been as highly gratified as she was with that of a general nature

shewn to her; but like every other young person he was tremblingly alive to the dread of ridicule, and to be laughed at as a jealous husband, tho’ by men who were as compleatly divested of honor, as their ladies were of shame, was a trial which he felt unable to endure with fortitude. He had not the slightest doubt of his wife’s conduct; he knew her too well to have even a momentary fear that it might be unworthy of her; but he knew that the world would judge from appearances only, and therefore appearances ought to be observed. He could see many women who merely by a rigid attention to common forms of propriety, had passed thro’ life uncondemned, tho’ not unsuspected; and yet these were the very women who were loudest in their censures of his Everilda; who wholly unsuspicious of blame, whilst unconscious of deserving it, invited its severity by the imprudent levity of her behaviour. It would have been more friendly to his wife, and more just to himself, if Lord Courtney, on making these reflections had resolved to pursue the plan of conduct, which would have rendered a repetition of them unnecessary; but “the world’s dread laugh, which scarce the firm philosopher can scorn,” was the phantom that he could not cease to fear; and to avoid it, he submitted to the possibility of becoming in reality, the mark for “scorn to point her slow unmoving finger at,” when by a firmer conduct he would have ensured the applause of the wise, the approbation of the virtuous, and have preserved his own honor and his wife’s, from the withering influence of suspicion, and the poisonous blast of scandal. Edmund remarked the cloud that obscured his friend’s customary cheerfulness and connected as he now was with him, he could not remark it without anxiety as well as regret. Could Lady Courtney have offended him? their uninterrupted and mutual affection forbade the idea. Was Miss Macdonald the cause? She might be in distress; he might wish to assist her, and require the aid of some friend. This determined Edmund to take notice of an alteration which otherwise he would not have appeared to observe. Lord Courtney seemed hurt, that his gravity should have drawn attention, and denied with some peevishness having any reason for it. Edmund was almost discouraged, but affectionately uttered a hope that his friend was happy. “Happy my dear Edmund,” he replied, “yes, as happy as man may be; but life is puppet-shew work at the best; we neither fix our attention on the present scene, nor recollect the past: we are only intent on what will come the next, and when it is over, we find that it has not been worth looking at.” Well,” said Edmund smiling, “it is not entirely without novelty however; since you can moralize on its imperfections. I shall begin to think our friend Clayton not quite so romantic in his ideas, if you adopt similar ones.” “I am not so deficient in ideas,” replied Lord Courtney hastily, “as to adopt Sir Edward Clayton’s on any subject, for there are none that I less approve;” then conscious of the warmth which he had betrayed, he continued, “but if you think that I am ill- humoured or melancholy, have the charity to accompany me in a ride; for I must be both, in a very great degree, if your society cease to be one of my chief pleasures.” It was not in nature to resist such a compliment; and it was just made in time to allay the resentment, that his last speech had occasioned even in Edmund’s breast; for tho’ always gentle and unassuming, he yet knew too well the respect due to himself, to submit to rudeness, however it might be attributed to the influence of anger, or impatience. About this time one of those unfortunate affairs of gallantry occurred which give occasion for the pleader on one side, to paint in the most beautiful colours, charms of mind and person, and perfection of connubial happiness, which probably had never any other foundation but in the

fruitful eloquence of the counsel for the plaintiff; and on the other of excusing the breach of every sacred and moral tie, palliating vice under new names, proving neglect which never existed, and teaching mankind to distrust even the fairest appearances of virtue. As this event took place in the higher circles, it afforded incessant conversation, till the remembrance of it was effaced by some other of the same nature more new, and of course more entertaining; attended likewise with circumstances of still greater atrocity, consequently a thousand times more interesting. Whilst however it was yet the subject of some days wonder, it was mentioned one morning at Lady Drelincourt’s work table, where the gentlemen were assembled, waiting for fair weather. Some of them said it was at least a proof that a woman could keep a secret, when her own interest was concerned in its preservation, as the connexion had subsisted many years, without even being suspected. “Well,” exclaimed Lady Courtney, with her usual animation, “I declare I think that very secrecy, an aggravation of her fault.” “I am of a different opinion,” replied Lord Courtney, with unusual gravity, “it at least proved her regard to public opinion, and that is a virtue in every one, and above all in a female.” “Yes,” answered his lady, “as far as self- interest is concerned, it is very adviseable; and for that reason we see it practised the most scrupulously, by those, who are the most conscious that their conduct requires a screen.” “Not entirely so, my dear Everilda,” said the Earl, taking up the argument, “in society, next to being virtuous, it is essential to its interests to appear so; and they who, content with the rectitude of their thoughts, are regardless of the construction that may be put upon their actions, are unjust to themselves, and to the virtue on which they rely; for they expose themselves to censure, where they might have been gratified by receiving just praise, and affording a beneficial example to others.” “Yet,” replied Everilda, “is not vice infinitely more culpable when it affects the language of virtue, than virtue can be made to appear, by the censures of vice? I confess, I would much rather be supported by the applauses of my own conscience, than by the approbation of those, in deceiving whom, I should add hypocrisy to my other faults.” “But you do not argue fairly, my dear Everilda,” returned the Earl, with the utmost good humour, “you seem to think it necessary, to be vicious and a hypocrite, or virtuous and an object of censure. Virtue to be beneficial, ought to be acknowledged; and I wish only to convince you, that where we rely entirely on the purity of our own intentions, for approbation, we cannot be surprised if the world be backward in granting it; for our intentions can only be known to ourselves, and the world can only judge of them by our actions, consequently ought not to be accused of too great severity if it condemn such as appear deserving of censure; and give little credit to the integrity of principles, which do not seem to have sufficient influence to correct the conduct that offends.” “In short,” said Lord Courtney abruptly, “there can need little argument to convince any, but those who are wilfully obstinate in error, that vice may be made to appear more vicious, and audacity more audacious, by shewing an utter contempt of the opinions of that society, which they disgrace by their actions; and as the rain has now ceased, I think we may spend our time more agreeably, than in discussing topics, which I am sorry are become so familiar, that they fail to inspire the disgust, which their deformity would otherwise naturally create.” He spoke with a bitterness and severity altogether new to him. The Earl seeing that he was ruffled, proposed taking him to the House, and Edmund accompanied them, leaving Sir Edward Clayton, who was a regular morning visitor, in a situation the very reverse of agreeable. He had felt the full force of the conversation, without

daring to take a part in it, lest what he said might be misconstrued. In any other company he would have spiritedly examined the value of popular applause, and the basis on which it was generally founded; but now he shrunk from giving an opinion, lest he should be suspected of teaching Lady Courtney to despise it. “Alas!” he mentally exclaimed, “I have not only neglected the observance of propriety to the world, but I have also neglected the conviction which my own sense of it forced upon my mind. I have said, I will rest satisfied with the purity of my own desires, but I have never really enquired what those desires were; ah! too surely the best of them is a selfish one!—to gratify my partiality for the society of my friend’s wife, even though by the unjustifiable indulgence of it, I expose him to ridicule, and her to censure; thus ungenerously subjecting them to evils, which the misjudging world extends not to me; and I who am the only guilty person, am the only one who escapes punishment.”
When Sir Edward had once convinced himself that his conduct had been wrong, an alteration in it, was the invariable consequence of the conviction; and he now resolved no longer to prefer his own gratification to the dictates of honor.