Return! Idle words
are these! I forgive the pain I endure; but the trodden path cannot be retraced. "Common affection might have been satisfied with common usages. I believed that you read my
heart, and knew its devotion, its unalienable fidelity towards you. I never loved any but you. You
came the embodied image of my fondest dreams. The praise of men, power and high aspirations
attended your career. Love for you invested the world for me in enchanted light; it was no longer the
earth I trod-the earth, common mother, yielding only trite and stale repetition of objects and
circumstances old and worn out. I lived in a temple glorified by intensest sense of devotion and
rapture; I walked, a consecrated being, contemplating only your power, your excellence;
  For O, you stood beside me, like my youth,
  Transformed for me the real to a dream,
  Cloathing the palpable and familiar
  With golden exhalations of the dawn. 'The bloom has vanished from my life'-there is no morning to this all investing night; no rising to the
set-sun of love. In those days the rest of the world was nothing to me: all other men-I never
considered nor felt what they were; nor did I look on you as one of them. Separated from them;
exalted in my heart; sole possessor of my affections; single object of my hopes, the best half of
myself. "Ah, Raymond, were we not happy? Did the sun shine on any, who could enjoy its light with purer
and more intense bliss? It was not-it is not a common infidelity at which I repine. It is the disunion
of an whole which may not have parts; it is the carelessness with which you have shaken off the
mantle of election with which to me you were invested, and have become one among the many. Dream not to alter this. Is not love a divinity, because it is immortal? Did not I appear sanctified, even
to myself, because this love had for its temple my heart? I have gazed on you as you slept, melted
even to tears, as the idea filled my mind, that all I possessed lay cradled in those idolized, but mortal
lineaments before me. Yet, even then, I have checked thick-coming fears with one thought; I would
not fear death, for the emotions that linked us must be immortal. "And now I do not fear death. I should be well pleased to close my eyes, never more to open them
again. And yet I fear it; even as I fear all things; for in any state of being linked by the chain of
memory with this, happiness would not return-even in Paradise, I must feel that your love was less
enduring than the mortal beatings of my fragile heart, every pulse of which knells audibly,
  The funeral note
  Of love, deep buried, without resurrection. No-no-me miserable; for love extinct there is no resurrection! "Yet I love you. Yet, and for ever, would I contribute all I possess to your welfare. On account of a
tattling world; for the sake of my-of our child, I would remain by you, Raymond, share your
fortunes, partake your counsel. Shall it be thus? We are no longer lovers; nor can I call myself a friend
to any; since, lost as I am, I have no thought to spare from my own wretched, engrossing self. But it
will please me to see you each day! to listen to the public voice praising you; to keep up your
paternal love for our girl; to hear your voice; to know that I am near you, though you are no longer
mine. "If you wish to break the chains that bind us, say the word, and it shall be done-I will take all the
blame on myself, of harshness or unkindness, in the world's eye. "Yet, as I have said, I should be best pleased, at least for the present, to live under the same roof with
you. When the fever of my young life is spent; when placid age shall tame the vulture that devours
me, friendship may come, love and hope being dead. May this be true? Can my soul, inextricably
linked to this perishable frame, become lethargic and cold, even as this sensitive mechanism shall
lose its youthful elasticity? Then, with lack-lustre eyes, grey hairs, and wrinkled brow, though now
the words sound hollow and meaningless, then, tottering on the grave's extreme edge, I may be-
your affectionate and true friend,
"PERDITA." Raymond's answer was brief. What indeed could he reply to her complaints, to her griefs which she
jealously paled round, keeping out all thought of remedy. "Notwithstanding your bitter letter," he
wrote, "for bitter I must call it, you are the chief person in my estimation, and it is your happiness
that I would principally consult. Do that which seems best to you: and if you can receive gratification
from one mode of life in preference to another, do not let me be any obstacle. I foresee that the plan
which you mark out in your letter will not endure long; but you are mistress of yourself, and it is my
sincere wish to contribute as far as you will permit me to your happiness." "Raymond has prophesied well," said Perdita, "alas, that it should be so! our present mode of life
cannot continue long, yet I will not be the first to propose alteration. He beholds in me one whom he
has injured even unto death; and I derive no hope from his kindness; no change can possibly be
brought about even by his best intentions. As well might Cleopatra have worn as an ornament the
vinegar which contained her dissolved pearl, as I be content with the love that Raymond can now
offer me." I own that I did not see her misfortune with the same eyes as Perdita. At all events methought that
the wound could be healed; and, if they remained together, it would be so. I endeavoured therefore
to sooth and soften her mind; and it was not until after many endeavours that I gave up the task as
impracticable. Perdita listened to me impatiently, and answered with some asperity:-"Do you think
that any of your arguments are new to me? or that my own burning wishes and intense anguish have
not suggested them all a thousand times, with far more eagerness and subtlety than you can put into
them? Lionel, you cannot understand what woman's love is. In days of happiness I have often
repeated to myself, with a grateful heart and exulting spirit, all that Raymond sacrificed for me. I was
a poor, uneducated, unbefriended, mountain girl, raised from nothingness by him. All that I
possessed of the luxuries of life came from him. He gave me an illustrious name and noble station;
the world's respect reflected from his own glory: all this joined to his own undying love, inspired me
with sensations towards him, akin to those with which we regard the Giver of life. I gave him love
only. I devoted myself to him: imperfect creature that I was, I took myself to task, that I might
become worthy of him. I watched over my hasty temper, subdued my burning impatience of
character, schooled my self-engrossing thoughts, educating myself to the best perfection I might
attain, that the fruit of my exertions might be his happiness. I took no merit to myself for this. He
deserved it all-all labour, all devotion, all sacrifice; I would have toiled up a scaleless Alp, to pluck a
flower that would please him. I was ready to quit you all, my beloved and gifted companions, and to
live only with him, for him. I could not do otherwise, even if I had wished; for if we are said to have
two souls, he was my better soul, to which the other was a perpetual slave. One only return did he
owe me, even fidelity. I earned that; I deserved it. Because I was mountain bred, unallied to the
noble and wealthy, shall he think to repay me by an empty name and station? Let him take them
back; without his love they are nothing to me. Their only merit in my eyes was that they were his." Thus passionately Perdita ran on. When I adverted to the question of their entire separation, she
replied: "Be it so! One day the period will arrive; I know it, and feel it. But in this I am a coward. This
imperfect companionship, and our masquerade of union, are strangely dear to me. It is painful, I
allow, destructive, impracticable. It keeps up a perpetual fever in my veins; it frets my immedicable
wound; it is instinct with poison. Yet I must cling to it; perhaps it will kill me soon, and thus perform a
thankful office." In the mean time, Raymond had remained with Adrian and Idris. He was naturally frank; the
continued absence of Perdita and myself became remarkable; and Raymond soon found relief from
the constraint of months, by an unreserved confidence with his two friends. He related to them the
situation in which he had found Evadne. At first, from delicacy to Adrian he concealed her name; but
it was divulged in the course of his narrative, and her former lover heard with the most acute
agitation the history of her sufferings. Idris had shared Perdita's ill opinion of the Greek; but
Raymond's account softened and interested her. Evadne's constancy, fortitude, even her ill-fated and
ill-regulated love, were matter of admiration and pity; especially when, from the detail of the events
of the nineteenth of October, it was apparent that she preferred suffering and death to any in her
eyes degrading application for the pity and assistance of her lover. Her subsequent conduct did not
diminish this interest. At first, relieved from famine and the grave, watched over by Raymond with
the tenderest assiduity, with that feeling of repose peculiar to convalescence, Evadne gave herself up
to rapturous gratitude and love. But reflection returned with health. She questioned him with regard
to the motives which had occasioned his critical absence. She framed her enquiries with Greek
subtlety; she formed her conclusions with the decision and firmness peculiar to her disposition. She
could not divine, that the breach which she had occasioned between Raymond and Perdita was
already irreparable: but she knew, that under the present system it would be widened each day, and
that its result must be to destroy her lover's happiness, and to implant the fangs of remorse in his
heart. From the moment that she perceived the right line of conduct, she resolved to adopt it, and to
part from Raymond for ever. Conflicting passions, long-cherished love, and self-inflicted
disappointment, made her regard death alone as sufficient refuge for her woe. But the same feelings
and opinions which had before restrained her, acted with redoubled force; for she knew that the
reflection that he had occasioned her death, would pursue Raymond through life, poisoning every
enjoyment, clouding every prospect. Besides, though the violence of her anguish made life hateful, it
had not yet produced that monotonous, lethargic sense of changeless misery which for the most part
produces suicide. Her energy of character induced her still to combat with the ills of life; even those
attendant on hopeless love presented themselves, rather in the shape of an adversary to be
overcome, than of a victor to whom she must submit. Besides, she had memories of past tenderness
to cherish, smiles, words, and even tears, to con over, which, though remembered in desertion and
sorrow, were to be preferred to the forgetfulness of the grave. It was impossible to guess at the
whole of her plan. Her letter to Raymond gave no clue for discovery; it assured him, that she was in
no danger of wanting the means of life; she promised in it to preserve herself, and some future day
perhaps to present herself to him in a station not unworthy of her. She then bade him, with the
eloquence of despair and of unalterable love, a last farewell. All these circumstances were now related to Adrian and Idris. Raymond then lamented the cureless
evil of his situation with Perdita. He declared, notwithstanding her harshness, he even called it
coldness, that he loved her. He had been ready once with the humility of a penitent, and the duty of
a vassal, to surrender himself to her; giving up his very soul to her tutelage, to become her pupil, her
slave, her bondsman. She had rejected these advances; and the time for such exuberant submission,
which must be founded on love and nourished by it, was now passed. Still all his wishes and
endeavours were directed towards her peace, and his chief discomfort arose from the perception
that he exerted himself in vain. If she were to continue inflexible in the line of conduct she now
pursued, they must part. The combinations and occurrences of this senseless mode of intercourse
were maddening to him. Yet he would not propose the separation. He was haunted by the fear of
causing the death of one or other of the beings implicated in these events; and he could not
persuade himself to undertake to direct the course of events, lest, ignorant of the land he traversed,
he should lead those attached to the car into irremediable ruin. After a discussion on this subject, which lasted for several hours, he took leave of his friends, and
returned to town, unwilling to meet Perdita before us, conscious, as we all must be, of the thoughts
uppermost in the minds of both. Perdita prepared to follow him with her child. Idris endeavoured to
persuade her to remain. My poor sister looked at the counsellor with affright. She knew that
Raymond had conversed with her; had he instigated this request?-was this to be the prelude to
their eternal separation?-I have said, that the defects of her character awoke and acquired vigour
from her unnatural position. She regarded with suspicion the invitation of Idris; she embraced me, as
if she were about to be deprived of my affection also: calling me her more than brother, her only
friend, her last hope, she pathetically conjured me not to cease to love her; and with encreased
anxiety she departed for London, the scene and cause of all her misery. The scenes that followed, convinced her that she had not yet fathomed the obscure gulph into which
she had plunged. Her unhappiness assumed every day a new shape; every day some unexpected
event seemed to close, while in fact it led onward, the train of calamities which now befell her. The selected passion of the soul of Raymond was ambition. Readiness of talent, a capacity of
entering into, and leading the dispositions of men; earnest desire of distinction were the awakeners
and nurses of his ambition. But other ingredients mingled with these, and prevented him from
becoming the calculating, determined character, which alone forms a successful hero. He was
obstinate, but not firm; benevolent in his first movements; harsh and reckless when provoked. Above
all, he was remorseless and unyielding in the pursuit of any object of desire, however lawless. Love of
pleasure, and the softer sensibilities of our nature, made a prominent part of his character,
conquering the conqueror; holding him in at the moment of acquisition; sweeping away ambition's
web; making him forget the toil of weeks, for the sake of one moment's indulgence of the new and
actual object of his wishes. Obeying these impulses, he had become the husband of Perdita: egged
on by them, he found himself the lover of Evadne. He had now lost both. He had neither the
ennobling self-gratulation, which constancy inspires, to console him, nor the voluptuous sense of
abandonment to a forbidden, but intoxicating passion. His heart was exhausted by the recent events;
his enjoyment of life was destroyed by the resentment of Perdita, and the flight of Evadne; and the
inflexibility of the former, set the last seal upon the annihilation of his hopes. As long as their
disunion remained a secret, he cherished an expectation of re-awakening past tenderness in her
bosom; now that we were all made acquainted with these occurrences, and that Perdita, by
declaring her resolves to others, in a manner pledged herself to their accomplishment, he gave up
the idea of re-union as futile, and sought only, since he was unable to influence her to change, to
reconcile himself to the present state of things. He made a vow against love and its train of struggles,
disappointment and remorse, and sought in mere sensual enjoyment, a remedy for the injurious
inroads of passion. Debasement of character is the certain follower of such pursuits. Yet this consequence would not
have been immediately remarkable, if Raymond had continued to apply himself to the execution of
his plans for the public benefit, and the fulfilling his duties as Protector. But, extreme in all things,
given up to immediate impressions, he entered with ardour into this new pursuit of pleasure, and
followed up the incongruous intimacies occasioned by it without reflection or foresight. The council-
chamber was deserted; the crowds which attended on him as agents to his various projects were
neglected. Festivity, and even libertinism, became the order of the day. Perdita beheld with affright the encreasing disorder. For a moment she thought that she could stem
the torrent, and that Raymond could be induced to hear reason from her.-Vain hope! The moment
of her influence was passed. He listened with haughtiness, replied disdainfully; and, if in truth, she
succeeded in awakening his conscience, the sole effect was that he sought an opiate for the pang in
oblivious riot. With the energy natural to her, Perdita then endeavoured to supply his place. Their
still apparent union permitted her to do much; but no woman could, in the end, present a remedy to
the encreasing negligence of the Protector; who, as if seized with a paroxysm of insanity, trampled
on all ceremony, all order, all duty, and gave himself up to license. Reports of these strange proceedings reached us, and we were undecided what method to adopt to
restore our friend to himself and his country, when Perdita suddenly appeared among us. She
detailed the progress of the mournful change, and entreated Adrian and myself to go up to London,
and endeavour to remedy the encreasing evil:-"Tell him," she cried, "tell Lord Raymond, that my
presence shall no longer annoy him. That he need not plunge into this destructive dissipation for the
sake of disgusting me, and causing me to fly. This purpose is now accomplished; he will never see me
more. But let me, it is my last entreaty, let me in the praises of his countrymen and the prosperity of
England, find the choice of my youth justified." During our ride up to town, Adrian and I discussed and argued upon Raymond's conduct, and his
falling off from the hopes of permanent excellence on his part, which he had before given us cause to
entertain. My friend and I had both been educated in one school, or rather I was his pupil in the
opinion, that steady adherence to principle was the only road to honour; a ceaseless observance of
the laws of general utility, the only conscientious aim of human ambition. But though we both
entertained these ideas, we differed in their application. Resentment added also a sting to my
censure; and I reprobated Raymond's conduct in severe terms. Adrian was more benign, more
considerate. He admitted that the principles that I laid down were the best; but he denied that they
were the only ones. Quoting the text, there are many mansions in my father's house, he insisted that
the modes of becoming good or great, varied as much as the dispositions of men, of whom it might
be said, as of the leaves of the forest, there were no two alike. We arrived in London at about eleven at night. We conjectured, notwithstanding what we had heard,
that we should find Raymond in St. Stephen's: thither we sped. The chamber was full-but there was
no Protector; and there was an austere discontent manifest on the countenances of the leaders, and
a whispering and busy tattle among the underlings, not less ominous. We hastened to the palace of
the Protectorate. We found Raymond in his dining room with six others: the bottle was being pushed
about merrily, and had made considerable inroads on the understanding of one or two. He who sat
near Raymond was telling a story, which convulsed the rest with laughter. Raymond sat among them, though while he entered into the spirit of the hour, his natural dignity
never forsook him. He was gay, playful, fascinating-but never did he overstep the modesty of
nature, or the respect due to himself, in his wildest sallies. Yet I own, that considering the task which
Raymond had taken on himself as Protector of England, and the cares to which it became him to
attend, I was exceedingly provoked to observe the worthless fellows on whom his time was wasted,
and the jovial if not drunken spirit which seemed on the point of robbing him of his better self. I
stood watching the scene, while Adrian flitted like a shadow in among them, and, by a word and look
of sobriety, endeavoured to restore order in the assembly. Raymond expressed himself delighted to
see him, declaring that he should make one in the festivity of the night. This action of Adrian provoked me. I was indignant that he should sit at the same table with the
companions of Raymond-men of abandoned characters, or rather without any, the refuse of high-
bred luxury, the disgrace of their country. "Let me entreat Adrian," I cried, "not to comply: rather join
with me in endeavouring to withdraw Lord Raymond from this scene, and restore him to other
society." "My good fellow," said Raymond, "this is neither the time nor place for the delivery of a moral
lecture: take my word for it that my amusements and society are not so bad as you imagine. We are
neither hypocrites or fools -for the rest, 'Dost thou think because thou art virtuous, there shall be
no more cakes and ale?'" I turned angrily away: "Verney," said Adrian, "you are very cynical: sit down; or if you will not,
perhaps, as you are not a frequent visitor, Lord Raymond will humour you, and accompany us, as we
had previously agreed upon, to parliament." Raymond looked keenly at him; he could read benignity only in his gentle lineaments; he turned to
me, observing with scorn my moody and stern demeanour. "Come," said Adrian, "I have promised for
you, enable me to keep my engagement. Come with us. "-Raymond made an uneasy movement,
and laconically replied-"I won't!" The party in the mean time had broken up. They looked at the pictures, strolled into the other
apartments, talked of billiards, and one by one vanished. Raymond strode angrily up and down the
room. I stood ready to receive and reply to his reproaches. Adrian leaned against the wall. "This is
infinitely ridiculous," he cried, "if you were school-boys, you could not conduct yourselves more
unreasonably." "You do not understand," said Raymond. "This is only part of a system:-a scheme of tyranny to
which I will never submit. Because I am Protector of England, am I to be the only slave in its empire? My privacy invaded, my actions censured, my friends insulted? But I will get rid of the whole
together.-Be you witnesses," and he took the star, insignia of office, from his breast, and threw it
on the table. "I renounce my office, I abdicate my power-assume it who will!" --
"Let him assume it," exclaimed Adrian, "who can pronounce himself, or whom the world will
pronounce to be your superior. There does not exist the man in England with adequate presumption. Know yourself, Raymond, and your indignation will cease; your complacency return. A few months
ago, whenever we prayed for the prosperity of our country, or our own, we at the same time prayed
for the life and welfare of the Protector, as indissolubly linked to it. Your hours were devoted to our
benefit, your ambition was to obtain our commendation. You decorated our towns with edifices, you
bestowed on us useful establishments, you gifted the soil with abundant fertility. The powerful and
unjust cowered at the steps of your judgment-seat, and the poor and oppressed arose like morn-
awakened flowers under the sunshine of your protection. "Can you wonder that we are all aghast and mourn, when this appears changed? But, come, this
splenetic fit is already passed; resume your functions; your partizans will hail you; your enemies be
silenced; our love, honour, and duty will again be manifested towards you. Master yourself,
Raymond, and the world is subject to you." "All this would be very good sense, if addressed to another," replied Raymond, moodily, "con the
lesson yourself, and you, the first peer of the land, may become its sovereign. You the good, the
wise, the just, may rule all hearts. But I perceive, too soon for my own happiness, too late for
England's good, that I undertook a task to which I am unequal. I cannot rule myself. My passions are
my masters; my smallest impulse my tyrant. Do you think that I renounced the Protectorate (and I
have renounced it) in a fit of spleen? By the God that lives, I swear never to take up that bauble
again; never again to burthen myself with the weight of care and misery, of which that is the visible
sign. "Once I desired to be a king. It was in the hey-day of youth, in the pride of boyish folly. I knew myself
when I renounced it. I renounced it to gain -no matter what-for that also I have lost. For many
months I have submitted to this mock majesty-this solemn jest. I am its dupe no longer. I will be
free. "I have lost that which adorned and dignified my life; that which linked me to other men. Again I am
a solitary man; and I will become again, as in my early years, a wanderer, a soldier of fortune. My
friends, for Verney, I feel that you are my friend, do not endeavour to shake my resolve. Perdita,
wedded to an imagination, careless of what is behind the veil, whose charactery is in truth faulty and
vile, Perdita has renounced me. With her it was pretty enough to play a sovereign's part; and, as in
the recesses of your beloved forest we acted masques, and imagined ourselves Arcadian shepherds,
to please the fancy of the moment-so was I content, more for Perdita's sake than my own, to take
on me the character of one of the great ones of the earth; to lead her behind the scenes of grandeur,
to vary her life with a short act of magnificence and power. This was to be the colour; love and
confidence the substance of our existence. But we must live, and not act our lives; pursuing the
shadow, I lost the reality-now I renounce both. "Adrian, I am about to return to Greece, to become again a soldier, perhaps a conqueror. Will you
accompany me? You will behold new scenes; see a new people; witness the mighty struggle there
going forward between civilization and barbarism; behold, and perhaps direct the efforts of a young
and vigorous population, for liberty and order. Come with me. I have expected you. I waited for this
moment; all is prepared;-will you accompany me?" "I will," replied Adrian. "Immediately?" "To-morrow if you will." "Reflect!" I cried. "Wherefore?" asked Raymond-"My dear fellow, I have done nothing else than reflect on this step
the live-long summer; and be assured that Adrian has condensed an age of reflection into this little
moment. Do not talk of reflection; from this moment I abjure it; this is my only happy moment during
a long interval of time. I must go, Lionel-the Gods will it; and I must. Do not endeavour to deprive
me of my companion, the out-cast's friend. "One word more concerning unkind, unjust Perdita. For a time, I thought that, by watching a
complying moment, fostering the still warm ashes, I might relume in her the flame of love. It is more
cold within her, than a fire left by gypsies in winter-time, the spent embers crowned by a pyramid of
snow. Then, in endeavouring to do violence to my own disposition, I made all worse than before. Still
I think, that time, and even absence, may restore her to me. Remember, that I love her still, that my
dearest hope is that she will again be mine. I know, though she does not, how false the veil is which
she has spread over the reality-do not endeavour to rend this deceptive covering, but by degrees
withdraw it. Present her with a mirror, in which she may know herself; and, when she is an adept in
that necessary but difficult science, she will wonder at her present mistake, and hasten to restore to
me, what is by right mine, her forgiveness, her kind thoughts, her love." AFTER these events, it was long before we were able to attain any degree of composure. A moral
tempest had wrecked our richly freighted vessel, and we, remnants of the diminished crew, were
aghast at the losses and changes which we had undergone. Idris passionately loved her brother, and
could ill brook an absence whose duration was uncertain; his society was dear and necessary to me-
I had followed up my chosen literary occupations with delight under his tutorship and assistance; his
mild philosophy, unerring reason, and enthusiastic friendship were the best ingredient, the exalted
spirit of our circle; even the children bitterly regretted the loss of their kind playfellow. Deeper grief
oppressed Perdita. In spite of resentment, by day and night she figured to herself the toils and
dangers of the wanderers. Raymond absent, struggling with difficulties, lost to the power and rank of
the Protectorate, exposed to the perils of war, became an object of anxious interest; not that she felt
any inclination to recall him, if recall must imply a return to their former union. Such return she felt
to be impossible; and while she believed it to be thus, and with anguish regretted that so it should
be, she continued angry and impatient with him, who occasioned her misery. These perplexities and
regrets caused her to bathe her pillow with nightly tears, and to reduce her in person and in mind to
the shadow of what she had been. She sought solitude, and avoided us when in gaiety and
unrestrained affection we met in a family circle. Lonely musings, interminable wanderings, and
solemn music were her only pastimes. She neglected even her child; shutting her heart against all
tenderness, she grew reserved towards me, her first and fast friend. I could not see her thus lost, without exerting myself to remedy the evil -remediless I knew, if I
could not in the end bring her to reconcile herself to Raymond. Before he went I used every
argument, every persuasion to induce her to stop his journey. She answered the one with a gush of
tears-telling me that to be persuaded-life and the goods of life were a cheap exchange. It was not
will that she wanted, but the capacity; again and again she declared, it were as easy to enchain the
sea, to put reins on the wind's viewless courses, as for her to take truth for falsehood, deceit for
honesty, heartless communion for sincere, confiding love. She answered my reasonings more briefly,
declaring with disdain, that the reason was hers; and, until I could persuade her that the past could
be unacted, that maturity could go back to the cradle, and that all that was could become as though
it had never been, it was useless to assure her that no real change had taken place in her fate. And
thus with stern pride she suffered him to go, though her very heart-strings cracked at the fulfilling of
the act, which rent from her all that made life valuable. To change the scene for her, and even for ourselves, all unhinged by the cloud that had come over
us, I persuaded my two remaining companions that it were better that we should absent ourselves
for a time from Windsor. We visited the north of England, my native Ulswater, and lingered in scenes
dear from a thousand associations. We lengthened our tour into Scotland, that we might see Loch
Katrine and Loch Lomond; thence we crossed to Ireland, and passed several weeks in the
neighbourhood of Killarney. The change of scene operated to a great degree as I expected; after a
year's absence, Perdita returned in gentler and more docile mood to Windsor. The first sight of this
place for a time unhinged her. Here every spot was distinct with associations now grown bitter. The
forest glades, the ferny dells, and lawny uplands, the cultivated and cheerful country spread around
the silver pathway of ancient Thames, all earth, air, and wave, took up one choral voice, inspired by
memory, instinct with plaintive regret. But my essay towards bringing her to a saner view of her own situation, did not end here. Perdita
was still to a great degree uneducated. When first she left her peasant life, and resided with the
elegant and cultivated Evadne, the only accomplishment she brought to any perfection was that of
painting, for which she had a taste almost amounting to genius. This had occupied her in her lonely
cottage, when she quitted her Greek friend's protection. Her pallet and easel were now thrown
aside; did she try to paint, thronging recollections made her hand tremble, her eyes fill with tears. With this occupation she gave up almost every other; and her mind preyed upon itself almost to
madness. For my own part, since Adrian had first withdrawn me from my selvatic wilderness to his own
paradise of order and beauty, I had been wedded to literature. I felt convinced that however it might
have been in former times, in the present stage of the world, no man's faculties could be developed,
no man's moral principle be enlarged and liberal, without an extensive acquaintance with books. To
me they stood in the place of an active career, of ambition, and those palpable excitements
necessary to the multitude. The collation of philosophical opinions, the study of historical facts, the
acquirement of languages, were at once my recreation, and the serious aim of my life. I turned
author myself. My productions however were sufficiently unpretending; they were confined to the
biography of favourite historical characters, especially those whom I believed to have been traduced,
or about whom clung obscurity and doubt. As my authorship increased, I acquired new sympathies and pleasures. I found another and a
valuable link to enchain me to my fellow-creatures; my point of sight was extended, and the
inclinations and capacities of all human beings became deeply interesting to me. Kings have been
called the fathers of their people. Suddenly I became as it were the father of all mankind. Posterity
became my heirs. My thoughts were gems to enrich the treasure house of man's intellectual
possessions; each sentiment was a precious gift I bestowed on them. Let not these aspirations be
attributed to vanity. They were not expressed in words, nor even reduced to form in my own mind;
but they filled my soul, exalting my thoughts, raising a glow of enthusiasm, and led me out of the
obscure path in which I before walked, into the bright noon-enlightened highway of mankind, making
me, citizen of the world, a candidate for immortal honors, an eager aspirant to the praise and
sympathy of my fellow men. No one certainly ever enjoyed the pleasures of composition more intensely than I. If I left the woods,
the solemn music of the waving branches, and the majestic temple of nature, I sought the vast halls
of the Castle, and looked over wide, fertile England, spread beneath our regal mount, and listened
the while to inspiring strains of music. At such times solemn harmonies or spirit-stirring airs gave
wings to my lagging thoughts, permitting them, methought, to penetrate the last veil of nature and
her God, and to display the highest beauty in visible expression to the understandings of men. As the
music went on, my ideas seemed to quit their mortal dwelling house; they shook their pinions and
began a flight, sailing on the placid current of thought, filling the creation with new glory, and rousing
sublime imagery that else had slept voiceless. Then I would hasten to my desk, weave the new-found
web of mind in firm texture and brilliant colours, leaving the fashioning of the material to a calmer
moment. But this account, which might as properly belong to a former period of my life as to the present
moment, leads me far afield. It was the pleasure I took in literature, the discipline of mind I found
arise from it, that made me eager to lead Perdita to the same pursuits. I began with light hand and
gentle allurement; first exciting her curiosity, and then satisfying it in such a way as might occasion
her, at the same time that she half forgot her sorrows in occupation, to find in the hours that
succeeded a reaction of benevolence and toleration. Intellectual activity, though not directed towards books, had always been my sister's characteristic. It
had been displayed early in life, leading her out to solitary musing among her native mountains,
causing her to form innumerous combinations from common objects, giving strength to her
perceptions, and swiftness to their arrangement. Love had come, as the rod of the master-prophet,
to swallow up every minor propensity. Love had doubled all her excellencies, and placed a diadem on
her genius. Was she to cease to love? Take the colours and odour from the rose, change the sweet
nutriment of mother's milk to gall and poison; as easily might you wean Perdita from love. She
grieved for the loss of Raymond with an anguish, that exiled all smile from her lips, and trenched sad
lines on her brow of beauty. But each day seemed to change the nature of her suffering, and every
succeeding hour forced her to alter (if so I may style it) the fashion of her soul's mourning garb. For a
time music was able to satisfy the cravings of her mental hunger, and her melancholy thoughts
renewed themselves in each change of key, and varied with every alteration in the strain. My
schooling first impelled her towards books; and, if music had been the food of sorrow, the
productions of the wise became its medicine. The acquisition of unknown languages was too tedious
an occupation, for one who referred every expression to the universe within, and read not, as many
do, for the mere sake of filling up time; but who was still questioning herself and her author,
moulding every idea in a thousand ways, ardently desirous for the discovery of truth in every
sentence. She sought to improve her understanding; mechanically her heart and dispositions became
soft and gentle under this benign discipline. After awhile she discovered, that amidst all her newly
acquired knowledge, her own character, which formerly she fancied that she thoroughly understood,
became the first in rank among the terrae incognitae, the pathless wilds of a country that had no
chart. Erringly and strangely she began the task of self-examination with self-condemnation. And
then again she became aware of her own excellencies, and began to balance with juster scales the
shades of good and evil. I, who longed beyond words, to restore her to the happiness it was still in
her power to enjoy, watched with anxiety the result of these internal proceedings. But man is a strange animal. We cannot calculate on his forces like that of an engine; and, though an
impulse draw with a forty-horse power at what appears willing to yield to one, yet in contempt of
calculation the movement is not effected. Neither grief, philosophy, nor love could make Perdita
think with mildness of the dereliction of Raymond. She now took pleasure in my society; towards
Idris she felt and displayed a full and affectionate sense of her worth-she restored to her child in
abundant measure her tenderness and care. But I could discover, amidst all her repinings, deep
resentment towards Raymond, and an unfading sense of injury, that plucked from me my hope,
when I appeared nearest to its fulfilment. Among other painful restrictions, she has occasioned it to
become a law among us, never to mention Raymond's name before her. She refused to read any
communications from Greece, desiring me only to mention when any arrived, and whether the
wanderers were well. It was curious that even little Clara observed this law towards her mother. This
lovely child was nearly eight years of age. Formerly she had been a light-hearted infant, fanciful, but
gay and childish. After the departure of her father, thought became impressed on her young brow. Children, unadepts in language, seldom find words to express their thoughts, nor could we tell in
what manner the late events had impressed themselves on her mind. But certainly she had made
deep observations while she noted in silence the changes that passed around her. She never
mentioned her father to Perdita, she appeared half afraid when she spoke of him to me, and though I
tried to draw her out on the subject, and to dispel the gloom that hung about her ideas concerning
him, I could not succeed. Yet each foreign post-day she watched for the arrival of letters-knew the
post mark, and watched me as I read. I found her often poring over the article of Greek intelligence
in the newspaper. There is no more painful sight than that of untimely care in children, and it was particularly
observable in one whose disposition had heretofore been mirthful. Yet there was so much sweetness
and docility about Clara, that your admiration was excited; and if the moods of mind are calculated
to paint the cheek with beauty, and endow motions with grace, surely her contemplations must have
been celestial; since every lineament was moulded into loveliness, and her motions were more
harmonious than the elegant boundings of the fawns of her native forest. I sometimes expostulated
with Perdita on the subject of her reserve; but she rejected my counsels, while her daughter's
sensibility excited in her a tenderness still more passionate. After the lapse of more than a year, Adrian returned from Greece. When our exiles had first arrived, a truce was in existence between the Turks and Greeks; a truce
that was as sleep to the mortal frame, signal of renewed activity on waking. With the numerous
soldiers of Asia, with all of warlike stores, ships, and military engines, that wealth and power could
command, the Turks at once resolved to crush an enemy, which creeping on by degrees, had from
their stronghold in the Morea, acquired Thrace and Macedonia, and had led their armies even to the
gates of Constantinople, while their extensive commercial relations gave every European nation an
interest in their success. Greece prepared for a vigorous resistance; it rose to a man; and the women,
sacrificing their costly ornaments, accoutred their sons for the war, and bade them conquer or die
with the spirit of the Spartan mother. The talents and courage of Raymond were highly esteemed
among the Greeks. Born at Athens, that city claimed him for her own, and by giving him the
command of her peculiar division in the army, the commander-in-chief only possessed superior
power. He was numbered among her citizens, his name was added to the list of Grecian heroes. His
judgment, activity, and consummate bravery, justified their choice. The Earl of Windsor became a
volunteer under his friend. "It is well," said Adrian, "to prate of war in these pleasant shades, and with much ill-spent oil make a
show of joy, because many thousand of our fellow-creatures leave with pain this sweet air and natal
earth. I shall not be suspected of being averse to the Greek cause; I know and feel its necessity; it is
beyond every other a good cause. I have defended it with my sword, and was willing that my spirit
should be breathed out in its defence; freedom is of more worth than life, and the Greeks do well to
defend their privilege unto death. But let us not deceive ourselves. The Turks are men; each fibre,
each limb is as feeling as our own, and every spasm, be it mental or bodily, is as truly felt in a Turk's
heart or brain, as in a Greek's.