'What is all this?' cried a maid, running out of the kitchen. 'Oh! Molly,' said the mistress, 'Miss Jane is just frightened to death
by a monster above stairs, half man, half woman, and all over covered
with hair!' Another servant now made her appearance. 'Oh! Betty,' cried Molly, 'Miss Jane is just killed by a huge monster
above stairs, half man, half beast, all over covered with black hair,
and I don't know what other devilments besides!' 'I will run and drive it down,' cried Betty, and began ascending the
stairs. Whither could I hide? I luckily recollected the large chest; so
I flew up to the garret. It was now quite dark; but I found the chest,
sprang into it, and having closed the lid, flung some of the linen over
me. I then heard the girl enter the next room, and in a few moments,
she came into mine, with another person. 'Here is the trunk, Tom,' said she, 'and I must lock it on you till the
search is over. You see, Tom, what risks I am running on your account;
for there is Miss Jane, killed by it, and lying in bits, all about the
floor.' The man had now jumped into the chest; the girl locked it in an
instant, took out the key, and ran down. Almost prest to death, I made a sudden effort to get from under him. 'What's this! Oh! mercy, what's this?' cried he, feeling about. I gathered myself up; but did not speak. 'Help!' vociferated he. ''Tis the monster--here is the hair! help,
help!' 'Hush!' said I, 'or you will betray both of us. I am no monster, but a
woman.' 'Wasn't? it you that murdered the milliner?' said he, still trembling. 'No, really,' replied I, 'but now not a word; for I hear people
coming.' As I spoke, several persons entered the room. We lay still. They
searched about; and one of them, approaching the chest, tried to lift
the lid. 'That is locked this month past,' said the voice of the maid who had
hidden the man in it, 'so you need not look there.' They then searched the remaining garrets; and I heard them say, as they
were going down stairs, that I must have jumped out of a window. 'And now, Madam,' said the man, 'will you have the goodness to tell me
who you are?' 'A young and innocent maiden,' answered I, 'who, flying from my
persecutors, took refuge here.' 'Young and innocent!' cried he, 'good ingredients, faith. Come then, my
dear; I will protect you.' So saying, he caught me round the waist, and attempted to kiss me. I begged, reasoned, menaced--all would not do. I had read of a heroine,
whose virtue was saved by a timely brain-fever; so, as I could not
command one at that instant, I determined on affecting one. 'I murdered her famously!' exclaimed I; and then commenced singing and
moaning by turns. He stopped, and lay quiet, as if uncertain what to make of me. I
scratched the chest with my nails, and laughed, and shrieked. He began
to mutter curses and prayers with great rapidity; till, as I was
gabbling over the finest passage in Ossian, 'Oh! merciful!' ejaculated
he, rolling himself into a ball; ''tis a Bedlamite broke loose!' By this time, between my terror, and the heat of the chest, I was
gasping for breath; and my companion appeared on the very point of
suffocation; when, at this critical juncture, some one fortunately came
into the room. The man called for help, the chest was unlocked, opened;
and the maid with a candle appeared before us. The man darted out like an arrow; she remained motionless with
astonishment at seeing me, while I lay there, almost exhausted; though,
as usual, not worth a swoon. I do believe, that the five fingers I am
writing with would leave me, sooner than my five senses. 'She has confessed to the murder!' cried the man; while the maid held
by his arm, and shrunk back, as I rose from the chest with an air of
dignity. 'Be not frightened, my friends,' said I smiling, 'for I assure you that
I am no murderess; and that the milliner is alive and well, at this
moment. Is she not, young woman?' 'Yes, sure,' answered she, somewhat recovering from her terror. 'How I came into this extraordinary situation,' continued I, 'it were
needless to relate; but I must have your assistance to get out of it. If you, my good girl, will supply me with a decent gown, bonnet, and
pair of stockings, I will promise not to tell the family that you had a
lover secreted in the house, and I will give you two guineas for your
kindness.' So saying, I took the casket from the pocket of my regimental coat, and
displayed the jewels and money that were in it. 'Mercy me!' cried the maid; 'how could they dare for to say that so
rich a lady murdered the girl?' 'Ay, or so handsome a lady,' added the man, bowing. In a word, after some explanations and compliments, I gave the maid
four guineas, and the man the regimental coat; and was supplied with a
gown, bonnet, and pair of stockings. As soon as I had dressed myself, we determined that I should steal down
stairs, and out of the house; and that, if discovered in my passage, I
should not betray the maid. Accordingly, with much trepidation, I began to descend the stairs. Not
a soul seemed stirring. But as I passed by the milliner's room, I
perceived the door half open, and heard some one humming a tune inside. I peeped through the chink, and saw the pretty milliner again seated
there, and still busied about the Tuscan dress. I resolved to make
another effort for it; and as I had gained my point with the maid, by
having discovered her intrigue, it struck me that I might succeed with
the milliner in a similar manner. I therefore glided into the room, and seated myself just opposite to
her. 'Your business, Ma'am?' said she, looking surprised. 'To purchase that dress,' answered I. ''Tis already purchased,' said she. 'Do you remember the mad woman with the long hair?' said I, as I took
off my bonnet, and let down my tresses, with all the grandeur of virtue
victorious over vice. She started and turned pale. 'You are the very person, I believe,' faltered she. 'What upon earth
shall I do?' 'Do?' cried I. 'Why, sell me the Tuscan dress of course. The fact
is--but let it go no farther--I am a heroine; I am, I give you my word
and honour. So, you know, the lady being wronged of the dress,
(inasmuch as she is but an individual), is as nothing compared with the
wrong that the community will sustain, if they lose the pleasure of
finding that I get it from you. Sure the whole scene, since I came to
this house, was contrived for the express purpose of my procuring that
individual costume; and just conceive what pretty confusion must take
place, if, after all, you prevent me! My dear girl, we must do poetical
justice. We must not disappoint the reader. 'You will tell me, perhaps, that selling the dress is improper? Granted. But, recollect, what improper things are constantly done, in
novels, to bring about a pre-determined event. Your amour with the
gentleman, for instance; which I shall certainly tell your employer, if
you refuse to sell me the dress. 'As you value your own peace of mind, therefore, and in the name of all
that is just, generous, and honourable, I conjure you to reflect for a
moment, and you must see the matter in its rational light. What can you
answer to these arguments?' 'That the person who could use them,' said she, 'will never listen to
reason. I see what is the matter with you, and that I have no resource
but to humour you, or be ruined.' And she began crying. To conclude, after a little farther persuasion, I got the dress, gave
her ten guineas, and, tripping down stairs, effected a safe escape out
of the house. I then called a coach, and drove to Jerry Sullivan's; for I would not
return to my lodgings, lest the conspirators there should prevent me
from going to the masquerade. The poor fellow jumped with joy when he saw me; but I found him in
great distress. His creditors had threatened his little shop with
immediate ruin, unless he would discharge his debts. He had now
provided the whole sum due, except forty pounds; but this he could not
procure, and the creditors were expected every minute. 'I have only twelve guineas in the world,' said I, opening my casket,
'but they are at your service.' And I put them into his hand. 'Dear Lady!' cried the wife, 'what a mortal sight of jewels you have
got! Do you know, now, I could borrow thirty pounds at least on them,
at the pawnbroker's; and that sum would just answer.' 'Nay,' said I, 'I cannot consent to part with them; though, had I
thirty pounds, I would sooner give it to you, than buy jewels with it.' 'Sure then,' cried she, 'by the same rule, you would sooner sell your
jewels, than let me want thirty pounds.' 'Not at all,' answered I, 'for I am fond of my jewels, and I do not
care about money. Besides, have I not already given you twelve
guineas?' 'You have,' answered she, 'and that is what vexes me. If you had given
me nothing at all, I would not have minded, because you were a
stranger. But first to make yourself our friend, by giving us twelve
guineas, and then to refuse us the remainder--'tis so unnatural!' 'Ungrateful woman!' cried I. 'Had I ten thousand pounds, you should not
touch a farthing of it.' The arrival of the creditors interrupted us, and a touching scene
ensued. The wife and daughter flung themselves on their knees, and
wrung their hands, and begged for mercy; but the wretches were
inexorable. How could I remain unmoved? In short, I slipped the casket into the
wife's hand; out she ran with it, and in a few minutes returned with
forty pounds. The creditors received the money due, passed receipts,
and departed, and Jerry returned me the twelve guineas, saying: 'Bless
your sweet face, for 'tis that is the finger-post to heaven, though, to
be sure, I can't look strait in it, after all you have done for me. Och! 'tis a murder to be under an obligation: so if just a little bit
of mischief would happen you, and I to relieve you, as you did me, why
that would make me _aisy_.' I am writing to you, from his house, while his daughter is finishing
the sleeve of my Tuscan dress; and in a short time I shall be ready for
the masquerade. I confess I am not at all reconciled to the means I used in obtaining
that dress. I took advantage of the milliner's indiscretion in one
instance, to make her do wrong in another. But doubtless my biographer
will find excuses for me, which I cannot discover myself. Besides, the
code of moral law that heroines acknowledge is often quite opposite
from those maxims which govern other conditions of life. And, indeed,
if we view the various ranks and departments of society, we shall see,
that what is considered vicious in some of them, is not esteemed so in
others. Thus: it is deemed dishonest in a servant to cheat his master
of his wines, but it is thought perfectly fair for his master to
defraud the King of the revenue from those wines. In the same way, what
is called wantonness in a little minx with a flat face, is called only
susceptibility in a heroine with an oval one. We weep at the letters of
Heloise; but were they written by an alderman's fat wife, we should
laugh at them. The heroine may permit an amorous arm round her waist,
fly in the face of her parents, and make assignations in dark groves,
yet still be described as the most prudent of human creatures; but the
mere Miss has no business to attempt any mode of conduct beyond
modesty, decorum, and filial obedience. In a word, as different classes
have distinct privileges, it appears to me, from what I have read of
the law national, and the law romantic, that the heroine's prerogative
is similar to the King's, and that she, like him, can do no wrong. Adieu. O Biddy, I have ascertained my genealogy. I am--but I must not
anticipate. Take the particulars. Having secured a comfortable bed at Jerry's, and eaten something (for I
had fasted all day), I went with him in a coach to the Pantheon, where
he promised to remain, and escort me back. But I must first describe my Tuscan dress. It was a short petticoat of
pale green, with a bodice of white silk; the sleeves loose, and tied up
at the shoulders with ribbons and bunches of flowers. My hair, which
fell in ringlets on my neck, was also ornamented with flowers and a
straw hat. I wore no mask, heroines so seldom do. Palpitating with expectation, I entered the assembly. Such a multitude
of grotesque groups as presented themselves! Clowns, harlequins, nuns,
devils; all talking and none listening. The clowns happy to be called
fools, the harlequins as awkward as clowns, the nuns impudent, and the
devils well-conducted. But as there is a description of a masquerade in
almost every novel, you will excuse me from entering into farther
particulars. Too much agitated to support my character with spirit, I retired to a
recess, and there anxiously awaited the arrival of the ancient vassal. Hardly had I been seated five minutes, when an infirm and reverend old
man approached, and sat down beside me. His feeble form was propt upon
a long staff, a palsy shook his white locks, and his garments had all
the quaintness of antiquity. During some minutes, he gazed on me with earnestness, through a black
mask; at length, heaving a heavy sigh, he thus broke forth in tremulous
accents:

'Well-a-day! how the scalding tears do run adown my furrowed cheeks;
for well I wis, thou beest herself--the Lady Cherubina De Willoughby,
the long-lost daughter of mine honoured mistress!' 'Speak, I beseech you!' cried I. 'Are you, indeed, the ancient and
loyal vassal?' 'Now by my truly, 'tis even so,' said he. I could have hugged the dear old man to my heart. 'Welcome, thrice welcome, much respected menial!' cried I, grasping his
hand. 'But keep me not in suspense. Unfold to me the heart-harrowing
mysteries of my unhappy house!' 'Now by my fay,' said he, 'I will say forth my say. My name is Whylome
Eftsoones, and I was accounted comely when a younker. But what boots
that now? Beauty is like unto a flower of the field.--Good my lady,
pardon a garrulous old man. So as I was saying, the damozels were once
wont to leer at me right waggishly; but time changeth all things, as
the proverb saith; and time hath changed my face, from that of a
blithesome Ganymede to one of those heads which Guido has often
painted; mild, pale, penetrating. Good my lady, I must tell thee a
right pleasant and quaint saying of a certain nun, touching my face.' 'For pity's sake,' cried I, 'and as you value the preservation of my
senses, continue your story without these digressions.' 'Certes, my lady,' said he. 'Well, I was first taken, as a bonny page,
into the service of thy great great grandfader's fader's brother; and I
was in at the death of these four generations, till at last, I became
seneschal to thine honoured fader, Lord De Willoughby. His lordship
married the Lady Hysterica Belamour, and thou wast the sole offspring
of that ill-fated union. 'Soon after thy birth, thy noble father died of an apparition; or, as
some will have it, of stewed lampreys. Returning, impierced with mickle
dolour, from his funeral, which took place at midnight, I was stopped
on a common, by a tall figure, with a mirksome cloak, and a flapped
hat. I shook grievously, ne in that ghastly dreriment wist how myself
to bear.' 'I do not comprehend your expressions,' interrupted I. 'I mean,' said he, 'I was in such a fright I did not know what to do. Anon, he threw aside his disguise, and I beheld--Lord Gwyn!' 'Lord Gwyn!' cried I. 'Yea,' said he. 'Lord Gwyn, who was ywedded unto Lord De Willoughby's
sister, the Lady Eleanor.' 'Then Lady Eleanor Gwyn is my aunt!' cried I. 'Thou sayest truly,' replied he. '"My good Eftsoones," whispered Lord
Gwyn to me, "know you not that my wife, Lady Eleanor Gwyn, will enjoy
all the extensive estates of her brother, Lord De Willoughby, if that
brother's infant, the little Cherubina, were no more?" '"I trow, ween, and wote, 'tis as your lordship saith," answered I. 'His lordship then put into mine hand a stiletto. '"Eftsoones," said he, with a hollow voice, "if this dagger be planted
in a child's heart, it will grow, and bear a golden flower!" 'He spake, and incontinently took to striding away from me, in such
wise, that maulgre and albe, I gan make effort after him, nathlesse and
algates did child Gwyn forthwith flee from mine eyne.' 'I protest most solemnly,' said I, 'I do not understand five words in
the whole of that last sentence!' 'And yet, my lady,' replied he, ''tis the pure well of English
undefiled, and such as was yspoken in mine youth.' 'But what can you mean by _child_ Gwyn?' said I. 'Surely his lordship
was no suckling at this time.' 'Child,' said Eftsoones, 'signified a noble youth, some centuries ago;
and it is coming into fashion again. For instance, there is Childe
Harold.' 'Then,' said I, 'there is "second childishness;" and I fancy there will
be "mere oblivion" too. But if possible, finish your tale in the
corrupt tongue.' 'I will endeavour,' said he. 'Tempted by this implied promise of a
reward, I took an opportunity of conveying you away from your mother,
and of secreting you at the house of a peasant, whom I bribed to bring
you up as his own daughter. I told Lord Gwyn that I had dispatched you,
and he gave me three and fourpence halfpenny for my trouble. 'When the dear lady, your mother, missed you, she went through the most
elegant extravagancies; till, having plucked the last hair from her
head, she ran wild into the woods, and has never been heard of since.' 'Dear sainted sufferer!' exclaimed I. 'A few days ago,' continued Eftsoones, 'a messenger out of breath came
to tell me, that the peasant to whom I had consigned you was dying, and
wished to see me. I went. Such a scene! He confessed to me that he had
sold you, body and bones, as he inelegantly expressed it, to one farmer
Wilkinson, about thirteen years before; for that this farmer, having
discovered your illustrious birth, speculated on a handsome
consideration from Lord Gwyn, for keeping the secret. Now I am told
there is a certain parchment----'

'Which I have!' cried I. 'And a certain portrait of Nell Gwyn----'

'Which I have!' 'And a mole just above your left temple----'

'Which I have!' exclaimed I, in an ecstasy. 'Then your title is made out, as clear as the sun,' said he; 'and I
bow, in contrition, before Lady Cherubina de Willoughby, rightful
heiress of all the territory now appertaining, or that may hereinafter
appertain, to the House of De Willoughby.' 'Oh, dear, how delightful!' cried I. 'But my good friend, how am I to
set about proving my title?' 'Nothing easier,' answered he. 'Lady Gwyn (for his lordship is dead)
resides at this moment on your estate, which lies about thirty miles
from Town; so to-morrow morning you shall set off to see her ladyship,
and make your claims known to her. I will send a trusty servant with
you, and will myself proceed before you, to prepare her for your
arrival. You will therefore find me there.' While we were in the act of arranging affairs more accurately, who
should make his appearance, but Stuart in a domino! The moment he addressed me, old Eftsoones slunk away; nor could I catch
another glimpse of him during that night. Stuart told me that he had come to the masquerade, on the chance of
finding me there, as I seemed so determined on going, the last time he
was with me. He likewise explained the mystery of the darkened chamber,
and the false alarm of fire. It appears, that as soon as he had discovered the views of Betterton,
he hired a lodging at the opposite side of the street, and had two
police officers there, for the purpose of watching Betterton's
movements, and frustrating his attempts. He knocked several times in
the course of yesterday, but was always answered that I had walked out. Knowing that I had not, he began to suspect foul play, and determined
on gaining admittance to me. He therefore knocked once more, and then
rushed into the house crying fire. This manoeuvre had the desired
effect, for an universal panic took place; and in the midst of it, he
saw me issuing forth, and effect my escape. After having pursued me
till he lost all traces of my route, he returned to my lodgings, and
was informed by the poet, that Betterton had persuaded the landlady to
fasten a carpet at the outside of my window, in order to make me remain
in bed, till the time for the masquerade should arrive; and thus
prevent me from having an interview with Stuart. We then walked up and down the room, while I gave him an account of the
ancient and loyal vassal, and of all that I had heard respecting my
family. He was silent on the subject; and only begged of me to point
out Eftsoones, as soon as I should see him; but that interesting old
man never appeared. However, I was in great hopes of another adventure;
for a domino now began hovering about us so much, that Stuart at last
addressed it; but it glided away. He said he knew it was Betterton. In about an hour, I became tired of the scene; for no one took notice
of my dress. We therefore bade Jerry, who was in waiting, call a coach;
and we proceeded in it to his house. On our way, I mentioned my determination of setting off to Lady Gwyn's
the very next morning, as Eftsoones had promised to meet me there. Stuart, for a wonder, applauded my resolution; and even offered to
accompany me himself. 'For,' said he, 'I think I know this old Eftsoones; and if so, I fancy
you will find me useful in unravelling part of the mystery. Besides, I
would assist, with all my soul, in any plan tending to withdraw you
from the metropolis.' I snatched at his offer with joy; and it was then fixed that we should
take a chaise the next morning, and go together. On our arrival at the lodging, Stuart begged a bed of Jerry, that he
might be ready for the journey in time; and the good-natured Irishman,
finding him my friend, agreed to make up a pallet for him in the
parlour. Matters were soon arranged, and we have just separated for the night. Well, Biddy, what say you now? Have I not made a glorious expedition of
it? A young, rich, beautiful titled heiress already--think of that,
Biddy. As soon as I can decently turn Lady Gwyn out of doors, I mean to set
up a most magnificent establishment. But I will treat the poor woman
(who perhaps is innocent of her husband's crime) with extreme
delicacy. She shall never want a bed or a plate. By the by, I must
purchase silver plate. My livery shall be white and crimson. Biddy,
depend upon my patronage. How the parson and music-master will boast
of having known me. Then our village will swarm so, _to hear tell as
how_ Miss Cherry has grown a great lady. Old mother Muggins, at the
bottom of the hill, will make a good week's gossip out of it. However,
I mean to condescend excessively, for there is nothing I hate so much
as pride. Yet do not suppose that I am speculating upon an easy life. Though the
chief obstacle to my marriage will soon be removed, by the confirmation
of my noble birth, still I am not ignorant enough to imagine that no
other impediments will interfere. Besides, to confess the fact, I do
not feel my mind quite prepared to marry Montmorenci at so short a
notice. Hitherto I have thought of him but as a lover, not as a
husband--very different characters, in general. Ah, no, my friend; be well assured, that adversity will not desert me
quite so quickly. A present good is often the prognostic of an
approaching evil; and when prosperity points its sunshine in our faces,
misfortune, like our shadows, is sure to be behind. Adieu. After having breakfasted, and remunerated our entertainers, Stuart and
I set out in a post-chaise, while Jerry ran at our side half way down
the street, heaping me with blessings; and bidding me come to him if
ever I should be ruined. After we had advanced a few miles into the
country, Stuart began to look frequently through the back window, and
appeared uneasy. At length he stopped the carriage, and desired the
driver to turn round. As soon as the man had done so, another carriage,
which, it seems, had followed us from London, passed us, and
immediately turned after us. ''Tis as I thought!' cried Stuart, and stopping the chaise again,
jumped out of it. The chaise behind us also stopped; and a gentleman alighted from it and
approached. But imagine my surprise, when I found that this gentleman
was old Betterton! I could almost have embraced him, his villainous
face looked so promising, and so pregnant with mischief. 'Sir,' said he to Stuart, 'as you have perceived me following your
carriage, I find myself compelled, however unwillingly, to declare my
motives for doing so. Last night I happened to be at the Pantheon, in a
domino, and saw you there escorting this lady. I confess I had long
before suspected your intentions towards her, and seeing you now
together at a masquerade, and without a matron, I did not feel my
suspicions lessened. I therefore had you both traced home, and I found,
to my great horror, that you stopped at a wretched, and, as I am
informed, infamous house in St. Giles's, where you remained during the
night. I found too, that a chaise was at the door of it this morning:
whence concluding, as I well might, that an elopement was in agitation,
I determined, if possible, to prevent so dreadful a catastrophe, by
hiring a carriage and pursuing you. 'Sir, you undertook to lecture me, when last I saw you; and plausibly
enough you performed your part. It is now my duty to return the
obligation. Mr. Stuart, Mr. Stuart, is it not a shame for you, Mr.
Stuart? Is this the way to treat the daughter of your friend, Mr.
Stuart? Go, silly boy, return to your home; and bless that heaven which
hath sent me to the rescue of this fair unfortunate.' 'By all that is comical,' cried Stuart, laughing immoderately, 'this is
too ludicrous even to be angry at! Miss Wilkinson, allow me to
introduce you to Mr. Whylome Eftsoones, an ancient and loyal vassal of
the De Willoughbys;--a mere modern in his principles, I am afraid; but
addicted, I wis, to antiquated language.' Betterton, I thought, looked rather blank, as he said, 'Really, Sir, I
do not understand----'

'But really, Sir,' cried Stuart, 'I _do_ understand. I understand,
that if you would take less trouble in protecting this lady's honour,
you would have a better chance of preserving your own.' 'Sir,' answered Betterton, 'I will have you to know, that I would
sacrifice my life in defence of my honour.' 'Well, then,' said Stuart, 'though your life has but little of the
saint, it will, at least, have something of the martyr.' Betterton scowled at him askance, and grinned a thousand devils. 'Hear me, gentlemen,' cried I. 'If either of you again say any thing
disrespectful or insulting to the other, I declare, on my honour, he
shall leave me instantly. At present, I should be happy if both would
do me the favour of escorting me to Lady Gwyn's, as I may meet with
treatment there that will render the support of friends indispensible.' It was now Stuart's turn to look downcast, and Betterton's to smile
triumphant. The fact is, I wished to shew this admirable villain how
grateful I felt for his meritorious conduct in not having deserted me. 'I will accept of your invitation with pleasure,' said he, 'for my seat
lies within a few miles of her ladyship, and I wish to visit my
tenantry.' It was now noon. A few fleecy clouds floated in the blue depths of
ether. The breeze brought coolness on its wings, and an inviting
valley, watered by a rivulet, lay on the left; here whitened with
sheep, and there dotted with little encampments of hay. Exhilarated by the scene, after so long a confinement in the smoke and
stir of London, I proposed to my companions the rural exercise of
walking, as preferable to proceeding cooped up in a carriage. Each,
whatever was his motive, caught at the proposal with delight, and we
dismissed our chaises. I now hastened to luxuriate in Arcadian beatitude. The pastoral habit
of Tuscany was favourable; nothing remained but to rival an Ida, or a
Glorvina, in simple touches of nature; and to trip along the lawns,
like a Daphne or a Hamadryad. In an instant, I sprang across a hedge, and fled towards the little
valley, light as a wood-nymph flying from a satyr. I then took up a
most picturesque position. It was beside of the streamlet, under a
weeping willow, and on a grassy bank.