They swept the country like a conquering army, burning-laying waste-
murdering. The lower and vagabond English joined with them. Some few of the Lords Lieutenant who
remained, endeavoured to collect the militia-but the ranks were vacant, panic seized on all, and the
opposition that was made only served to increase the audacity and cruelty of the enemy. They talked
of taking London, conquering England-calling to mind the long detail of injuries which had for many
years been forgotten. Such vaunts displayed their weakness, rather than their strength-yet still they
might do extreme mischief, which, ending in their destruction, would render them at last objects of
compassion and remorse. We were now taught how, in the beginning of the world, mankind clothed their enemies in
impossible attributes-and how details proceeding from mouth to mouth, might, like Virgil's ever-
growing Rumour, reach the heavens with her brow, and clasp Hesperus and Lucifer with her
outstretched hands. Gorgon and Centaur, dragon and iron-hoofed lion, vast sea-monster and gigantic
hydra, were but types of the strange and appalling accounts brought to London concerning our
invaders. Their landing was long unknown, but having now advanced within an hundred miles of
London, the country people flying before them arrived in successive troops, each exaggerating the
numbers, fury, and cruelty of the assailants. Tumult filled the before quiet streets-women and
children deserted their homes, escaping they knew not whither-fathers, husbands, and sons, stood
trembling, not for themselves, but for their loved and defenceless relations. As the country people
poured into London, the citizens fled southwards-they climbed the higher edifices of the town,
fancying that they could discern the smoke and flames the enemy spread around them. As Windsor
lay, to a great degree, in the line of march from the west, I removed my family to London, assigning
the Tower for their sojourn, and joining Adrian, acted as his Lieutenant in the coming struggle. We employed only two days in our preparations, and made good use of them. Artillery and arms
were collected; the remnants of such regiments, as could be brought through many losses into any
show of muster, were put under arms, with that appearance of military discipline which might
encourage our own party, and seem most formidable to the disorganized multitude of our enemies. Even music was not wanting: banners floated in the air, and the shrill fife and loud trumpet breathed
forth sounds of encouragement and victory. A practised ear might trace an undue faltering in the
step of the soldiers; but this was not occasioned so much by fear of the adversary, as by disease, by
sorrow, and by fatal prognostications, which often weighed most potently on the brave, and quelled
the manly heart to abject subjection. Adrian led the troops. He was full of care. It was small relief to him that our discipline should gain us
success in such a conflict; while plague still hovered to equalize the conqueror and the conquered, it
was not victory that he desired, but bloodless peace. As we advanced, we were met by bands of
peasantry, whose almost naked condition, whose despair and horror, told at once the fierce nature
of the coming enemy. The senseless spirit of conquest and thirst of spoil blinded them, while with
insane fury they deluged the country in ruin. The sight of the military restored hope to those who
fled, and revenge took place of fear. They inspired the soldiers with the same sentiment. Languor
was changed to ardour, the slow step converted to a speedy pace, while the hollow murmur of the
multitude, inspired by one feeling, and that deadly, filled the air, drowning the clang of arms and
sound of music. Adrian perceived the change, and feared that it would be difficult to prevent them
from wreaking their utmost fury on the Irish. He rode through the lines, charging the officers to
restrain the troops, exhorting the soldiers, restoring order, and quieting in some degree the violent
agitation that swelled every bosom. We first came upon a few stragglers of the Irish at St. Albans. They retreated, and, joining others of
their companions, still fell back, till they reached the main body. Tidings of an armed and regular
opposition recalled them to a sort of order. They made Buckingham their head-quarters, and scouts
were sent out to ascertain our situation. We remained for the night at Luton. In the morning a
simultaneous movement caused us each to advance. It was early dawn, and the air, impregnated
with freshest odour, seemed in idle mockery to play with our banners, and bore onwards towards
the enemy the music of the bands, the neighings of the horses, and regular step of the infantry. The
first sound of martial instruments that came upon our undisciplined foe, inspired surprise, not
unmingled with dread. It spoke of other days, of days of concord and order; it was associated with
times when plague was not, and man lived beyond the shadow of imminent fate. The pause was
momentary. Soon we heard their disorderly clamour, the barbarian shouts, the untimed step of
thousands coming on in disarray. Their troops now came pouring on us from the open country or
narrow lanes; a large extent of unenclosed fields lay between us; we advanced to the middle of this,
and then made a halt: being somewhat on superior ground, we could discern the space they covered. When their leaders perceived us drawn out in opposition, they also gave the word to halt, and
endeavoured to form their men into some imitation of military discipline. The first ranks had
muskets; some were mounted, but their arms were such as they had seized during their advance,
their horses those they had taken from the peasantry; there was no uniformity, and little obedience,
but their shouts and wild gestures showed the untamed spirit that inspired them. Our soldiers
received the word, and advanced to quickest time, but in perfect order: their uniform dresses, the
gleam of their polished arms, their silence, and looks of sullen hate, were more appalling than the
savage clamour of our innumerous foe. Thus coming nearer and nearer each other, the howls and
shouts of the Irish increased; the English proceeded in obedience to their officers, until they came
near enough to distinguish the faces of their enemies; the sight inspired them with fury: with one cry,
that rent heaven and was re-echoed by the furthest lines, they rushed on; they disdained the use of
the bullet, but with fixed bayonet dashed among the opposing foe, while the ranks opening at
intervals, the matchmen lighted the cannon, whose deafening roar and blinding smoke filled up the
horror of the scene. I was beside Adrian; a moment before he had again given the word to halt, and
had remained a few yards distant from us in deep meditation: he was forming swiftly his plan of
action, to prevent the effusion of blood; the noise of cannon, the sudden rush of the troops, and yell
of the foe, startled him: with flashing eyes he exclaimed, "Not one of these must perish!" and
plunging the rowels into his horse's sides, he dashed between the conflicting bands. We, his staff,
followed him to surround and protect him; obeying his signal, however, we fell back somewhat. The
soldiery perceiving him, paused in their onset; he did not swerve from the bullets that passed near
him, but rode immediately between the opposing lines. Silence succeeded to clamour; about fifty
men lay on the ground dying or dead. Adrian raised his sword in act to speak: "By whose command,"
he cried, addressing his own troops, "do you advance? Who ordered your attack? Fall back; these
misguided men shall not be slaughtered, while I am your general. Sheath your weapons; these are
your brothers, commit not fratricide; soon the plague will not leave one for you to glut your revenge
upon: will you be more pitiless than pestilence? As you honour me-as you worship God, in whose
image those also are created-as your children and friends are dear to you,-shed not a drop of
precious human blood." He spoke with outstretched hand and winning voice, and then turning to our invaders, with a severe
brow, he commanded them to lay down their arms: "Do you think," he said, "that because we are
wasted by plague, you can overcome us; the plague is also among you, and when ye are vanquished
by famine and disease, the ghosts of those you have murdered will arise to bid you not hope in
death. Lay down your arms, barbarous and cruel men-men whose hands are stained with the blood
of the innocent, whose souls are weighed down by the orphan's cry! We shall conquer, for the right
is on our side; already your cheeks are pale-the weapons fall from your nerveless grasp. Lay down
your arms, fellow men! brethren! Pardon, succour, and brotherly love await your repentance. You
are dear to us, because you wear the frail shape of humanity; each one among you will find a friend
and host among these forces. Shall man be the enemy of man, while plague, the foe to all, even now
is above us, triumphing in our butchery, more cruel than her own?" Each army paused. On our side the soldiers grasped their arms firmly, and looked with stern glances
on the foe. These had not thrown down their weapons, more from fear than the spirit of contest;
they looked at each other, each wishing to follow some example given him,-but they had no leader. Adrian threw himself from his horse, and approaching one of those just slain: "He was a man," he
cried, "and he is dead. O quickly bind up the wounds of the fallen-let not one die; let not one more
soul escape through your merciless gashes, to relate before the throne of God the tale of fratricide;
bind up their wounds-restore them to their friends. Cast away the hearts of tigers that burn in your
breasts; throw down those tools of cruelty and hate; in this pause of exterminating destiny, let each
man be brother, guardian, and stay to the other. Away with those blood-stained arms, and hasten
some of you to bind up these wounds." As he spoke, he knelt on the ground, and raised in his arms a man from whose side the warm tide of
life gushed-the poor wretch gasped-so still had either host become, that his moans were distinctly
heard, and every heart, late fiercely bent on universal massacre, now beat anxiously in hope and fear
for the fate of this one man. Adrian tore off his military scarf and bound it round the sufferer-it was
too late-the man heaved a deep sigh, his head fell back, his limbs lost their sustaining power.- "He
is dead!" said Adrian, as the corpse fell from his arms on the ground, and he bowed his head in
sorrow and awe. The fate of the world seemed bound up in the death of this single man. On either
side the bands threw down their arms, even the veterans wept, and our party held out their hands to
their foes, while a gush of love and deepest amity filled every heart. The two forces mingling,
unarmed and hand in hand, talking only how each might assist the other, the adversaries conjoined;
each repenting, the one side their former cruelties, the other their late violence, they obeyed the
orders of the General to proceed towards London. Adrian was obliged to exert his utmost prudence, first to allay the discord, and then to provide for
the multitude of the invaders. They were marched to various parts of the southern counties,
quartered in deserted villages,-a part were sent back to their own island, while the season of winter
so far revived our energy, that the passes of the country were defended, and any increase of
numbers prohibited. On this occasion Adrian and Idris met after a separation of nearly a year. Adrian had been occupied in
fulfilling a laborious and painful task. He had been familiar with every species of human misery, and
had for ever found his powers inadequate, his aid of small avail. Yet the purpose of his soul, his
energy and ardent resolution, prevented any re-action of sorrow. He seemed born anew, and virtue,
more potent than Medean alchemy, endued him with health and strength. Idris hardly recognized
the fragile being, whose form had seemed to bend even to the summer breeze, in the energetic man,
whose very excess of sensibility rendered him more capable of fulfilling his station of pilot in storm-
tossed England. It was not thus with Idris. She was uncomplaining; but the very soul of fear had taken its seat in her
heart. She had grown thin and pale, her eyes filled with involuntary tears, her voice was broken and
low. She tried to throw a veil over the change which she knew her brother must observe in her, but
the effort was ineffectual; and when alone with him, with a burst of irrepressible grief she gave vent
to her apprehensions and sorrow. She described in vivid terms the ceaseless care that with still
renewing hunger ate into her soul; she compared this gnawing of sleepless expectation of evil, to the
vulture that fed on the heart of Prometheus; under the influence of this eternal excitement, and of
the interminable struggles she endured to combat and conceal it, she felt, she said, as if all the
wheels and springs of the animal machine worked at double rate, and were fast consuming
themselves. Sleep was not sleep, for her waking thoughts, bridled by some remains of reason, and by
the sight of her children happy and in health, were then transformed to wild dreams, all her terrors
were realized, all her fears received their dread fulfilment. To this state there was no hope, no
alleviation, unless the grave should quickly receive its destined prey, and she be permitted to die,
before she experienced a thousand living deaths in the loss of those she loved. Fearing to give me
pain, she hid as best she could the excess of her wretchedness, but meeting thus her brother after a
long absence, she could not restrain the expression of her woe, but with all the vividness of
imagination with which misery is always replete, she poured out the emotions of her heart to her
beloved and sympathizing Adrian. Her present visit to London tended to augment her state of inquietude, by shewing in its utmost
extent the ravages occasioned by pestilence. It hardly preserved the appearance of an inhabited city;
grass sprung up thick in the streets; the squares were weed-grown, the houses were shut up, while
silence and loneliness characterized the busiest parts of the town. Yet in the midst of desolation
Adrian had preserved order; and each one continued to live according to law and custom-human
institutions thus surviving as it were divine ones, and while the decree of population was abrogated,
property continued sacred. It was a melancholy reflection; and in spite of the diminution of evil
produced, it struck on the heart as a wretched mockery. All idea of resort for pleasure, of theatres
and festivals had passed away. "Next summer," said Adrian as we parted on our return to Windsor,
"will decide the fate of the human race. I shall not pause in my exertions until that time; but, if
plague revives with the coming year, all contest with her must cease, and our only occupation be the
choice of a grave." I must not forget one incident that occurred during this visit to London. The visits of Merrival to
Windsor, before frequent, had suddenly ceased. At this time where but a hair's line separated the
living from the dead, I feared that our friend had become a victim to the all-embracing evil. On this
occasion I went, dreading the worst, to his dwelling, to see if I could be of any service to those of his
family who might have survived. The house was deserted, and had been one of those assigned to the
invading strangers quartered in London. I saw his astronomical instruments put to strange uses, his
globes defaced, his papers covered with abstruse calculations destroyed. The neighbours could tell
me little, till I lighted on a poor woman who acted as nurse in these perilous times. She told me that
all the family were dead, except Merrival himself, who had gone mad- mad, she called it, yet on
questioning her further, it appeared that he was possessed only by the delirium of excessive grief. This old man, tottering on the edge of the grave, and prolonging his prospect through millions of
calculated years,-this visionary who had not seen starvation in the wasted forms of his wife and
children, or plague in the horrible sights and sounds that surrounded him-this astronomer,
apparently dead on earth, and living only in the motion of the spheres-loved his family with
unapparent but intense affection. Through long habit they had become a part of himself; his want of
worldly knowledge, his absence of mind and infant guilelessness, made him utterly dependent on
them. It was not till one of them died that he perceived their danger; one by one they were carried
off by pestilence; and his wife, his helpmate and supporter, more necessary to him than his own
limbs and frame, which had hardly been taught the lesson of self-preservation, the kind companion
whose voice always spoke peace to him, closed her eyes in death. The old man felt the system of
universal nature which he had so long studied and adored, slide from under him, and he stood
among the dead, and lifted his voice in curses.-No wonder that the attendant should interpret as
phrensy the harrowing maledictions of the grief-struck old man. I had commenced my search late in the day, a November day, that closed in early with pattering rain
and melancholy wind. As I turned from the door, I saw Merrival, or rather the shadow of Merrival,
attenuated and wild, pass me, and sit on the steps of his home. The breeze scattered the grey locks
on his temples, the rain drenched his uncovered head, he sat hiding his face in his withered hands. I
pressed his shoulder to awaken his attention, but he did not alter his position. "Merrival," I said, "it is
long since we have seen you-you must return to Windsor with me-Lady Idris desires to see you,
you will not refuse her request-come home with me." He replied in a hollow voice, "Why deceive a helpless old man, why talk hypocritically to one half
crazed? Windsor is not my home; my true home I have found; the home that the Creator has
prepared for me." His accent of bitter scorn thrilled me-"Do not tempt me to speak," he continued, "my words would
scare you-in an universe of cowards I dare think-among the church-yard tombs-among the
victims of His merciless tyranny I dare reproach the Supreme Evil. How can he punish me? Let him
bare his arm and transfix me with lightning-this is also one of his attributes"-and the old man
laughed. He rose, and I followed him through the rain to a neighbouring church-yard -he threw himself on
the wet earth. "Here they are," he cried, "beautiful creatures-breathing, speaking, loving creatures. She who by day and night cherished the age-worn lover of her youth-they, parts of my flesh, my
children-here they are: call them, scream their names through the night; they will not answer!" He
clung to the little heaps that marked the graves. "I ask but one thing; I do not fear His hell, for I have
it here; I do not desire His heaven, let me but die and be laid beside them; let me but, when I lie
dead, feel my flesh as it moulders, mingle with theirs. Promise," and he raised himself painfully, and
seized my arm, "promise to bury me with them." "So God help me and mine as I promise," I replied, "on one condition: return with me to Windsor." "To Windsor!" he cried with a shriek, "Never!-from this place I never go -my bones, my flesh, I
myself, are already buried here, and what you see of me is corrupted clay like them. I will lie here,
and cling here, till rain, and hail, and lightning and storm, ruining on me, make me one in substance
with them below." In a few words I must conclude this tragedy. I was obliged to leave London, and Adrian undertook to
watch over him; the task was soon fulfilled; age, grief, and inclement weather, all united to hush his
sorrows, and bring repose to his heart, whose beats were agony. He died embracing the sod, which
was piled above his breast, when he was placed beside the beings whom he regretted with such wild
despair. I returned to Windsor at the wish of Idris, who seemed to think that there was greater safety for her
children at that spot; and because, once having taken on me the guardianship of the district, I would
not desert it while an inhabitant survived. I went also to act in conformity with Adrian's plans, which
was to congregate in masses what remained of the population; for he possessed the conviction that
it was only through the benevolent and social virtues that any safety was to be hoped for the
remnant of mankind. It was a melancholy thing to return to this spot so dear to us, as the scene of a happiness rarely
before enjoyed, here to mark the extinction of our species, and trace the deep uneraseable footsteps
of disease over the fertile and cherished soil. The aspect of the country had so far changed, that it
had been impossible to enter on the task of sowing seed, and other autumnal labours. That season
was now gone; and winter had set in with sudden and unusual severity. Alternate frosts and thaws
succeeding to floods, rendered the country impassable. Heavy falls of snow gave an arctic
appearance to the scenery; the roofs of the houses peeped from the white mass; the lowly cot and
stately mansion, alike deserted, were blocked up, their thresholds uncleared; the windows were
broken by the hail, while the prevalence of a north-east wind rendered out-door exertions extremely
painful. The altered state of society made these accidents of nature, sources of real misery. The
luxury of command and the attentions of servitude were lost. It is true that the necessaries of life
were assembled in such quantities, as to supply to superfluity the wants of the diminished
population; but still much labour was required to arrange these, as it were, raw materials; and
depressed by sickness, and fearful of the future, we had not energy to enter boldly and decidedly on
any system. I can speak for myself-want of energy was not my failing. The intense life that quickened my pulses,
and animated my frame, had the effect, not of drawing me into the mazes of active life, but of
exalting my lowliness, and of bestowing majestic proportions on insignificant objects-I could have
lived the life of a peasant in the same way-my trifling occupations were swelled into important
pursuits; my affections were impetuous and engrossing passions, and nature with all her changes
was invested in divine attributes. The very spirit of the Greek mythology inhabited my heart; I deified
the uplands, glades, and streams, I
  Had sight of Proteus coming from the sea;
  And heard old Triton blow his wreathed horn. Strange, that while the earth preserved her monotonous course, I dwelt with ever-renewing wonder
on her antique laws, and now that with excentric wheel she rushed into an untried path, I should feel
this spirit fade; I struggled with despondency and weariness, but like a fog, they choked me. Perhaps,
after the labours and stupendous excitement of the past summer, the calm of winter and the almost
menial toils it brought with it, were by natural re-action doubly irksome. It was not the grasping
passion of the preceding year, which gave life and individuality to each moment-it was not the
aching pangs induced by the distresses of the times. The utter inutility that had attended all my
exertions took from them their usual effects of exhilaration, and despair rendered abortive the balm
of self applause-I longed to return to my old occupations, but of what use were they? To read were
futile-to write, vanity indeed. The earth, late wide circus for the display of dignified exploits, vast
theatre for a magnificent drama, now presented a vacant space, an empty stage-for actor or
spectator there was no longer aught to say or hear. Our little town of Windsor, in which the survivors from the neighbouring counties were chiefly
assembled, wore a melancholy aspect. Its streets were blocked up with snow-the few passengers
seemed palsied, and frozen by the ungenial visitation of winter. To escape these evils was the aim
and scope of all our exertions. Families late devoted to exalting and refined pursuits, rich, blooming,
and young, with diminished numbers and care-fraught hearts, huddled over a fire, grown selfish and
grovelling through suffering. Without the aid of servants, it was necessary to discharge all household
duties; hands unused to such labour must knead the bread, or in the absence of flour, the statesmen
or perfumed courtier must undertake the butcher's office. Poor and rich were now equal, or rather
the poor were the superior, since they entered on such tasks with alacrity and experience; while
ignorance, inaptitude, and habits of repose, rendered them fatiguing to the luxurious, galling to the
proud, disgustful to all whose minds, bent on intellectual improvement, held it their dearest privilege
to be exempt from attending to mere animal wants. But in every change goodness and affection can find field for exertion and display. Among some
these changes produced a devotion and sacrifice of self at once graceful and heroic. It was a sight for
the lovers of the human race to enjoy; to behold, as in ancient times, the patriarchal modes in which
the variety of kindred and friendship fulfilled their duteous and kindly offices. Youths, nobles of the
land, performed for the sake of mother or sister, the services of menials with amiable cheerfulness. They went to the river to break the ice, and draw water: they assembled on foraging expeditions, or
axe in hand felled the trees for fuel. The females received them on their return with the simple and
affectionate welcome known before only to the lowly cottage-a clean hearth and bright fire; the
supper ready cooked by beloved hands; gratitude for the provision for to-morrow's meal: strange
enjoyments for the high-born English, yet they were now their sole, hard earned, and dearly prized
luxuries. None was more conspicuous for this graceful submission to circumstances, noble humility, and
ingenious fancy to adorn such acts with romantic colouring, than our own Clara. She saw my
despondency, and the aching cares of Idris. Her perpetual study was to relieve us from labour and to
spread ease and even elegance over our altered mode of life. We still had some attendants spared by
disease, and warmly attached to us. But Clara was jealous of their services; she would be sole
handmaid of Idris, sole minister to the wants of her little cousins; nothing gave her so much pleasure
as our employing her in this way; she went beyond our desires, earnest, diligent, and unwearied,-
  Abra was ready ere we called her name,
  And though we called another, Abra came. It was my task each day to visit the various families assembled in our town, and when the weather
permitted, I was glad to prolong my ride, and to muse in solitude over every changeful appearance of
our destiny, endeavouring to gather lessons for the future from the experience of the past. The
impatience with which, while in society, the ills that afflicted my species inspired me, were softened
by loneliness, when individual suffering was merged in the general calamity, strange to say, less
afflicting to contemplate. Thus often, pushing my way with difficulty through the narrow snow-
blocked town, I crossed the bridge and passed through Eton. No youthful congregation of gallant-
hearted boys thronged the portal of the college; sad silence pervaded the busy school-room and
noisy playground. I extended my ride towards Salt Hill, on every side impeded by the snow. Were
those the fertile fields I loved-was that the interchange of gentle upland and cultivated dale, once
covered with waving corn, diversified by stately trees, watered by the meandering Thames? One
sheet of white covered it, while bitter recollection told me that cold as the winter-clothed earth,
were the hearts of the inhabitants. I met troops of horses, herds of cattle, flocks of sheep, wandering
at will; here throwing down a hay-rick, and nestling from cold in its heart, which afforded them
shelter and food-there having taken possession of a vacant cottage. Once on a frosty day, pushed
on by restless unsatisfying reflections, I sought a favourite haunt, a little wood not far distant from
Salt Hill. A bubbling spring prattles over stones on one side, and a plantation of a few elms and
beeches, hardly deserve, and yet continue the name of wood. This spot had for me peculiar charms. It had been a favourite resort of Adrian; it was secluded; and he often said that in boyhood, his
happiest hours were spent here; having escaped the stately bondage of his mother, he sat on the
rough hewn steps that led to the spring, now reading a favourite book, now musing, with speculation
beyond his years, on the still unravelled skein of morals or metaphysics. A melancholy foreboding
assured me that I should never see this place more; so with careful thought, I noted each tree, every
winding of the streamlet and irregularity of the soil, that I might better call up its idea in absence. A
robin red-breast dropt from the frosty branches of the trees, upon the congealed rivulet; its panting
breast and half-closed eyes shewed that it was dying: a hawk appeared in the air; sudden fear seized
the little creature; it exerted its last strength, throwing itself on its back, raising its talons in impotent
defence against its powerful enemy. I took it up and placed it in my breast. I fed it with a few crumbs
from a biscuit; by degrees it revived; its warm fluttering heart beat against me; I cannot tell why I
detail this trifling incident-but the scene is still before me; the snow-clad fields seen through the
silvered trunks of the beeches,-the brook, in days of happiness alive with sparkling waters, now
choked by ice-the leafless trees fantastically dressed in hoar frost-the shapes of summer leaves
imaged by winter's frozen hand on the hard ground-the dusky sky, drear cold, and unbroken
silence-while close in my bosom, my feathered nursling lay warm, and safe, speaking its content
with a light chirp- painful reflections thronged, stirring my brain with wild commotion-cold and
death-like as the snowy fields was all earth-misery-stricken the life-tide of the inhabitants-why
should I oppose the cataract of destruction that swept us away?-why string my nerves and renew
my wearied efforts-ah, why? But that my firm courage and cheerful exertions might shelter the
dear mate, whom I chose in the spring of my life; though the throbbings of my heart be replete with
pain, though my hopes for the future are chill, still while your dear head, my gentlest love, can
repose in peace on that heart, and while you derive from its fostering care, comfort, and hope, my
struggles shall not cease,-I will not call myself altogether vanquished. One fine February day, when the sun had reassumed some of its genial power, I walked in the forest
with my family. It was one of those lovely winter-days which assert the capacity of nature to bestow
beauty on barrenness. The leafless trees spread their fibrous branches against the pure sky; their
intricate and pervious tracery resembled delicate sea-weed; the deer were turning up the snow in
search of the hidden grass; the white was made intensely dazzling by the sun, and trunks of the trees,
rendered more conspicuous by the loss of preponderating foliage, gathered around like the
labyrinthine columns of a vast temple; it was impossible not to receive pleasure from the sight of
these things. Our children, freed from the bondage of winter, bounded before us; pursuing the deer,
or rousing the pheasants and partridges from their coverts. Idris leant on my arm; her sadness
yielded to the present sense of pleasure. We met other families on the Long Walk, enjoying like
ourselves the return of the genial season. At once, I seemed to awake; I cast off the clinging sloth of
the past months; earth assumed a new appearance, and my view of the future was suddenly made
clear. I exclaimed, "I have now found out the secret!" "What secret?" In answer to this question, I described our gloomy winter-life, our sordid cares, our menial labours:-
"This northern country," I said, "is no place for our diminished race. When mankind were few, it was
not here that they battled with the powerful agents of nature, and were enabled to cover the globe
with offspring. We must seek some natural Paradise, some garden of the earth, where our simple
wants may be easily supplied, and the enjoyment of a delicious climate compensate for the social
pleasures we have lost. If we survive this coming summer, I will not spend the ensuing winter in
England; neither I nor any of us." I spoke without much heed, and the very conclusion of what I said brought with it other thoughts. Should we, any of us, survive the coming summer? I saw the brow of Idris clouded; I again felt, that
we were enchained to the car of fate, over whose coursers we had no control. We could no longer
say, This we will do, and this we will leave undone. A mightier power than the human was at hand to
destroy our plans or to achieve the work we avoided. It were madness to calculate upon another
winter. This was our last. The coming summer was the extreme end of our vista; and, when we
arrived there, instead of a continuation of the long road, a gulph yawned, into which we must of
force be precipitated. The last blessing of humanity was wrested from us; we might no longer hope. Can the madman, as he clanks his chains, hope? Can the wretch, led to the scaffold, who when he
lays his head on the block, marks the double shadow of himself and the executioner, whose uplifted
arm bears the axe, hope? Can the ship-wrecked mariner, who spent with swimming, hears close
behind the splashing waters divided by a shark which pursues him through the Atlantic, hope? Such
hope as theirs, we also may entertain! Old fable tells us, that this gentle spirit sprung from the box of Pandora, else crammed with evils; but
these were unseen and null, while all admired the inspiriting loveliness of young Hope; each man's
heart became her home; she was enthroned sovereign of our lives, here and here-after; she was
deified and worshipped, declared incorruptible and everlasting. But like all other gifts of the Creator
to Man, she is mortal; her life has attained its last hour. We have watched over her; nursed her
flickering existence; now she has fallen at once from youth to decrepitude, from health to
immedicinable disease; even as we spend ourselves in struggles for her recovery, she dies; to all
nations the voice goes forth, Hope is dead! We are but mourners in the funeral train, and what
immortal essence or perishable creation will refuse to make one in the sad procession that attends to
its grave the dead comforter of humanity? Does not the sun call in his light? and day
  Like a thin exhalation melt away-
  Both wrapping up their beams in clouds to be
  Themselves close mourners at this obsequie. HEAR YOU not the rushing sound of the coming tempest? Do you not behold the clouds open, and
destruction lurid and dire pour down on the blasted earth? See you not the thunderbolt fall, and are
deafened by the shout of heaven that follows its descent? Feel you not the earth quake and open
with agonizing groans, while the air is pregnant with shrieks and wailings,- all announcing the last
days of man? No! none of these things accompanied our fall! The balmy air of spring, breathed from
nature's ambrosial home, invested the lovely earth, which wakened as a young mother about to lead
forth in pride her beauteous offspring to meet their sire who had been long absent. The buds decked
the trees, the flowers adorned the land: the dark branches, swollen with seasonable juices, expanded
into leaves, and the variegated foliage of spring, bending and singing in the breeze, rejoiced in the
genial warmth of the unclouded empyrean: the brooks flowed murmuring, the sea was waveless, and
the promontories that over-hung it were reflected in the placid waters; birds awoke in the woods,
while abundant food for man and beast sprung up from the dark ground. Where was pain and evil? Not in the calm air or weltering ocean; not in the woods or fertile fields, nor among the birds that
made the woods resonant with song, nor the animals that in the midst of plenty basked in the
sunshine. Our enemy, like the Calamity of Homer, trod our hearts, and no sound was echoed from
her steps-
  With ills the land is rife, with ills the sea,
  Diseases haunt our frail humanity,
  Through noon, through night, on casual wing they glide,
  Silent,-a voice the power all-wise denied. Once man was a favourite of the Creator, as the royal psalmist sang, "God had made him a little
lower than the angels, and had crowned him with glory and honour. God made him to have
dominion over the works of his hands, and put all things under his feet." Once it was so; now is man
lord of the creation? Look at him-ha! I see plague! She has invested his form, is incarnate in his
flesh, has entwined herself with his being, and blinds his heaven-seeking eyes. Lie down, O man, on
the flower-strown earth; give up all claim to your inheritance, all you can ever possess of it is the
small cell which the dead require. Plague is the companion of spring, of sunshine, and plenty. We no
longer struggle with her. We have forgotten what we did when she was not. Of old navies used to
stem the giant ocean-waves betwixt Indus and the Pole for slight articles of luxury. Men made
perilous journies to possess themselves of earth's splendid trifles, gems and gold. Human labour was
wasted-human life set at nought. Now life is all that we covet; that this automaton of flesh should,
with joints and springs in order, perform its functions, that this dwelling of the soul should be
capable of containing its dweller. Our minds, late spread abroad through countless spheres and
endless combinations of thought, now retrenched themselves behind this wall of flesh, eager to
preserve its well-being only. We were surely sufficiently degraded. At first the increase of sickness in spring brought increase of toil to such of us, who, as yet spared to
life, bestowed our time and thoughts on our fellow creatures. We nerved ourselves to the task: "in
the midst of despair we performed the tasks of hope." We went out with the resolution of disputing
with our foe. We aided the sick, and comforted the sorrowing; turning from the multitudinous dead
to the rare survivors, with an energy of desire that bore the resemblance of power, we bade them-
live. Plague sat paramount the while, and laughed us to scorn. Have any of you, my readers, observed the ruins of an anthill immediately after its destruction? At
first it appears entirely deserted of its former inhabitants; in a little time you see an ant struggling
through the upturned mould; they reappear by twos and threes, running hither and thither in search
of their lost companions. Such were we upon earth, wondering aghast at the effects of pestilence. Our empty habitations remained, but the dwellers were gathered to the shades of the tomb. As the rules of order and pressure of laws were lost, some began with hesitation and wonder to
transgress the accustomed uses of society. Palaces were deserted, and the poor man dared at length,
unreproved, intrude into the splendid apartments, whose very furniture and decorations were an
unknown world to him. It was found, that, though at first the stop put to all circulation of property,
had reduced those before supported by the factitious wants of society to sudden and hideous
poverty, yet when the boundaries of private possession were thrown down, the products of human
labour at present existing were more, far more, than the thinned generation could possibly consume. To some among the poor this was matter of exultation. We were all equal now; magnificent
dwellings, luxurious carpets, and beds of down, were afforded to all. Carriages and horses, gardens,
pictures, statues, and princely libraries, there were enough of these even to superfluity; and there
was nothing to prevent each from assuming possession of his share. We were all equal now; but near
at hand was an equality still more levelling, a state where beauty and strength, and wisdom, would
be as vain as riches and birth. The grave yawned beneath us all, and its prospect prevented any of us
from enjoying the ease and plenty which in so awful a manner was presented to us. Still the bloom did not fade on the cheeks of my babes; and Clara sprung up in years and growth,
unsullied by disease. We had no reason to think the site of Windsor Castle peculiarly healthy, for
many other families had expired beneath its roof; we lived therefore without any particular
precaution; but we lived, it seemed, in safety. If Idris became thin and pale, it was anxiety that
occasioned the change; an anxiety I could in no way alleviate. She never complained, but sleep and
appetite fled from her, a slow fever preyed on her veins, her colour was hectic, and she often wept in
secret; gloomy prognostications, care, and agonizing dread, ate up the principle of life within her. I
could not fail to perceive this change. I often wished that I had permitted her to take her own course,
and engage herself in such labours for the welfare of others as might have distracted her thoughts. But it was too late now. Besides that, with the nearly extinct race of man, all our toils grew near a
conclusion, she was too weak; consumption, if so it might be called, or rather the over active life
within her, which, as with Adrian, spent the vital oil in the early morning hours, deprived her limbs of
strength. At night, when she could leave me unperceived, she wandered through the house, or hung
over the couches of her children; and in the day time would sink into a perturbed sleep, while her
murmurs and starts betrayed the unquiet dreams that vexed her. As this state of wretchedness
became more confirmed, and, in spite of her endeavours at concealment more apparent, I strove,
though vainly, to awaken in her courage and hope. I could not wonder at the vehemence of her care;
her very soul was tenderness; she trusted indeed that she should not outlive me if I became the prey
of the vast calamity, and this thought sometimes relieved her. We had for many years trod the
highway of life hand in hand, and still thus linked, we might step within the shades of death; but her
children, her lovely, playful, animated children-beings sprung from her own dear side-portions of
her own being-depositories of our loves-even if we died, it would be comfort to know that they
ran man's accustomed course. But it would not be so; young and blooming as they were, they would
die, and from the hopes of maturity, from the proud name of attained manhood, they were cut off
for ever. Often with maternal affection she had figured their merits and talents exerted on life's wide
stage. Alas for these latter days! The world had grown old, and all its inmates partook of the
decrepitude. Why talk of infancy, manhood, and old age? We all stood equal sharers of the last
throes of time-worn nature. Arrived at the same point of the world's age-there was no difference in
us; the name of parent and child had lost their meaning; young boys and girls were level now with
men. This was all true; but it was not less agonizing to take the admonition home. Where could we turn, and not find a desolation pregnant with the dire lesson of example? The fields
had been left uncultivated, weeds and gaudy flowers sprung up,-or where a few wheat-fields
shewed signs of the living hopes of the husbandman, the work had been left halfway, the ploughman
had died beside the plough; the horses had deserted the furrow, and no seedsman had approached
the dead; the cattle unattended wandered over the fields and through the lanes; the tame
inhabitants of the poultry yard, baulked of their daily food, had become wild-young lambs were
dropt in flower-gardens, and the cow stalled in the hall of pleasure. Sickly and few, the country
people neither went out to sow nor reap; but sauntered about the meadows, or lay under the
hedges, when the inclement sky did not drive them to take shelter under the nearest roof. Many of
those who remained, secluded themselves; some had laid up stores which should prevent the
necessity of leaving their homes;-some deserted wife and child, and imagined that they secured
their safety in utter solitude. Such had been Ryland's plan, and he was discovered dead and half-
devoured by insects, in a house many miles from any other, with piles of food laid up in useless
superfluity. Others made long journies to unite themselves to those they loved, and arrived to find
them dead. London did not contain above a thousand inhabitants; and this number was continually diminishing. Most of them were country people, come up for the sake of change; the Londoners had sought the
country. The busy eastern part of the town was silent, or at most you saw only where, half from
cupidity, half from curiosity, the warehouses had been more ransacked than pillaged: bales of rich
India goods, shawls of price, jewels, and spices, unpacked, strewed the floors. In some places the
possessor had to the last kept watch on his store, and died before the barred gates. The massy
portals of the churches swung creaking on their hinges; and some few lay dead on the pavement. The
wretched female, loveless victim of vulgar brutality, had wandered to the toilet of high-born beauty,
and, arraying herself in the garb of splendour, had died before the mirror which reflected to herself
alone her altered appearance. Women whose delicate feet had seldom touched the earth in their
luxury, had fled in fright and horror from their homes, till, losing themselves in the squalid streets of
the metropolis, they had died on the threshold of poverty. The heart sickened at the variety of
misery presented; and, when I saw a specimen of this gloomy change, my soul ached with the fear of
what might befall my beloved Idris and my babes. Were they, surviving Adrian and myself, to find
themselves protectorless in the world? As yet the mind alone had suffered-could I for ever put off
the time, when the delicate frame and shrinking nerves of my child of prosperity, the nursling of rank
and wealth, who was my companion, should be invaded by famine, hardship, and disease? Better die
at once-better plunge a poinard in her bosom, still untouched by drear adversity, and then again
sheathe it in my own! But, no; in times of misery we must fight against our destinies, and strive not
to be overcome by them. I would not yield, but to the last gasp resolutely defended my dear ones
against sorrow and pain; and if I were vanquished at last, it should not be ingloriously. I stood in the
gap, resisting the enemy-the impalpable, invisible foe, who had so long besieged us-as yet he had
made no breach: it must be my care that he should not, secretly undermining, burst up within the
very threshold of the temple of love, at whose altar I daily sacrificed. The hunger of Death was now
stung more sharply by the diminution of his food: or was it that before, the survivors being many, the
dead were less eagerly counted? Now each life was a gem, each human breathing form of far, O! far
more worth than subtlest imagery of sculptured stone; and the daily, nay, hourly decrease visible in
our numbers, visited the heart with sickening misery. This summer extinguished our hopes, the
vessel of society was wrecked, and the shattered raft, which carried the few survivors over the sea of
misery, was riven and tempest tost. Man existed by twos and threes; man, the individual who might
sleep, and wake, and perform the animal functions; but man, in himself weak, yet more powerful in
congregated numbers than wind or ocean; man, the queller of the elements, the lord of created
nature, the peer of demi-gods, existed no longer. Farewell to the patriotic scene, to the love of liberty and well earned meed of virtuous aspiration!-
farewell to crowded senate, vocal with the councils of the wise, whose laws were keener than the
sword blade tempered at Damascus!-farewell to kingly pomp and warlike pageantry; the crowns
are in the dust, and the wearers are in their graves!-farewell to the desire of rule, and the hope of
victory; to high vaulting ambition, to the appetite for praise, and the craving for the suffrage of their
fellows! The nations are no longer! No senate sits in council for the dead; no scion of a time
honoured dynasty pants to rule over the inhabitants of a charnel house; the general's hand is cold,
and the soldier has his untimely grave dug in his native fields, unhonoured, though in youth. The
market-place is empty, the candidate for popular favour finds none whom he can represent. To
chambers of painted state farewell!-To midnight revelry, and the panting emulation of beauty, to
costly dress and birth-day shew, to title and the gilded coronet, farewell! Farewell to the giant powers of man,-to knowledge that could pilot the deep-drawing bark through
the opposing waters of shoreless ocean,-to science that directed the silken balloon through the
pathless air,-to the power that could put a barrier to mighty waters, and set in motion wheels, and
beams, and vast machinery, that could divide rocks of granite or marble, and make the mountains
plain! Farewell to the arts,-to eloquence, which is to the human mind as the winds to the sea, stirring, and
then allaying it;-farewell to poetry and deep philosophy, for man's imagination is cold, and his
enquiring mind can no longer expatiate on the wonders of life, for "there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou goest! "-to the graceful building, which in its
perfect proportion transcended the rude forms of nature, the fretted gothic and massy saracenic
pile, to the stupendous arch and glorious dome, the fluted column with its capital, Corinthian, Ionic,
or Doric, the peristyle and fair entablature, whose harmony of form is to the eye as musical concord
to the ear!-farewell to sculpture, where the pure marble mocks human flesh, and in the plastic
expression of the culled excellencies of the human shape, shines forth the god!-farewell to painting,
the high wrought sentiment and deep knowledge of the artists's mind in pictured canvas-to
paradisaical scenes, where trees are ever vernal, and the ambrosial air rests in perpetual glow:-to
the stamped form of tempest, and wildest uproar of universal nature encaged in the narrow frame, O
farewell! Farewell to music, and the sound of song; to the marriage of instruments, where the
concord of soft and harsh unites in sweet harmony, and gives wings to the panting listeners, whereby
to climb heaven, and learn the hidden pleasures of the eternals!-Farewell to the well-trod stage; a
truer tragedy is enacted on the world's ample scene, that puts to shame mimic grief: to high-bred
comedy, and the low buffoon, farewell!-Man may laugh no more. Alas! to enumerate the
adornments of humanity, shews, by what we have lost, how supremely great man was. It is all over
now. He is solitary; like our first parents expelled from Paradise, he looks back towards the scene he
has quitted. The high walls of the tomb, and the flaming sword of plague, lie between it and him. Like
to our first parents, the whole earth is before him, a wide desart. Unsupported and weak, let him
wander through fields where the unreaped corn stands in barren plenty, through copses planted by
his fathers, through towns built for his use. Posterity is no more; fame, and ambition, and love, are
words void of meaning; even as the cattle that grazes in the field, do thou, O deserted one, lie down
at evening-tide, unknowing of the past, careless of the future, for from such fond ignorance alone
canst thou hope for ease! Joy paints with its own colours every act and thought. The happy do not feel poverty-for delight is
as a gold-tissued robe, and crowns them with priceless gems. Enjoyment plays the cook to their
homely fare, and mingles intoxication with their simple drink. Joy strews the hard couch with roses,
and makes labour ease. Sorrow doubles the burthen to the bent-down back; plants thorns in the unyielding pillow; mingles
gall with water; adds saltness to their bitter bread; cloathing them in rags, and strewing ashes on
their bare heads. To our irremediable distress every small and pelting inconvenience came with
added force; we had strung our frames to endure the Atlean weight thrown on us; we sank beneath
the added feather chance threw on us, "the grasshopper was a burthen." Many of the survivors had
been bred in luxury-their servants were gone, their powers of command vanished like unreal
shadows: the poor even suffered various privations; and the idea of another winter like the last,
brought affright to our minds. Was it not enough that we must die, but toil must be added?-must
we prepare our funeral repast with labour, and with unseemly drudgery heap fuel on our deserted
hearths -must we with servile hands fabricate the garments, soon to be our shroud? Not so! We are presently to die, let us then enjoy to its full relish the remnant of our lives. Sordid
care, avaunt! menial labours, and pains, slight in themselves, but too gigantic for our exhausted
strength, shall make no part of our ephemeral existences. In the beginning of time, when, as now,
man lived by families, and not by tribes or nations, they were placed in a genial clime, where earth
fed them untilled, and the balmy air enwrapt their reposing limbs with warmth more pleasant than
beds of down. The south is the native place of the human race; the land of fruits, more grateful to
man than the hard-earned Ceres of the north,-of trees, whose boughs are as a palace-roof, of
couches of roses, and of the thirst-appeasing grape. We need not there fear cold and hunger. Look at England! the grass shoots up high in the meadows; but they are dank and cold, unfit bed for
us. Corn we have none, and the crude fruits cannot support us. We must seek firing in the bowels of
the earth, or the unkind atmosphere will fill us with rheums and aches. The labour of hundreds of
thousands alone could make this inclement nook fit habitation for one man.