continued Mary. Adeline spoke not, but walked hastily on:--but Mary kept pace with her,
speaking as loud as she could. 'And did the little one live, pray?' Still Adeline spoke not. 'What sort of a getting-up had you, Miss Mowbray?' At this mischievously-intended question Adeline's other sensations were
lost in strong indignation; and resuming all the modest but collected
dignity of her manner, she turned round, and fixing her eyes steadily on
the insulting girl, exclaimed aloud, 'Woman, I never injured you either
in thought, word, or deed:--Whence comes it, then, that you endeavour to
make the finger of scorn point at me, and make me shrink with shame and
confusion from the eye of observation?' 'Woman! indeed!' replied Mary--but she was not allowed to proceed; for a
gentleman hastily stepped forward, crying, 'It is impossible for us to
suffer such insults to be offered to Miss Mowbray:--I desire, therefore,
that you will take your daughter away (turning to Mary's father); and,
if possible, teach her better manners.' Having said this, he overtook
the agitated Adeline; and offering her his arm, saw her home to her
lodgings: while those who had heard with surprise and suspicion the
strange and impertinent questions and insolent tone of Mary, resumed
in a degree their confidence in Adeline, and turned a disgusted and
deaf ear to the hysterical vehemence with which the half-sobbing
Mary defended herself, and vilified Adeline, as her father and
brother-in-law, almost by force, led her out of the church-yard. The gentleman who had so kindly stepped forward to the assistance of
Adeline was Mr Beauclerc, the surgeon of the village, a man of
considerable abilities and liberal principles; and when he bade Adeline
farewell, he said, 'My wife will do herself the pleasure of calling on
you this evening:' then, kindly pressing her hand, he with a respectful
bow took his leave. Luckily for Adeline, Berrendale was detained in town that day; and she
was spared the mortification of showing herself to him, writhing as
she was under the agonies of public shame, for such it seemed to her. Convinced as she was of the light in which she must have appeared
to the persons around her from the malicious interrogatories of
Mary;--convinced too, as she was more than beginning to be, of the
fallacy of the reasoning which had led her to deserve, and even to
glory in, the situation which she now blushed to hear disclosed;--and
conscious as she was, that to remain in the village, and expect to
retain her school, was now impossible--she gave herself up to a burst of
sorrow and despondence; during which her only consolation was, that it
was not witnessed by Berrendale. It never for a moment entered into the ingenuous mind of Adeline, that
her declaration would have more weight than that of Mary Warner; and
that she might, with almost a certainty of being believed, deny her
charge entirely: on the contrary, she had no doubt but that Mrs
Beauclerc was coming to inquire into the grounds for Mary's gross
address; and she was resolved to confess to her all the circumstances
of her story. After church in the afternoon Mrs Beauclerc arrived, and Adeline
observed, with pleasure, that her manner was even kinder than usual; it
was such as to ensure the innocent of the most strenuous support, and to
invite the guilty to confidence and penitence. 'Never, my dear Miss Mowbray,' said Mrs Beauclerc, 'did I call on you
with more readiness than now; as I come assured that you will give me
not only the most ample authority to contradict, but the fullest means
to confute, the vile calumnies which that malicious girl, Mary Warner,
has, ever since she entered the village, been propagating against you:
but, indeed, she is so little respected in her rank of life, and you so
highly in yours, that your mere denial of the truth of her statement
will, to every candid mind, be sufficient to clear your character.' Adeline never before was so strongly tempted to violate the truth;
and there was a friendly earnestness in Mrs Beauclerc's manner, which
proved that it would be almost cruel to destroy the opinion which she
entertained of her virtue. For a moment Adeline felt disposed to yield
to the temptation, but it was only for a moment,--and in a hurried and
broken voice she replied, 'Mary Warner has asserted of me nothing but--'
Here her voice faltered. 'Nothing but falsehoods, no doubt, interrupted Mrs Beauclerc
triumphantly,--'I thought so.' 'Nothing but the TRUTH!' resumed Adeline. 'Impossible!' cried Mrs Beauclerc, dropping the cold hand which she
held: and Adeline, covering her face, and throwing herself back in the
chair, sobbed aloud. Mrs Beauclerc was herself for some time unable to speak; but at length
she faintly said--'So sensible, so pious, so well-informed, and so
pure-minded as you seem!--to what strange arts, what wicked seductions,
did you fall a victim?' 'To no arts--to no seductions'--replied Adeline, recovering all her
energy at this insinuation against Glenmurray. 'My fall from virtue as
you would call it, was, I may say, from love of what I thought virtue;
and if there be any blame, it attaches merely to my confidence in my
lover's wisdom and my own too obstinate self-conceit. But you, dear
madam, deserve to hear my whole story; and, if you can favour me with an
hour's attention, I hope, at least, to convince you that I was worthy of
a better fate than to be publicly disgraced by a malicious and ignorant
girl.' Mrs Beauclerc promised the most patient attention; and Adeline related
the eventful history of her life, slightly dwelling on those parts of it
which in any degree reflected on her mother, and extolling most highly
her sense, her accomplishments, and her maternal tenderness. When she
came to the period of Glenmurray's illness and death, she broke abruptly
off and rushed into her own chamber; and it was some minutes before she
could return to Mrs Beauclerc, or before her visitor could wish her to
return, as she was herself agitated and affected by the relation which
she had heard:--and when Adeline came in she threw her arms round her
neck, and pressed her to her heart with a feeling of affection that
spoke consolation to the wounded spirit of the mourner. She then resumed her narration;--and, having concluded it, Mrs
Beauclerc, seizing her hand, exclaimed, 'For God's sake, marry Mr
Berrendale immediately; and adjure for ever, at the foot of the altar,
those errors in opinion to which all your misery has been owing!' 'Would I could atone for them some other way!' she replied. 'Impossible! and if you have any regard for me you will become the wife
of your generous lover; for then, and not till then, can I venture to
associate with you.' 'I thought so,' cried Adeline; 'I thought all idea of remaining here,
with any chance of keeping my scholars, was now impossible.' 'It would not be so,' replied Mrs Beauclerc, 'if every one thought like
me: I should consider your example as a warning to all young people; and
to preserve my children from evil I should only wish them to hear your
story, as it inculcates most powerfully how vain are personal graces,
talents, sweetness of temper, and even active benevolence, to ensure
respectability and confer happiness, without a strict regard to the
long-established rules for conduct, and a continuance in those paths of
virtue and decorum which the wisdom of ages has pointed out to the steps
of every one.--But others will, no doubt, consider, that continuing to
patronize you, would be patronizing vice; and my rank in life is not
high enough to enable me to countenance you with any chance of leading
others to follow my example; while I should not be able to serve you,
but should infallibly lose myself. But some time hence, as the wife of
Mr Berrendale, I might receive you as your merits deserve: till then--'
Here Mrs Beauclerc paused, and she hesitated to add, 'we meet no more.' Indeed it was long before the parting took place. Mrs Beauclerc had
justly appreciated the merits of Adeline, and thought she had found in
her a friend and companion for years to come: besides, her children were
most fondly attached to her; and Mrs Beauclerc, while she contemplated
their daily improvement under her care, felt grateful to Adeline for the
unfolding excellencies of her daughters. Still, to part with her was
unavoidable; but the pang of separation was in a degree soothed to
Adeline by the certainty which Mrs Beauclerc's sorrow gave her, that,
spite of her errors, she had inspired a real friendship in the bosom of
a truly virtuous and respectable woman; and this idea gave a sensation
of joy to her heart to which it had long been a stranger. The next morning some of the parents, whom Mary's tale had not yet
reached, sent their children as usual. But Adeline refused to enter upon
any school duties, bidding them affectionately farewell, and telling
them that she was going to write to their parents, as she was obliged
to leave her present situation, and, declining keeping school, meant to
reside, she believed in London. The children on hearing this looked at each other with almost tearful
consternation; and Adeline observed, with pleasure, the interest which
she had made to herself in their young hearts. After they were gone she
sent a circular letter to her friends in the village, importing that
she was under the necessity of leaving her present residence; but that,
whatever her future situation might be, she should always remember, with
gratitude, the favours which she had received at ----. The necessity that drove her away was, by this time, very well
understood by every one; but Mrs Beauclerc took care to tell those who
mentioned the subject to her, the heads of Adeline's story; and to add
always, 'and I have reason to believe that, as soon as she is settled in
town, she will be extremely well married.' To the mulatto the change in Adeline's plans was particularly pleasing,
as it would bring her nearer her son, and nearer William, from whom
nothing but a sense of grateful duty to Adeline would so long have
divided her. But Savanna imagined that Adeline's removal was owing to
her having at last determined to marry Mr Berrendale; an event which
she, for Adeline's sake, earnestly wished to take place, though for her
own she was undecided whether to desire it or not, as Mr Berrendale
might not, perhaps, be as contented with her services as Adeline was. While these thoughts were passing in Savanna's mind, and her warm and
varying feelings were expressed by alternate smiles and tears, Mr
Berrendale arrived from town: and as Savanna opened the door to him,
she, half whimpering, half smiling, dropped him a very respectful
curtsey, and looked at him with eyes full of unusual significance. 'Well, Savanna, what has happened?--Anything new or extraordinary since
my absence?' said Berrendale. 'Me tink not of wat hav appen, but what will happen,' replied Savanna. 'And what is going to happen?' returned Berrendale, seating himself in
the parlour, 'and where is your mistress?' 'She dress herself, that dear misses,' replied Savanna, lingering with
the door in her hand, 'and I,--ope to have a dear massa too.' 'What!' cried Berrendale, starting wildly from his seat, 'what did you
say?' 'Why me ope my misses be married soon.' 'Married! to whom?' cried Berrendale, seizing her hand, and almost
breathless with alarm. 'Why, to you, sure,' exclaimed Savanna, 'and den me hope you will not
turn away poor Savanna?' 'What reason you have, my dear Savanna, for talking thus, I cannot tell;
nor dare I give way to the sweet hopes which you excite: but, if it be
true that I may hope, depend on it you shall cook my wedding dinner, and
then I am sure it will be a good one.' 'Can full joy eat?' asked the mulatto thoughtfully. 'A good dinner is a good thing, Savanna,' replied Berrendale, 'and ought
never to be slighted.' 'Me good dinner day I marry, but I not eat it.--O sir, pity people look
best in dere wedding clothes, but my William look well all day and every
day, and perhaps you will too, sir; and den I ope to cook your wedding
dinner, next day dinner, and all your dinners.' 'And so you shall, Savanna,' cried Berrendale, grasping her hand, 'and
I--' Here the door opened, and Adeline appeared; who, surprised at
Berrendale's familiarity with her servant, looked gravely, and stopped
at the door with a look of cold surprise. Berrendale, awed into
immediate respect--for what is so timid and respectful as a man truly
in love?--bowed low, and lost in an instant all the hopes which had
elevated his spirits to such an unusual degree. Adeline with an air of pique observed, that she feared she interrupted
them unpleasantly, as something unusually agreeable and enlivening
seemed to occupy them as she came in, over which her entrance seemed to
have cast a cloud. The mulatto had by this time retreated to the door, and was on the point
of closing it when Berrendale stammered out, as well as he could,
'Savanna was, indeed, raising my hopes to such an unexpected height,
that I felt almost bewildered with joy; but the coldness of your manner,
Miss Mowbray, has sobered me again.' 'And what did Savanna say to you?' cried Adeline. 'I--I say,' cried Savanna returning, 'dat is, he say, I should be let
cook de wedding dinner.' Adeline, returning even paler than she was before, desired her coldly to
leave the room; and, seating herself at the greatest possible distance
from Berrendale, leaned for some time in silence on her hand--he not
daring to interrupt her meditations. But at last she said, 'What could
give rise to this singular conversation between you and Savanna I am
wholly at a loss to imagine: still I--I must own that it is not so
ill-timed as it would have been some weeks ago. I will own, that since
yesterday I have been considering your generous proposals with the
serious attention which they deserve.' On hearing this, which Adeline uttered with considerable effort,
Berrendale in a moment was at her side, and almost at her feet. 'I--I wish you to return to your seat,' said Adeline coldly: but hope
had emboldened him, and he chose to stay where he was. 'But, before I require you to renew your promises, or make any on my
side, it is proper that I should tell you what passed yesterday; and if
the additional load of obloquy which I have acquired does not frighten
you from continuing your addresses--' Here Adeline paused:--and
Berrendale, rather drawing back, then pushing his chair nearer her as
he spoke, gravely answered, that his affection was proof against all
trials. Adeline then briefly related the scene in the church-yard, and her
conversation with Mrs Beauclerc, and concluded thus:--'In consequence of
this, and of the recollections of HIS advice, and HIS decided opinion,
that by becoming the wife of a respectable man I could alone expect to
recover my rank in society, and consequently my usefulness, I offer you
my hand; and promise, in the course of a few months, to become yours in
the sight of God and man.' 'And from no other reason?--from no preference, no regard for me?' demanded Berrendale reproachfully. 'Oh! pardon me; from decided preference; there is not another being in
the creation whom I could bear to call husband.' Berrendale, gratified and surprised, attempted to take her hand; but,
withdrawing it, she continued thus;--'Still I almost scruple to let
you, unblasted as your prospects are, take a wife a beggar, blasted in
reputation, broken in spirits, with a heart whose best affections lie
buried in the grave, and which can offer you in return for your faithful
tenderness nothing but cold respect and esteem; one too who is not only
despicable to others, but also self-condemned.' While Adeline said this, Berrendale, almost shuddering at the picture
which she drew, paced the room in great agitation; and even the
gratification of his passion, used as he was to the indulgence of every
wish, seemed, for a moment, a motive not sufficiently powerful to enable
him to unite his fate to that of a woman so degraded as Adeline appeared
to be; and he would, perhaps, have hesitated to accept the hand she
offered, had she not added, as a contrast to the picture which she had
drawn--'But if, in spite of all these unwelcome considerations, you
persist in your resolution of making me yours, and I have resolution
enough to conquer the repugnance that I feel to make a second connexion,
you may depend on possessing in me one who will study your happiness
and wishes in the minutest particulars;--one who will cherish you in
sickness and in sorrow;--' (here a twinge of the gout assisted Adeline's
appeal very powerfully;) 'and who, conscious of the generosity of your
attachment, and her own unworthiness, will strive, by every possible
effort, not to remain your debtor even in affection.' Saying this, she put out her hand to Berrendale; and that hand, and
the arm belonging to it, were so beautiful, and he had so often envied
Glenmurray while he saw them tenderly supporting his head, that while a
vision of approaching gout, and Adeline bending over his restless couch,
floated before him, all his prudent considerations vanished; and,
eagerly pressing the proffered hand to his lips, he thanked her most
ardently for her kind promise; and, putting his arm round her waist,
would have pressed her to his bosom. But the familiarity was ill-timed;--Adeline was already surprised, and
even shocked, at the lengths to which she had gone; and starting almost
with loathing from his embrace, she told him it grew late, and it was
time for him to go to his lodgings. She then retired to her own room,
and spent half the night at least in weeping over the remembrance of
Glenmurray, and in loudly apostrophizing his departed spirit. The next day Adeline, out of the money which she had earned, discharged
her lodgings; and having written a farewell note to Mrs Beauclerc,
begging to hear of her now and then, she and the mulatto proceeded to
town, with Berrendale, in search of apartments; and having procured
them, Adeline began to consider by what means, till she could resolve to
marry Berrendale, she should help to maintain herself, and also contrive
to increase their income if she became his wife. The success which she had met with in instructing children, led her
to believe that she might succeed in writing little hymns and tales
for their benefit; a method of getting money which she looked upon to
be more rapid and more lucrative than working plain or fancy works:
and, in a short time, a little volume was ready to be offered to a
bookseller:--nor was it offered in vain. Glenmurray's bookseller
accepted it; and the sum which he gave, though trifling, imparted a
balsam to the wounded mind of Adeline: it seemed to open to her the path
of independence; and to give her, in spite of her past errors, the means
of serving her fellow-creatures. But month after month elapsed, and Glenmurray had been dead two years,
yet still Adeline could not prevail on herself to fix a time for her
marriage. But next to the aversion she felt to marrying at all, was that which
she experienced at the idea of having no fortune to bestow on the
disinterested Berrendale; and so desirous was she of his acquiring
some little property by his union with her, that she resolved to ask
counsel's opinion on the possibility of her claiming a sum of money
which Glenmurray had bequeathed to her, but without, as Berrendale had
assured her, the customary formalities. The money was near £300; but Berrendale had allowed it to go to
Glenmurray's legal heir, because he was sure that the writing which
bequeathed it would not hold good in law. Still Adeline was so unwilling
to be under so many pecuniary obligations to a man whom she did not
love, that she resolved to take advice on the subject, much against the
will of Berrendale, who thought the money for fees might as well be
saved; but as a chance for saving the fee he resolved to let Adeline go
to the lawyer's chambers alone, thinking it likely that no fee would be
accepted from so fine a woman. Accordingly, more alive to economy than
to delicacy or decorum, Berrendale, when Adeline, desiring a coach to be
called, summoned him to accompany her to the Temple, pleaded terror of
an impending fit of the gout, and begged her to excuse his attendance;
and Adeline, unsuspicious of the real cause of his refusal, kindly
expressing her sorrow for the one he feigned, took the counsellor's
address, and got into the coach, Berrendale taking care to tell her, as
she got in, that the fare was but a shilling. The gentleman, Mr Langley, to whom Adeline was going, was celebrated for
his abilities as a chamber counsellor, and no less remarkable for his
gallantries: but Berrendale was not acquainted with this part of his
history: else he would not, even to save a lawyer's fee, have exposed
his intended wife to a situation of such extreme impropriety; and
Adeline was too much a stranger to the rules of general society, to feel
any great repugnance to go alone on an errand so interesting to her
feelings. The coach having stopped near the entrance of the court to which she was
directed, Adeline, resolving to walk home, discharged the coach, and
knocked at the door of Mr Langley's chambers. A very smart servant out
of livery answered the knock; and Mr Langley being at home, Adeline was
introduced into his apartment. Mr Langley, though surprised at seeing a lady of a deportment so
correct and of so dignified an appearance enter his room unattended, was
inspired with so much respect at the sight of Adeline, whose mourning
habit added to the interest which her countenance never failed to
excite, that he received her with bows down to the ground, and, leading
her to a chair, begged she would do him the honour to be seated, and
impart her commands. Adeline, embarrassed, she scarcely knew why, at the novelty of her
situation, drew the paper from her pocket, and presented it to him. 'Mr Berrendale recommended me to you, sir,' said Adeline faintly. 'Berrendale, Berrendale, O, aye,--I remember--the cousin of Mr
Glenmurray: you know Mr Glenmurray too, ma'am, I presume; pray how
is he?' --Adeline, unprepared for this question, could not speak; and
the voluble counsellor went on--'Oh!--I ask your pardon, madam, I
see;--pray, might I presume so far, how long has that extraordinary
clever man been lost to the world?' 'More than two years, sir,' replied Adeline faintly. 'You are,--may I presume so far,--you are his widow?' --Adeline bowed. There was a something in Mr Langley's manner and look so like Sir
Patrick's, that she could not bear to let him know she was only
Glenmurray's companion. 'Gone more than two years, and you still in deep mourning!--Amiable
susceptibility!--How unlike the wives of the present day! But I beg
pardon.--Now to business.' So saying, he perused the paper which Adeline
had given him, in which Glenmurray simply stated, that he bequeathed to
Adeline Mowbray the sum of £260 in the 5 per cents, but it was signed by
only one witness. 'What do you wish to know, Madam?' asked the counsellor. 'Whether this will be valid, as it is not signed by two witnesses, sir?' 'Why,--really not,' replied Langley; 'though the heir-at-law, if we have
either equity or gallantry, could certainly not refuse to fulfil what
evidently was the intention of the testator:--but then, it is very
surprising to me that Mr Glenmurray should have wished to leave any
thing from the lady whom I have the honour to behold. Pray, madam,--if
I may presume to ask,--Who is Adeline Mowbray?' 'I--I am Adeline Mowbray,' replied Adeline in great confusion. 'You, madam! Bless me, I presumed;--and pray, madam,--if I may make so
bold,--what was your relationship to that wonderfully clever man?--his
niece,--his cousin,--or,--?' 'I was no relation of his,' said Adeline still more confused; and this
confusion confirmed the suspicions which Langley entertained, and also
brought to his recollection something which he had heard of Glenmurray's
having a very elegant and accomplished mistress. 'Pardon me, dear madam,' said Mr Langley, 'I perceive now my mistake;
and I now perceive why Mr Glenmurray was so much the envy of those who
had the honour of visiting at his house. 'Pon my soul,' taking her hand,
which Adeline indignantly, withdrew, 'I am grieved beyond words at being
unable to give you a more favourable opinion.' 'But you said, sir,' said Adeline, 'that the heir-at-law, if he had
any equity, would certainly be guided by the evident intention of the
testator.' 'I did, madam,' replied the lawyer, evidently piqued by the proud and
cold air which Adeline assumed;--'but then,--excuse me,--the applicant
would not stand much chance of being attended to, who is neither the
_widow_ nor _relation_ of Mr Glenmurray.' 'I understand you, sir,' replied Adeline, 'and need trouble you no
longer.' 'Trouble! my sweet girl!' returned Mr Langley, 'call it not trouble;
I--' Here his gallant effusions were interrupted by the sudden entrance
of a very showy woman, highly rouged, and dressed in the extremity of
the fashion; and who in no very pleasant tone of voice exclaimed,--'I
fear I interrupt you.' 'Oh! not in the least,' replied Langley, blushing even more than
Adeline, 'my fair client was just going. Allow me, madam, to see you
to the door,' continued he, attempting to take Adeline's hand, and
accompanying her to the bottom of the first flight of stairs. 'Charming fine woman upon my soul!' cried he, speaking through his shut
teeth, and forcibly squeezing her fingers as he spoke; 'and if you ever
want advice I should be proud to see you here, (with a significant
smile).' Here Adeline, too angry to speak, put the fee in his hand,
which he insisted on returning, and, in the struggle, he forcibly kissed
the ungloved hand which was held out, praising its beauty at the same
time, and endeavouring to close her fingers on the money: but Adeline
indignantly threw it on the ground, and rushed down the remaining
staircase; over-hearing the lady, as she did so, exclaim, 'Langley! is
not that black mawkin gone yet! Come up this moment, you devil!' while
Langley obsequiously replied, 'Coming this moment, my angel!' Adeline felt so disappointed, so ashamed, and so degraded, that she
walked on some way without knowing whither she was going; and when she
recollected herself, she found that she was wandering from court to
court, and unable to find the avenue to the street down which the coach
had come: while her very tall figure, heightened colour, and graceful
carriage, made her an object of attention to every one whom she met. At last she saw herself followed by two young men; and as she walked
very fast to avoid them, she by accident turned into the very lane which
she had been seeking: but her pursuers kept pace with her; and she
overheard one of them say to the other, 'A devilish fine girl! moves
well too,--I cannot help thinking that I have seen her before.' 'And I think so too!--by her height, it must be that sweet creature who
lived at Richmond with that crazy fellow, Glenmurray.' Here Adeline relaxed in her pace: the name of Glenmurray--that
name which no one since his death had ventured to pronounce in her
presence,--had, during the last half hour, been pronounced several
times; and, unable to support herself from a variety of emotions, she
stopped, and leaned for support against the wall. 'How do you do, my fleet and swift girl?' said one of the gentlemen:--and
Adeline, roused at the insult, looked at him proudly and angrily, and
walked on. 'What! angry! If I may be so bold,' (with a sneering smile),
'fair creature, may I ask where you live now?' 'No, sir,' replied Adeline; 'you are wholly unknown to me.' 'But were you to tell me where you live, we might cease to be strangers;
pray who is your friend now?' Here, as his companion gave way to a loud fit of laughter, Adeline
clearly understood what he meant by the term 'friend;' and summoning
up all her spirit, she called a coach which luckily was passing; and
turning round to her tormentor, with great dignity said,--'Though the
situation, sir, in which I once was, may in the eyes of the world, and
in yours, authorize and excuse your present insulting address, yet, when
I tell you that I am on the eve of marriage with a most respectable man,
I trust that you will feel the impropriety of your conduct, and be
convinced of the fruitlessness and impertinence of the questions which
you have put to me.' 'If this be the case, madam,' cried the gentleman, 'I beg your pardon,
and shall take my leave, wishing you all possible happiness, and begging
you to attribute my impertinence wholly to my ignorance.' So saying, he
bowed and left her, and Adeline was driven to her lodgings. 'Now,' said Adeline, 'the die is cast;--I have used the sacred name of
wife to shield me from insult; and I am therefore pledged to assume it
directly. Yes, HE was right--I find I must have a legal protector.' She found Berrendale rather alarmed at her long absence; and, with a
beating heart, she related her adventures to him: but when she said that
Langley was not willing to take the fee, he exclaimed, 'Very genteel in
him, indeed! I suppose you took him at his word?' 'Good Heavens!' replied Adeline, 'Do you think I would deign to owe
such a man a pecuniary obligation?--No, indeed; I threw it with proud
indignation on the floor.' 'What madness!' returned Berrendale: 'you had much better have put it in
your pocket.' 'Mr Berrendale,' cried Adeline gravely, and with a look bordering on
contempt, 'I trust that you are not in earnest: for if these are your
sentiments,--if this is your delicacy, sir--'

'Say no more, dearest of women,' replied Berrendale pretending to laugh,
alarmed at the seriousness with which she spoke: 'how could you for one
moment suppose me in earnest? Insolent coxcomb!--I wish I had been
there.' 'I wish you had,' said Adeline, 'for then no one would have dared to
insult me:' and Berrendale, delighted at this observation, listened to
the rest of her story with a spirit of indignant knight-errantry which
he never experienced before; and at the end of her narration he felt
supremely happy; for Adeline assured him that the next week she would
make him her protector for life:--and this assurance opened his heart so
much, that he vowed he would not condescend to claim of the heir-at-law
the pitiful sum which he might think proper to withhold. To be brief.--Adeline kept her word: and resolutely struggling with her
feelings, she became the next week the wife of Berrendale. For the first six months the union promised well. Adeline was so
assiduous to anticipate her husband's wishes, and contrived so many
dainties for his table, which she cooked with her own hands, that
Berrendale, declaring himself completely happy for the first time in
his life, had not a thought or a wish beyond his own fireside; while
Adeline, happy because she conferred happiness, and proud of the name of
wife, which she had before despised, began to hope that her days would
glide on in humble tranquillity. It was natural enough that Adeline should be desirous of imparting this
change in her situation to Mrs Pemberton, whose esteem she was eager to
recover, and whose kind intentions towards her, at a moment when she
was incapable of appreciating them, Savanna had, with great feeling,
expatiated upon. She therefore wrote to her according to the address
which Mrs Pemberton had left for her, and received a most friendly
letter in return. In a short time Adeline had again an expectation of
being a mother; and though she could not yet entertain for her husband
more than cold esteem, she felt that as the father of her child he would
insensibly become more dear to her. But Berrendale awoke from his dream of bliss, on finding to what a large
sum the bills for the half-year's housekeeping amounted. Nor was he
surprised without reason. Adeline, more eager to gratify Berrendale's
palate than considerate as to the means, had forgotten that she was no
longer at the head of a liberal establishment like her mother's, and had
bought for the supply of the table many expensive articles. In consequence of this terrible discovery Berrendale remonstrated very
seriously with Adeline; who meekly answered, 'My dear friend, good
dinners cannot be had without good ingredients, and good ingredients
cannot be had without money.' 'But, madam,' cried Berrendale, knitting his brows, but not elevating
his voice, for he was one of those soft-speaking beings who in the
sweetest tones possible can say the most heart-wounding things, and give
a mortal stab to your self-love in the same gentle manner in which they
flatter it:--'there must have been great waste, great mismanagement
here, or these expenses could not have been incurred.' 'There may have been both,' returned Adeline, 'for I have not been used
to economize, but I will try to learn;--but I doubt, my dear Berrendale,
you must endeavour to be contented with plainer food; for not all the
economy in the world can make rich gravies and high sauces cheap
things.' 'Oh! care and skill can do much,' said Berrendale;--'and I find a
certain person deceived me very much when he said you were a good
manager.' 'He only said,' replied Adeline sighing deeply, 'that I was a good
cook, and you yourself allow that; but I hope in time to please your
appetite at less expense: as to myself, a little suffices me, and I care
not how plain that food is.' 'Still, I think I have seen you eat with a most excellent appetite,'
said Berrendale, with a very significant expression. Adeline shocked at the manner more than the words, replied in a
faltering voice, 'As a proof of my being in health, no doubt you
rejoiced in the sight.' 'Certainly; but less robust health would suit our finances better.' Adeline looked up, wishing, though not expecting, to see by his face
that he was joking: but such serious displeasure appeared on it, that
the sordid selfishness of his character was at once unveiled to her
view; and clasping her hands in agony, she exclaimed, 'Oh Glenmurray!' and ran into her own room. It was the first time that she had pronounced his name since the hour
of his death, and now it was wrung from her by a sensation of acute
anguish; no wonder, then, that the feelings which followed completely
overcame her, and that Berrendale had undisputed and solitary possession
of his supper. But he, on his side, was deeply irritated. The 'Oh, Glenmurray!' was
capable of being interpreted two ways:--either it showed how much she
regretted Glenmurray, and preferred him to his successor in spite of
the superior beauty of his person, of which he was very vain; or it
reproached Glenmurray for having recommended her to marry him. In either
case it was an unpardonable fault; and this unhappy conversation laid
the foundation of future discontent. Adeline arose the next day dejected, pensive, and resolved that her
appetite should never again, if possible, force a reproach from the lips
of her husband.